AUTOBIOUHAPHY 


THE    KEY.    DR    CARLYLE 


,1.0,  Google 


,1.0,  Google 


L  1J.75;  h^\-i 


,1.0,  Google 


.^t.,.,/..€v:/ 


,i.oD,Google  . 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY 


EEV.  DR  ALEXANDER  CARLTLE 

MINISTER    OF    INVERE8K 


MEMORIALS    OF    THE    MEN    AND 
EVENTS   OF   HIS   TIME 


SECOND   EDITTON 


WILLIAM    BLACKWOOD    AND    SONS 

EDINBURGH    AND    LONDON 

MDCCCLX 


izecy  Google 


,1.0,  Google 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


The  reader  will  soon  discover  that  this  is  a  work 
requiring  no  introduction  to  his  attention.  Indeed, 
whoever  catches  a  glimpse  of  the  attractions  of  the 
iuterior,  will  not  be  disposed  patiently  to  listen  to 
any  detaUs  intended  to  detain  him  on  the  threshold  ; 
and  I  have,  therefore,  thought  it  best  to  reserve 
editorial  explanations  for  the  end. 

The  Publishers  did  me  the  honour  to  place  in  my 
hands  the  manuscript  of  the  Autobiography,  and 
several  other  documents,  without  any  restriction  on 
the  extent  to  which  they  should  be  published.  The 
reader  is  entitled  to  explanations  both  as  to  the  nature 
and  condition  of  these  materials,  and  the  manner 
iu  which  I  thought  it  fitting  to  execute  the  trust 
coofided  to  me.  For  these  explanations  I  refer  to 
the  Supplementary  Chapter. 

J.  H.  BUHTON. 


Edtkbosor,  A'oiftrtber  iac(). 


oy  Google 


,1.0,  Google 


C  0  N  T  E  N  T  S. 


CHAPTEB  I. 
172a-1736:  AGE,  BIRTH  TO  U. 
Hii  tsrUi— Uu iatber  uid  the  fiumljr — Precocioui  miniMeriDgB — PraatoD- 
paiu  BDil  its  aodal  circle—Colonel  Chuteris— Gnkine  of  Oiangit—Ledy 
tinnge  and  her  adioDturea—ColoDel  Gudiner^  Doddridge's  accoaut  of 
hii  conTenioD  oonected — The  Hurray  Keitha — A  tour  to  Dumfries — 
The  Mwial  habits  of  tbo  borderen  —  Hanging  o(  a  herder  thief —  Qoes 
to  the  Univenity  of  Edinburgh— Fint  BeenDU- Uia  tauhen  and  oom- 
lunioDs— Dr  Withonpoon  of  Naw  York— Sir  John  Dalrymple— M'laurin 
the  TuthemaUciiD,  .  ,    1 

CHAPTER  IL 
173ti-174S;    AGE,  W-21. 
ETents  of  the  FortMiiu  mob — Sees  the  Escape  of  Robertson  from  church — 
Present  nt  the  eiecutioD  of  Wilson,  and  Poiteoua  firing  on  the  people- 
Hie  night  of  the  mob— Unireiutf  studies— Logic— lUie  of  the  madioal 
Bclioid~Anecdotes  and  adieDturee- Reminiscences  of  fellow-studenla — 
Sit  John  Pringle — First  aoquidnlmee  with  Robertson  the  hiatorian  and 
Jidm  Home  tbs  dramatist — AchleTements  in  dancing— Buddimao  the 
*    grammarian— LooldDg  about  for  a  profeesion- Medioine— The  army— 
The  Choreh — Ad  erening'a  adrentures  with  Lord  Lovat  and  Knkina  of 
Gtmnge — AmogemeDts  for  studying  in  Ulai^ir— Clerical  convirisjitdeii 
— IdstseaionatEdinbargb,  .     3^ 

CHAPTER  m. 

1743-1745 :  AGE,  21-23. 
ifoea  to  GLaagoir^Leechnian,  Hutcheson,  and  the  other  professoi*— Life 
and  sooietj  in  Qhugw — Rise  of  trade — Origin  of  Giasgov  suppers^ — Qubs 
*  — HatchssoD  the  metaphysidan — SimsOD  and  Stewart  the  mathematiciana 
— Moore — Tour  among  the  clet;gy  of  Haddington:  sketohes  of  tham — 
The  anther  of  "  The  Qrave"- Return  to  Olasgoir— College  Uieatricala— 
TraieUiDg  adfentures — Nawa  of  the  lauding  of  Prince  Charles- A  *olun. 
uer  oorps — Prepsratioos  for  the  defence  of  Edinburgh — The  march  and 
recall  at  the  ndunteer*— The  Prorost's  cc'nduct— Adventures  as  a  djs- 


izecy  Google 


VUl  COMTENTS. 

embodied  voluuMer — AdT«titum  of  John  Home  and  Bobertaon  Ihs  his- 
torian— Expedition  to  view  Copa'B  (trmy— The  position  ot  the  two  amuM 
~Hia  laat  interriew  with  Coionel  Qardiner — IiutructioDs  to  bo  widieoBd 
when  the  battle  begiim — Ii  wakeusd,  and  desariptioB  of  what  he  saeii 
-  -  The  battle  —  Inoideata  —  iDBpeotion  of  (he  HighlaDd  army  —  Prince 
ChorloB— Preparationa  for  goiDg  to  Holland,       ....     fl7-155 

CHAPTER  IV. 
1745-17«:  AGE,  2S-2*. 
Seta  off  for  HoUaad  -A  corporation  dinner  at  NewBBBtie—Adrenturea  at 
Yarmouth — Leydea  and  the  etudenta  there— John  Gregory — John  Witkea 
—Immateriality  Baiter  —  Charles  Townshend  ^  Dr  Aitkon  —  Beturn  to 
Brilaio— Fellow-paBBengera— Violetti  the  danoer— Takon  to  eomt— Loo- 
don  society  ITie  Lyons— Lord  Haathfleld— SmoUoW  and  John  Blair— 
Suppera  nt  the  Golden  Ball— London  gettiog  the  nowa  of  the  battle  of 
Culloden — WiUiua  Guthrie  and  Ansoii'a  vojagos- Byron's  narratiie— 
The  theatres  and  theatrical  celebritisB— Uterary  society — Thonukin— 
AnnsCron{(- -Seeker,         .......     1S6-197 

CHAPTER  T. 

1710-1718 :  AGE,  21-2S. 
ItotaTDtoSootland—&Dgll6hsoeDery—WiDdsor— Oxford— TisTelling  ad  ven- 
tures—Presented  to  the  ohurah  ot  Coohbumapath — Subsequently  settled 
nt  Inreresk- Hia  settiemeat  there  prophesied  and  forsordsjned — Aneo- 
dutea— Anthony  Colli  as— Social  life  in  Inveresk  and  Musselburgh— Eng. 
lish  notion  that  the  Scots  bare  no  humour— John  Home — Sketch  of  the 
Asaiatant  at  larenwk,       .......     168-225 

CHAPTER  VI. 

171S-1763;  AGE,  2ft-ai. 
Booladastioal  matten— The  aftir  of  Guorgo  Logan— 3k etohea  of  the  clergy 
-Webster- Wallaoe-Contemporary  history  of  the  Church— The  "Mode- 
ratae  "  and  the  "  Wild"  party— The  patronage  question — Biding  commit- 
tees-Revolution in  Chorch  polity,  and  Carlyle's  share  Id  it— Bkotobes  of 
leaden  in  tho  Assembly — Lord  latay,  Marchmont,  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot- 
Principal  Tullidelph,       220-2(7 

CHAPTER  VII. 
1753-17S6 :  AGE,  Sl-34. 
Sketches  of  society- Lord  Milton— Lady  Horvey— Smollett's  visit— CuUeo's 
mimicries— NoUces  and  anecdoles  of  David  Hume,  Adam  Smith,  Adam 
FerguaoD,  Dr  Robertson,  Dr  Bliur,  John  Home— Foundation  of  the  Select 
Society— Completion  of  tho  tragedy  ot  "  Douglas"— Adventures  of  its 
author  and  his  fncnds  in  conveyiiig  it  to  London- Admiral  Byng  -The 
t\irriorB'  Inn,        .....  .  .  .      258-30fl 


izecy  Google 


CHAPTER  VUL 
175S-17S8:  AG^  Sl-38. 
PrepmtioDB  for  aoting  the  tragedj  of  '■Douglu"  in  EdicMirgfa— The 
rafaearul— The  mocei*— Carljlo  attanda— A  war  of  pomphleto— RomoTed 
into  tbe  ChuTOh  Coorta — The  "  Ubel "  against  Carljle — The  ecclealartlonl 
oonflict — CharactemUa  of  the  oombatsDti — The  cIbte;  of  SoatJaad  and 
the  ataife— Cooduct  of  DimdAi  and  Wedderbuni — Heme  and  hia  (oooeai 
— ArohihaldDukeotArgrtoMidhUhablta,     ....    810-832 

CHAPTEB  IX. 
1758:  AOB,  30. 
Finds  Roberteon  in  London  iLbont  hia  hiiitory — Home  jrAoM  them — Their 
frienda  and  a^Tenture*  ~  diatham  —  John  Blair  the  mattieniatician  — 
Biehop  Douglai — Smollett  and  hii  levee  of  aathon — A  da;  with  Garriok 
at  hii  •iBs — Fsata  at  golf  there— A  Hethodiet  moetiDg-honse — The  clei^ 
or  Scatlatid  and  the  Windov-tax— Adorn  the  architeot—AD  expedition 
to  Portnaonth — AdTeotures  by  land  Hid  ana  llavting  with  Lord  Bute— 
The  jimnM7  home  —  Oxford  — Woodatook  —  Blenlirfm  —  BJnningham— 
Lord  littleton— SheDStoue  at  the  Leaaovea,    ....    8S3-S77 

CHAPTER  X. 

17S9-1769 ;   AGE,  36-87. 

Vi^  to  Inreraiy— Pamphlet  in  defenoe  of  Chatham— Charlea  Townriiand 

and  the  hoepitalitiea  of  Dalkeith  — A  ator;  of  a  haunoh  of  TeniaoD  — 

Wllkia  of  the  "Eidgoniaii"  — A  corporation  row  in  Dumfrlw — Andrew 

CnMbie—Oanao  Hacjdierean — The  militia  pamphlet,  878-101 

CHAPTER   XI. 

1760-1768;  AQE,  8S-«. 
Hit  manrlaf^  —  Santfrnonta]  retroapacta  —  Prsaent  happineaa  —  Adam  Fn- 
tfOKOt  and  aiater  Peg— Death  of  George  It.  and  the  Duke  of  Aigyle- 
Change  in  tha  adminiatiation  of  Scotch  afiUra — Newoaatle  and  its  aodet; 
in  1760— The  Edinburgh  Poker  Club— Lord  Elibank'i  aentjmental  adven' 
turee— Dr  Robertaon  and  the  leadaicbip  af  the  Church  of  9oot3and— Har- 
rogste  and  the  omnpanjr  there — Andrew  Miliar  the  bODkaelleiw.Ben]arain 
Fmnkliii—Lord  Cllre,      .......     102-414 

CHAPTER  XIL 
1764-1766:  AOE,  12-14. 
Domeatic  a&in — Henrj  Dundaa — Harrogate  revidted — Adranturaa  with  a 
remarkable  bore — The  author  of  "Cracy  Talea" — Ambaaaador  Keith — 
Education  of  the  Soola  gentry — John  Qregoiy — Hra  Uontagne  and  her 
ooterie — D«ath  of  the  autbor'a  father — Budden  death  of  hia  fHand  Jardine 
— Oinrch  politia^ 11S-16& 


izecDy  Google 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XI  ir. 

1768-1768:   AQB,  «-4fl. 
Visit  to  Lord  Glangow  with  Robertwn  — ConviYialitioa  —  Synod  buMnew 
—  Hr  ArrxutroTIg -^  An  ercuraioD  to  Tweeddolo  and  ooron  the  border — 
AdteDturee  In  Culialo  —  Ths  Duke  of  Bucolenah  and  futlvities  at  Dal- 
l^th— Adam  Smith  there— Profuaor  Hillsr  of  Olugow,  .    470-495 

CHAPTER  XrV. 
1769-1770:  AQB,  47-48. 
The  oIm^  at  Sootland  and  the  Windov-lai — Carlyte  ai^xiinted  their  chwn- 
{don — Sojooni  in  London— The  &oatoh  danoing  aMembiy—  The  Chnroh  of 
Sootland'a  olaims  to  conddentJon  —  NsgotiatioiiB  with  Etat«sinea  —  Dr 
Dodd  pi«aohing  to  the  Hagdaleiu-  The  tamer  of  Colonel  Dow — Anoc- 
dot«B  of  Wolfe  and  Quaheo— Ganiolc  and  John  Home's  playa— Dooiaion  of 
the  Douglas  OaoBe— Lord  H&nsfleld— Tha  Eidtement— ConversaiioD  at 
Hn  Montague's— The  return  home- Back  to  London  about  tiie  Window- 
tax— Anecdotea  of  the  formation  of  the  North  Mlniitij— Conchuion,      4B6-S3fi 

SUPPLEMENTARY  CHAPTER 

Ilia  oorreapondenoe  on  Chtuoh  mattera — Hii  iDflaence — Hia  lighter  ooire*' 
pondeaoe  —  The  great  oontoat  of  the  olerkaMp  —  The  augmentation 
question — PoUtloe — Collins's  Ode  on  the  saperstition  of  the  Highlands 
— Carlyle  and  poetry— Dome^tio  hirtory— His  perBonal  appmnuioe— flie 
oompodUon  of  hiaautobiograpby- Condition  and  ediUsg  of  the  manii- 
■oripts— His  last  days—  His  death,        .....    5S6-G76 


izecy  Google 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY 


DR    ALEXANDER    CARLYLE. 


CHAPTEE  I. 

1722^1736  — AGE,   BIRTn  TO   li. 

niB  BirnU — EI8  FATHER  AND  THE  7AH1LY — FRECOCIOtIB  UINI8T£I11N0H 

PBESTONPANB  AKD  ITS  SOCIAL  ClRCLIi — COLONEL  CHABTEBiS — 

TWKIlfE    OF  ORAKOE — LADY   GBANOB  AND  HER  ADVENTUKE8 — 
COLONEL  GARDINER  :    DODDRIDOE'S  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS  CONVEREION 

CORRECTED TBE    HURRAY    KEITHS A   TOUR    TO   DVHF»IES 

THE     SOCIAL     HABITS     OF     THE     BORDERERS  —  HANOINO    OF    A 
BORDER    THIEF  —  GOES  TO   THE    UKIVERSITT    OF   FJ)INIiURGH  — 

FIRST    SESSION HIS    TEACHERS   AND  COMPANIONS — DR  WITHES- 

BPOON  OP  HEW    YORK — SIR    JOHN    DALBYMPLE — U'LAURIN  THS 
MATHKIIATICIAII. 


)H,  Jan.  26, 1800. 

Havikg  observed  how  carelessly,  and  consequently 
how  falsely,  history  is  writteo,  I  have  long  resolved  to 
note  down  certain  facts  within  my  own  knowledge, 
under  the  title  of  Anecdotes  and  Characters  of  the 
Times,  that  may  be  subservient  to  a  future  historian, 
if  not  to  embellish  his  page,  yet  to  keep  him  within 
the  bounds  of  truth  and  certainty. 


iz^cy  Google 


CHILDHOOD. 


I  have  been  too  late  in  beginning  this  work,  as  on 
this  very  day  I  enter  on  the  seventy-ninth  year  of  my 
age ;  which  circumatance,  as  it  renders  it  not  improbable 
that  I  may  be  stopped  short  in  the  middle  of  my 
annals,  wiU  undoubtedly  make  it  difficult  for  me  to 
recall  the  memory  of  many  past  transactions  in  my 
long  life  with  that  precision  and  clearness  which  such 
a  work  reqmres.  But  I  will  admit  of  no  more  excuses 
for  indolence  or  procrastination,  and  endeavour  {with 
God's  blessing)  to  serve  posterity,  to  the  best  of  my 
ability,  with  such  a  faithful  picture  of  times  and 
characters  as  came  within  my  view  in  the  humble  and 
private  sphere  of  life,  in  comparison  with  that  of  many 
others,  in  which  I  have  always  acted  ;  remembering, 
however,  that  in  whatever  sphere  men  act,  the  agents 
and  instruments  are  still  the  same,  viz.  the  faculties 
and  passions  of  human  nature. 

The  first  characters  which  I  could  discriminate  were 
those  of  my  own  family,  which  1  was  able  to  mark  at 
a  very  early  age.  My  father  was  of  a  moderate 
understanding,  of  ordinary  learning  and  accomplish- 
ments for  the  times,  for  he  was  bom  in  1690  ;  of  a 
warm,  open,  and  benevolent  temper ;  most  faithful 
and  diligent  in  the  duties  of  his  office,  and  an  ortho- 
dox and  popular  orator.  He  was  entirely  beloved 
and  much  caressed  by  the  whole  parish.*  My  mother 
was  a  person  of  superior  understanding,  of  a  calm  and 
firm  tenaper,  of  an  elegant  and  reflecting  mind ;  and 
considering  that  she  was  the  eldest  of  seven  daughters 

*  He  W4S  nunistv  of  the  pwisb  of  Prestonp&ns. 


oy  Google 


THE  FAMILY.  S 

and  three  sons  of  a  country  dergyman,  near  Dum- 
fries, and  was  bom  in  1700,  she  had  received  an 
education,  and  improved  by  it,  far  beyond  what  could 
have  been  expected.  Good  sense,  however,  and  dignity 
of  conduct,  were  her  chief  attributes.  The  effect  of 
this  was,  that  she  was  as  much  respected  as  my  father 


They  were  in  very  narrow  circumstances  till  the 
stipend  was  largely  augmented  iii  the  year  1732. 
Two  of  the  judges,  who  were  his  heritors.  Lords 
Grange  and  Dnumnore,  came  down  from  the  bench 
and  pleaded  his  cause.*  And  the  estate  of  the  patroD, 
then  Morison  of  Prestongrange,  being  under  seques- 
tration, it  was  with  little  difficulty  that  a  greater 
augmentation  than  was  usual  at  that  period  was 
obtained ;  for  the  stipend  was  raised  by  it  from  £70 
to  £140  per  annmn. 

In  the  year  1729,  the  good  people  bad  a  visit  from 
London  that  proved  expensive  and  troublesome.  It 
was  Mrs  Lyon,  a  sister  of  my  father's,  and  her  son  and 
daughter.  Her  deceased  husband  was  Mr  Lyon  of 
Easter  OgOI,  a  branch  of  the  Strathmore  family,  who 
had  been  in  the  Hebellion  1715,  and,  having  been 
pardoned,  had  attempted  to  carry  on  business  in 
London,  but  was  ruined  in  the  South  Sea.t  This 
lady,  who  came  down  on  business,  after  a  few  weeks 
went  into  lodgings  in  Edinburgh,  where  she  lost  her 

*  Hia  horiton — that  is  to  tay,  proptietora  of  land  in  Lib  pariak  liable  to 
conbibute  to  Uie  payment  of  lun  Etipeud. — Ed. 
t  Vit.,  tlie  Soath-Seft  Scheme. 


izecDy  Google 


4  THE   FAMILY. 

daughter  iu  ihe  smallpox,  and  soon  after  returned 
to  my  father's,  where  she  remained  for  some  months 
She  was  young  and  beautiful,  and  vain,  not  so  much 
of  her  person  (to  which  she  had  a  good  title)  aa  of  her 
husband's  great  family,  to  which  she  annexed  her  own, 
and,  by  a  little  stretch  of  imagination  and  a  search 
into  autiquity,  made  it  great  also.  Her  son,  who  was 
a  year  and  a  half  older  than  myself,  was  very  hand- 
some and  good-natured,  though  much  indulged.  My 
father  was  partial  to  him,  and  I  grew  a  little  jealous. 
But  the  excess  of  his  mother's  fondness  soon  cured  my 
father  of  his ;  and  as  I  was  acknowledged  to  be  the 
better  scholar  of  the  two,  I  soon  lost  all  uneasiness, 
and  came  to  love  my  cousin  most  sincerely,  though 
he  intercepted  many  of  the  good  things  that  I  should 
have  got. 

Not  long  after  this,  another  sister  of  my  father's 
came  down  from  London,  who  was  a  widow  also,  but 
had  no  children.  She  staid  with  us  for  a  year,  and 
during  that  time  taught  me  to  read  English,  with 
just  pronunciation  and  a  very  tolerable  accent — an 
accomplishment  which  in  those  days  was  very  rare. 
Long  before  she  came  down,  I  had  been  taught  to 
read  by  an  old  woman,  who  kept  a  school,  so  per- 
fectly, that  at  six  years  of  age  I  had  read  a  large 
portion  of  the  Bible  to  a  dozen  of  old  women,  who 
had  been  excluded  the  church  by  a  crowd  which 
had  made  me  leave  it  also,  and  whom  I  observed  sit- 
ting on  the  outside  of  a  door,  where  they  could  not 
hear.     Upon  this  I  proposed  to  read  a  portion  of 


oy  Google 


PRESTONPANS — COLONEL  CHARTERI3.  5 

Scripture  to  them,  to  whicL  they  agreed,  and  set  me 
on  a  tombstone,  whence  I  read  very  andibly  to  a  con- 
gregation, which  increased  to  about  a  score,  the  whole 
of  the  Song  of  Solomon.  This  would  not  deserve  to 
be  noted,  but  for  the  effect  it  had  afterwarda 

There  lived  in  the  town  and  iiarish  of  Preatonpana 
at  this  time  several  respectable  and  wealthy  people — 
such  as  the  Mathies,  the  Hogs,  the  Youngs,  and  the 
Shirreffa,  There  still  remained  some  foreign  trade, 
though  their  shipping  had  been  reduced  from  twenty 
to  half  the  number  since  the  Union,  which  put  an  end 
to  the  foreign  trade  in  the  ports  of  the  Firth  of  Forth. 
There  was  a  custom-house  established  here,  the  supe- 
rior ofiScers  of  which,  with  their  families,  added  to  the 
mercantile  class  which  still  remained,  made  a  respect- 
able society  enough. 

The  two  great  men  of  the  parish,  however,  were 
Morison  of  Prestongrange,  the  patron,  and  the  Hon- 
ourable James  Erskine  of  Grange,  one  of  the  Supreme 
Judges.  The  first  was  elected  Member  of  Parliament 
for  East  Lothian  in  the  first  Parliament  of  Great 
Britain,  although  the  celebrated  Andrew  Fletcher  of 
Saltoun  was  the  other  candidate.  But  Government 
took  part  with  Morison,  and  Fletcher  had  only  nine 
votes.  Morison  had  been  very  rich,  but  had  aufiered 
himself  to  be  stripped  by  the  famous  gambler  of  those 
times.  Colonel  Charteris,  whom  I  once  saw  with  him 
in  church,  when  I  was  five  or  six  years  of  age ;  and 
being  fully  impressed  with  the  popular  opinion  that 
he  was  a  wizard,  who  had  a  fascinating  power,  I  never 


izecy  Google 


COLOKEL  CHAETERIS. 


once  took  my  ^es  off  him  during  the  whole  Bervice, 
believing  that  I  should  be  a  4ead  man  the  moment  I 
did.  This  Colonel  Charteris  was  of  a  very  ancient 
family  in  Dumfriesehire,  the  first  of  whom,  being  one 
of  the  foUowera  of  Robert  Bruce,  had  acquired  a  great 
estate,  a  small  part  of  which  is  still  in  the  family. 
The  colonel  had  been  otherwise  well  connected,  for  he 
was  cousin-german  to  Sir  Francis  Kinloch,  and,  when 
a  boy,  was  educated  with  him  at  the  village  school. 
Many  stories  were  told  of  him,  which  would  never 
have  been  heard  of  had  he  not  afterwards  been  so 
much  celebrated  in  the  annals  of  infamy.  He  was  a 
great  profligate,  no  doubt,  but  there  have  been  as  bad 
men  and  greater  plunderers  than  he  was,  who  have 
escaped  with  little  public  notice.  But  he  was  one  of 
the  Runners  of  Sir  Robert  "Walpole,  and  defended  him 
in  all  places  of  resort,  which  drew  the  wrath  of  the 
Tories  upon  him,  and  particularly  sharpened  the  pens 
of  Pope  and  Arbuthnot  against  him.  For  had  it  not 
been  for  the  witty  epitaph  of  the  latter,  Charteris 
might  have  escaped  in  the  crowd  of  gamesters  and 
debauchees,  who  are  only  railed  at  by  their  pigeons, 
and  soon  fall  into  total  oblivion.  This  simple  gentle- 
man's estate  [Morison's]  soon  went  under  seques- 
tration for  the  payment  of  his  debts.  He  was  so 
imagmary  and  credulous  as  to  believe  that  close  by 
his  creek  of  Morison's  Haven  was  the  place  where  St 
John  wrote  the  Apocalypse,  because  some  old  vaults 
had  been  discovered  in  digging  a  mill-race  for  a  mill 
that  went  by  sea-water.    I'his  had  probably  been  put 


oy  Google 


LOED  AND  LADT  QEANOE.  7 

iuto  his  head  by  the  annual  meeting  of  the  oldest 
lodge  of  operative  masons  in  Scotland  at  that  place 
on  St  John's  Day. 

My  Lord  Grange  was  the  leading  man  in  the  parish, 
and  had  bronght  my  father  to  Frestonpans  from  Cum- 
bertrees  in  his  native  county  AnnandaJe,  where  he  had 
been  settled  for  four  years,  and  where  I  was  bom. 
Lord  Grange  was  Justice-Qerk  in  the  end  of  Queen 
Anne's  reign,  but  had  been  dismissed  &om  that  office 
in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  George  I.,  when  his 
brother,  the  Earl  of  Mar,  lost  the  Secretary  of  State's 
office,  which  he  had  held  for  some  years.  After  this, 
and  during  the  Bebellioo,  IiOrd  Grange  kept  dose  at 
his  house  of  Preston,  on  an  estate  which  he  had  re- 
cently bought  from  the  heirs  of  a  Dr  Oswald,  but 
which  had  not  long  before  been  the  family  estate  of  a 
very  ancient  cadet  of  the  family  of  Hamilton.  Dur- 
ing the  Rebellion,  and  some  time  after,  IiOrd  Grange 
amused  himself  in  laying  out  and  planting  a  fine 
garden,  in  the  style  of  those  times,  full  of  close  walks 
and  labyrinths  and  wLldemesses,  which,  though  it  did 
not  occupy  above  four  or  five  acres,  cost  one  at  least 
two  hours  to  perambulate.  This  garden  or  pleasure- 
ground  was  soon  brought  to  perfection  by  his  defend- 
ing it  from  the  westerly  and  south-westerly  winds  by 
hedges  of  common  elder,  which  in  a  few  years  were 
above  sixteen  feet  high,  and  completely  sheltered  all 
the  interior  grounds.  This  garden  continued  to  be 
an  object  of  curiosity  down  to  the  year  1740,  insomuch 
that  flocks  of  company  resorted  to  it  from  Edinburgh, 


izecy  Google 


8  LORD  AND   LADY  GEAKOE. 

during  the  summer,  on  Saturdays  and  Mondays  (for 
Sunday  waa  not  at  that  time  a  day  of  pleasure),  and 
were  highly  gratified  by  the  sight,  there  being  nothing 
at  that  time  like  it  in  Scotland,  except  at  Alloa,  the 
seat  of  the  Earl  of  Mar,  of  which  indeed  it  was  a 
copy  in  miniature. 

My  Lady  Grange  was  Rachel  Cbiesly,  the  daughter 
of  Cbiesly  of  Dairy,  the  person  who  shot  President 
Lockhart  in  the  dark,  when  standing  within  the  head 
of  a  close  in  the  Lawnmarket,  because  he  had  voted 
against  him  in  a  cause  depending  before  the  Court.* 
He  was  the  son  or  grandson  of  a  Cbiesly,  who,  in 
BaiUie's  Letters,  is  called  Man  to  the  famous  Mr  Alex- 
ander Henderson ;  that  is  to  say,  secretary,  for  he 
accompanied  Mr  Henderson  on  hia  journey  to  London, 
and  having  met  the  Court  somewhere  on  their  way, 
Cbiesly  was  knighted  by  Charles  I. ;  so  that,  being  a 
new  family,  they  must  have  bad  few  relations,  which, 
added  to  the  atrocious  deed  of  her  father,  had  made 
the  public  very  cool  in  the  interest  of  Lady  Grange. 
This  lady  had  been  very  beautiful,  but  was  of  a  violent 
temper.  She  had,  it  was  said,  been  debauched  by  her 
husband  before  marriage  ;  and  as  he  was  postponing 


*  It  WIS  not,  strictly  apeakiiig,  a  dedeioD  of  the  Conrt  that  inAiriated 
Chiesly,  but  a  flading  in  an  arbitratioD.  Ha  was  dmiroua,  and  thought 
himself  entitled,  to  leave  hia  wife,  with  whom  be  had  quureUed,  and  hia 
children,  to  starre.  The  question  of  hia  liability  for  their  support  hnving 
been  referred  to  President  Lockhart  and  Lord  Kemnay,  they  found  him 
bound  to  mabe  his  family  an  aUowance.  It  may  be  proper  to  explain  that 
Grange  and  his  wife  were  not  Lord  and  Lady  in  the  English  »euae,  as  a  peer 
and  peeress,  but  by  the  custom  of  Scotland,  which  gives  "Lord"  to  a  judg^ 
•nd  used  to  give  "  Lady"  to  tlie  wife  of  a  lauded  proprietor. — Ed. 


oy  Google 


LORD   AND  LADY  GKANGE.  9 

or  evading  the  performance  of  his  promise  to  marry 
her,  it  was  believed  that,  by  threatening  his  life,  she 
had  obtained  the  fulfilment  of  it. 

It  was  Lord  Grange's  custom  to  go  frequently  to 
London  in  the  spring ;  and  though  he  seemed  quiet  and 
inactive  here,  it  was  supposed  that  he  resented  his 
having  been  turned  out  of  the  Jostice-Clerk's  office  in 
1714,  and  might  secretly  be  canying  on  plots  when 
at  London.  Be  that  as  it  may,  he  had  contracted 
such  a  violent  aversion  at  Sir  Bobert  Walpole,  that 
having,  by  intrigue  and  hypocrisy,  secured  a  majority 
of  the  district  of  burghs  oT  which  Stirling  is  the 
chief,  he  threw  up  his  seat  as  a  Judge  in  the  Court  of 
Session,  was  elected  member  for  that  district,  and 
went  to  London  to  attend  Parliament,  and  to  overturn 
Sir  Eobert  Walpole,  not  merely  in  his  own  opinion, 
but  in  the  opinion  of  many  who  were  dupes  to  his 
cunning,  and  his  pretensions  to  abUities  that  he  had 
not.*  But  his  first  appearance  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons undeceived  his  sanguine  friends,  and  silenced 
him  for  ever.  He  chose  to  make  his  maiden  speech 
on  the  Witches  Bill,  as  it  was  called ;  and  being 
learned  in  daemonologia,  with  books  on  which  subject 
his  library  was  filled,  he  made  a  long  canting  speech 
that  set  the  House  in  a  titter  of  laughter,  and  convinced 
Sir  Robert  that  he  had  no  need  of  any  extraordinary 
armour  against  this  champion  of  the  house  of  Mar.t 

■  A  Bill  to  t^ilale  electiona  in  Scotlaod  was  then  passiDg,  and  Walpols 
added  to  it  a  clause  disqualifying  Judges  of  the  Court  of  SetHioD  from  sitting 
in  PArliamcnt,  for  the  purpose,  it  was  said,  of  keoping  Eiskine  out  —Ed. 

t  The  "Act  to  repeal  tba  statute  nude  in  the  fiist  year  of  King -lames  L, 


oy  Google 


10  LORD  AND  LADY  GRANGE. 

The  truth  was,  that  the  man  had  neither  learning  nor 
ability.  He  was  no  lawyer,  and  he  was  a  bad  speaker. 
He  had  been  raised  on  the  shoulders  of  his  brother, 
the  Earl  of  Mar,  in  the  end  of  the  Queen's  reign,  but 
had  never  distinguished  himsel£  In  the  General  As- 
sembly itself  which  many  gentlemen  afterwards  made 
a  school  of  popular  eloquence,  and  where  he  took  the 
high-flying  side  that  he  might  annoy  Government,  his 
appearances  were  but  rare  and  unimpressive  ;  but  as 
he  was  understood  to  be  a  great  plotter,  he  was  sup- 
posed to  reserve  himself  for  some  greater  occasions. 

In  Mr  Erskine's  annual  visits  to  London,  he  had 
attached  himself  to  a  mistress,  a  handsome  Scotch- 
woman, Fanny  Lindsay,  who  kept  a  coffeehouse  about 
the  bottom  of  the  Haymarket.  This  had  come  to  his 
lady's  ears,  and  did  not  tend  to  make  her  less  out- 
rageous. He  had  taken  every  method  to  soothe  her. 
As  she  loved  command,  he  had  made  her  factor  upon 
his  estate,  and  given  her  the  whole  management  of 
bis  afiairs.  When  absent,  he  wrote  her  the  most 
flattering  letters,  and,  what  was  still  more  flattering, 

intitulsd  'An  Act  against  Cnnjuratioii,  Witchcraft,  and  dealing  with 
ovil  and  wicked  Spirita,  except  bo  much  thereof,'  Jtc,  was  paaiied  early 
in  the  seBsion  of  1735.  Unfortunately,  we  have  no  account  of  anj  debate 
on  the  mesanre,  and  thus  lose  Entkine'a  speech,  which  was  probably  carious, 
for  the  vulgar  supentitioiia  of  the  day  seem  to  have  taken  faat  hold  on  him, 
and  hia  diary  is  fidl  of  dreams,  prognontica,  and  communingB  with  persons 
supeniaturally  gifted.  The  tenor  of  hia  "canting  speech"  may  periiapB  be 
iutatreJ  trora  the  following  testinioiiy  borne  in  1743  agunst  the  same  Bill, 
by  the  Associate  Presbytery :  "  The  iienol  statntes  against  witches  have 
been  repealed  by  the  Parliament,  contnuy  to  the  exfleaa  law  of  God; 
by  which  a  holy  God  may  be  provoked,  in  a  way  of  righteous  judgment,  to 
leave  those  who  ore  already  ensnared  to  be  hardened  more  and  more,  and 
to  permit  Satan  to  tempt  and  seduce  othen  to  the  satoo  wicked  and  danger- 


izecy  Google 


LOM)  AKD  LADY  OBANOE.  11 

he  was  stud,  when  present,  to  have  imparted  Becreta 
to  her,  which,  if  disclosed,  might  have  reached  his  life. 
Still  she  was  unquiet,  and  led  him  a  miserable  life. 
What  was  true  is  uncertain  ;  for  though  her  outward 
appearance  was  stormy  and  outrageous,  Lord  Grange 
not  improbably  exaggerated  the  violence  of  her  behav- 
iour to  his  familiar  friends  as  an  apology  for  what  he 
afterwards  did ;  for  he  alleged  to  them  that  his  life 
was  hourly  in  danger,  and  that  she  slept  with  lethal 
weapons  under  her  pillow.  He  once  showed  my  father 
a  razor  which  he  had  found  concealed  there. 

Whatever  might  be  the  truth,  be  executed  one  of 
the  boldest  and  most  violent  projects  that  ever  had 
been  attempted  since  the  nation  was  governed  by 
laws ;  for  he  seized  his  lady  in  his  house  in  Edin< 
bui^h,  and  by  main  forc6  carried  her  oflF  through 
Stirling  to  the  Highlands,  whence,  after  several  weeks, 
she  was  at  last  landed  in  St  Kilda,  a  desolate  isle  in 
the  Western  Ocean,  sixty  miles  distant  from  the  Long 
Island.  There  she  continued  to  live  to  the  end  of  her 
days,  which  was  not  before  the  year  17 — ,  in  the  most 
wretched  condition,  in  the  society  of  none  but  sav- 
ages, and  often  with  scanty  provision  of  the  coarsest 
fare,  and  but  rarely  enjoying  the  comfort  of  a  pound 
of  tea,  which  she  sometimes  got  irom  shipmasters  who 
accidentaUy  called.*     Lord  Grange's  accomplices  in 

*  She  was  carried  off  in  1732 ;  and  after  being  detained  about  two  yoora 
in  the  amaU  ialood  of  Heeker,  was  ooaveyed  to  St  Kildik  On  the  oSsif 
getting  wind,  shewaa  afterwards  removed  to  Harris,  where  she  died  in  lliB, 
before  the  aiTangemeate  for  obtaining  herreltMe,  and  a  full  inquiry  into  the 
oSair,  ooold  be  completed. —Ed. 


izecy  Google 


12  LOBD   AND  LADY  GRANGE. 

this  atrocious  act  were  believed  to  be  Lord  Lovat  aud 
the  Laird  of  M'Leod,  tbe  first  as  being  tbe  most  famous 
plotter  in  the  kingdom,  and  the  second  as  equally 
unprincipled,  and  the  proprietor  of  the  island  of  St 
Kilda.  What  was  moat  extraordinary  was,  that,  except 
in  conversation  for  a  few  weeks  only,  this  enormous 
act,  committed  in  the  midst  of  tbe  metropolis  of  Scot- 
land by  a  person  who  bad  been  Lord  Justice-Clerk, 
was  not  taken  the  least  notice  of  by  any  of  her  own 
family,  or  by  the  King's  Advocate  or  Solicitor,  or  any 
of  the  guardians  of  the  laws.  Two  of  her  sons  were 
grown  up  to  manhood — her  eldest  daughter  was  the 
wife  of  the  Earl  of  Kintore — who  acquiesced  in  what 
they  considered  as  a  necessary  act  of  justice  for  tbe 
preservation  of  their  father's  life.  Nay,  the  second 
son  was  supposed  to  be  one  of  tbe  persons  who  came 
masked'to  the  bouse,  and  carried  her  off  in  a  chair  to 
tbe  place  where  she  was  set  on  horseback. 

This  artful  man,  by  cant  and  hypocrisy,  persuaded 
all  his  intimate  friends  that  this  act  was  necessary 
for  the  preservation  of  her  life  as  well  as  of  his ; 
and  that  it  was  only  confining  a  mad  woman  in  a 
place  of  safety,  where  she  was  tenderly  cared  for,  and 
for  whom  he  professed  not  merely  an  affectionate  re- 
gard, but  tbe  most  passionate  love.  It  was  many  yeara 
afterwards  before  it  was  known  that  she  had  been  sent 
to  such  a  horrid  place  as  St  Kilda  ;  and  it  was  gene- 
rally believed  that  she  was  kept  comfortably,  though  in 
confinement,  in  some  castle  in  the  Highlands  belonging 
to  Lovat  or  M'Leod.    The  public  in  genei-al,  though 


oy  Google 


LORD  AND  LADY  GBANO£.  13 

damoToos  enoagb,  could  take  no  step,  seeing  that  tlie 
family  were  not  displeased,  and  supposing  that  Lord 
Grange  had  satisfied  the  Justice-Clerk  and  other  high 
officers  of  the  law  with  the  propriety  of  his  conduct. 

from  what  I  could  Icatn  at  the  time,  and  after- 
wards came  to  know.  Lord  Grange  was  in  one  respect 
a  character  not  unlike  Cromwell  and  some  of  his  asso- 
ciates— a  real  enthusiast,  but  at  the  same  time  licen- 
tious in  his  morals. 

He  had  my  father  very  frequently  with  him  in  the 
evenings,  and  kept  him  to  very  late  hours.  They 
were  imderstood  to  pass  much  of  their  time  in  prayer, 
and  in  settling  the  high  points  of  Calvinism ;  for  their 
creed  was  that  of  Geneva.  Lord  Grange  was  not  un- 
entertaining  in  conversation,  for  he  bad  a  great  many 
-anecdotes  which  he  related  agreeably,  and  was  fair- 
complexioned,  good-looking,  and  insinuating. 

After  those  meetings  for  private  prayer,  however, 
in  which  they  passed  several  hours  before  supper, 
praying  alternately,  they  did  not  part  without  wine  ; 
for  my  mother  used  to  complain  of  their  late  hours, 
and  suspected  that  the  claret  had  flowed  liberally.* 

*  Those  meetings  might  partly  be  calculated  to  keep  GnuiKe  free  of  hii 
irife's  company,  which  was  always  atonny  and  outrageooa.  I  remember  well 
that  when  I  was  invited  on  Saturdays  to  pass  the  afternoon  with  the  two 
youngest  daughters,  Jean  and  Itachel,  and  their  yomi|^  brother  John,  who 
was  of  my  age,  then  about  six  or  seven,  although  they  had  a  well-Gtted-up 
clo«et  for  children's  play,  we  always  kept  alternate  watch  at  the  door,  lest 
my  lady  should  come  suddenly  npon  us ;  which  was  needlew,  as  I  observed 
to  them,  for  ber  clamour  was  sufficiently  loud  u  she  came  through  the 
rooms  and  passages. 

In  the  "  Reoollectiona  "  there  is  the  following  account  of  an  iatervlew 
with  the  lady  :— 

"  I  had  tnivelled  half  a  mile  westwards  to  the  Red  Bum,  which  divides 


,1.0,  Google 


14  LORD  AMD  LADY  GRANGE. 

Notwithstanding  this  intimacy,  there  were  periods  of 
half  a  year  at  a  time  when  there  was  do  intercouTBo 
between  them  at  alt.  My  father's  conjecture  was, 
that  at  those  times  he  was  engaged  in  a  course  of  de- 

PreetonpuiB  from  ita  auburbs  the  CiithiH,  And  was  horering  on  Uie  brink  of 
tliis  livo',  nncertun  whether  or  not  I  shoulii  veDture  over.  In  this  state  I 
vu  met  by  a  coach,  which  stopped,  and  which  was  under  the  oammand  of 
I^y  Grange.  She  ordered  her  tootman  to  seize  me  directly  and  put  me 
into  the  ooach.  It  waa  in  rain  to  Sy,  go  I  was  flung  into  her  coach  relac- 
tant  and  aulky.  She  tried  to  soothe  me,  but  it  would  not  do.  She  had 
provoked  me  on  the  Snndiiy,  by  telling  my  father  that  I  played  myself  at 
church,  that  she  had  detected  me  smiling  at  her  eon  John  (exactly  of  my 
age),  and  trying  to  write  with  my  finger  on  the  dusty  desk  that  waa  before  me. 
Sho  was  gorgeously  dressed  :  herfaca  was  like  the  moon,  and  patched  all  over, 
not  for  ornament,  but  use.  For  theee  eighty  yean  that  I  have  been  wander- 
ing in  this  wildemeu,  I  haTe  seen  nothing  like  her  but  General  Dickson  of 
Kilbucho.  In  ahort,  she  appeared  to  me  to  be  the  lady  with  whom  all  well- 
edncated  children  were  aoquMntod,  the  Great  Scartet  Whore  of  Babylon, 
She  landed  me  at  my  father's  door,  and  gave  me  tomy  mothor,  with  inj  una - 
tions  to  keep  me  nearer  home,  or  I  would  be  lost.  This,  however,  drew  on 
a  nearer  connaction,  for  the  two  misses,  who  had  been  in  Uie  ooach,  came 
down  with  John,  who  was  younger  than  them,  and  invited  me  to  drink  tea 
with  them  next  Saturday :  to  this  I  had  no  avergioii,  and  went  aooordiugly. 
The  yomig  ladies  had  a  fine  closet,  charmingly  furnished,  wiHi  chairs,  a 
table,  a  set  of  china  and  everything  belonging  to  it^  The  misses  set  about 
making  tea,  for  they  had  a  fire  in  tiie  room,  and  a  maid  came  to  help  them, 
till  at  length  we  heard  a  shrill  voice  screaming,  *  Uaiy  Ershine,  my  angel 
Mary  Enkine  I ' 

"ThilwasCoontesaof  Kintore  afterwards,  and  now  very  near  that  honour. 
The  girla  seemed  frightened  out  of  their  wits,  and  so  did  the  maid.  The 
clamour  ceased  ;  but  the  girls  ordered  John  and  me  to  stand  sentiy  in  our 
turns,  with  vigilant  ear,  and  give  them  notice  whenever  the  storm  b^an 
Rf;ain.  We  had  sweet-cake  and  almonds  and  ntidns,  of  which  a  small 
paper  bag  was  given  me  for  my  brother  Londwick,  Jame^  Lord  Grange's 
godson,  who  came  last,  being  still  at  nurse.  I  had  no  great  enjf^ment, 
notwithstanding  the  good  thingB  and  the  kisse«  given,  for  I  had  by  contagion 
cau^t  a  mighty  fear  of  my  lady  from  them.  But  I  was  soon  relieved,  for 
my  father's  man  came  for  me  at  seven  o'clock.  The  moment  I  was  out  of 
sight  of  the  house,  I  took  oat  my  paper  bag  and  ate  np  ita  oontents,  bribing 
the  servant  with  a  few,  for  Loudwiok  was  gone  to  his  native  cotmtry  to  die 
at  our  grandfather's.  When  I  read  Uie  fable  of  the  '  City  Home  and 
Country  Mouse,'  this  scene  cams  fresh  to  my  memoiy.  What  trials  and 
dangers  have  children  to  go  through ! " 


izecy  Google 


LORD  AND  LADY  OEAlfGE.  16 

bauchery  at  Edinburgh,  and  interrapted  his  religious 
exearcises.  For  in  thoee  intervaU  he  not  only  neglected 
my  father's  company,  but  alaented  himself  from  church, 
and  did  not  attend  the  sacrament — religious  services 
which  at  other  times  he  would  not  have  neglected  for 
the  world.  Report,  however,  siud  that  he  and  his 
associates,  of  whom  a  Mr  Michael  Meuzies,  a  brother 
of  the  I^aird  of  St  Gennains,  and  Thomas  Elliott,  W.S. 
(the  father  of  Sir  John  Elliott,  physician  in  London), 
were  two,  passed  their  time  in  alternate  scenes  of  the 
exercises  of  religion  and  debauchery,  spending  the  day 
in  meetings  for  prayer  and  pious  conversation,  and 
their  nights  in  lewdness  and  reveUing.  Some  men 
are  of  opinion  that  they  could  not  be  equally  sincere 
in  both.  I  am  apt  to  think  that  they  were,  for 
human  nature  is  capable  of  wonderful  freaks.  There 
is  no  doubt  of  their  profligacy ;  and  I  have  frequently 
seen  them  drowned  in  teats,  during  the  whole  of  a 
sacramental  Sunday,  when,  so  far  as  my  observation 
could  reach,  they  could  have  no  rational  object  in  act- 
ing a  part'    The  Marquess  of  Lothian  of  that  day, 

■  Gnnge  kept  ft  dikiy,  a  poition  of  which  wu  printed  in  1834,  undeF  the 
title,  E3±radifivmOie  Diary  nf  a  Member  1^  the  CoUfge  <tf  JuMke.  Ittenda, 
on  the  whole,  to  conSim  Cailjle'i  view  of  hia  chuaoter ;  but  it  is  drier  read- 
ing than  one  wonld  expect  from  the  aelf-oommunings  of  a  man  whose  char- 
acter mw  CMt  between  eztranea  to  wide  apart,  SDd  whose  career  had  been 
BO  remaifcable.  Along  with  the  hankering  after  dreams  and  propheoies 
Already  alluded  to,  it  contaiDS  chiefly  accounts  of  his  conduct  and  views  in 
the  proceedings  of  the  church  courts.  It  mentions  some  pieces  of  condoot 
on  his  own  port,  which,  if  not  criminal,  would  not  then,  or  now,  be  deemed 
ray  oonnsteot  with  bonoar — as,  for  instance^  how  he  examined  a  private 
diuT  kept  'bs  ^^  ttnaij  tator,  in  order  that  he  might  see  what  was  said 
therein  abont  himself  and  his  household ;  and  the  tesult,  as  people  who  pur- 
s  usnalljr  find,  was  not  agreeaUe.    Each  rMtler  will 


izecy  Google 


16  COLONEL  GARDINER. 

whom  1  have  seen  attending  the  Bacrament  at  Pres- 
tonpans  with  Jjord  Grange,  and  whom  no  man  sus- 
pected of  plots  or  hypocrisy,  was  much  addicted  to 
debauchery.  The  natural  casuistry  of  the  passions 
grants  dispensations  with  more  facility  than  the  Church 
of  Home. 

About  this  time  two  or  three  other  remarkable  men 
came  to  live  in  the  parish.  The  celebrated  Col.  Gar- 
diner bought  the  estate  of  Banktoun,  where  Lord  Drum- 
more  had  resided  for  a  year  or  two  before  he  bought 
the  small  estate  of  Westpans,  which  he  called  Drum- 
more,  and  where  he  resided  till  his  death  in  1755. 

The  first  Gardiner,  who  was  afterwards  killed  in  the 
battle  of  Preston,  was  a  noted  enthusiast,  a  very  weak, 
honest,  and  brave  man,  who  had  once  been  a  great 
rake,  and  was  converted,  as  he  told  my  father,  by  his 
reading  a  book  called  Gumall's  Christian  Armour, 
which  his  mother  had  put  in  his  trimk  many  years 
before.  He  had  never  looked  at  it  till  one  day  at 
Paris,  where  he  was  attending  the  Earl  of  Stair,  who 
was  ambassador  to  that  court  from  the  year  1715  to 
the  Regent's  death,  when,  having  an  intrigue  with  a 

judge  for  HimBelf  how  much  ajnccritf  ther«  is  in  tlie  following  extntct  fmm 
the  diuy: — "I  have  reason  to  thank  God  that  1  was  put  out  from  the  office 
of  Jnatice-Clerk,  for  bemda  nuui;  retuons  from  the  times  and  my  own  circum- 
stances, and  other  reaaona  from  myself,  this  one  is  sufficient— that  I  have 
therein  so  much  more  time  to  employ  about  God  and  religion.  If  I  con- 
sider how  very  much  more  I  have  since  1  iraa  neither  ooncemed  in  tiie 
Court  of  Justiciary  nor  in  the  politics,  how  can  I  answer  for  the  littie 
advances  I  have  made  in  the  knowledge  of  religion  ?  If,  while  I  have  that 
leisure,  1  be  enabled,  through  gi«ce,  to  improve  it  for  that  end,  I  need  not 
grudge  the  want  of  tOie  £400  sterling  yearly  :  for  this  is  worth  all  the  woild, 
and  God  can  provide  for  my  family  in  his  own  good  lime  and  way. "—  (P,  31.) 


izecDy  Google 


COLONEL  GARDINER  AND  DODDRIDGE.  17 

SDTgeon's  wife,  and  the  hour  of  appointment  not  being 
come,  he  thought  he  would  paaa  the  time  in  turning 
over  the  leaves  of  the  book,  to  aee  what  the  divine 
could  Bay  about  armour,  which  he  thought  he  under- 
stood as  veil  as  he.  He  was  so  much  taken  with  this 
book,  that  he  allowed  his  hour  of  appointment  to  pass, 
never  saw  his  mistress  more,  and  from  that  day  left 
off  all  his  rakish  habits,  which  consisted  in  swearing 
and  whoring  (for  he  never  was  a  drinker),  and  the 
contempt  of  sacred  things,  and  became  a  serious  good 
Christian  ever  after. 

Dr  Doddridge  has  marred  this  story,  either  through 
mistake,  or  through  a  desire  to  make  Gardiner's  con- 
version more  supernatural,  for  he  says  that  his  appoint- 
ment was  at  midnight,  and  introduces  some  sort  of 
meteor  or  blaze  of  light,  that  alarmed  the  new  con- 
vert.* But  this  was  not  the  case ;  for  I  have  heard 
Gardiner  tell  the  story  at  least  three  or  four  times,  to 
different  sets  of  people — for  he  was  not  shy  or  back- 
ward to  speak  on  the  subject,  as  many  would  have  been. 
But  it  was  at  mid-day,  for  the  appointment  was  at  one 

*  "He  thought  he  saw  an  uoiudaI  blaze  of  li^t  Call  on  the  book  while  he 
waa  raading,  which  he  at  Erst  imagined  might  happen  bj  gome  accddent  in 
the  candle.  Bat  liftuag  up  hu  eyes,  he  appraheaded,  to  bin  extreme  amaze- 
ment, tiiat  there  was  before  him,  oa  it  were  guspended  in  the  lur,  a  visible 
rejneacntation  of  the  Lord  Jratra  Christ  upon  the  Ctobb,  Buirounded  on  all 
■idea  with  a  glory ;  and  was  imprGeaod  as  if  a  voice,  or  something  equivalent 
to  a  voic^  bad  come  to  him,  to  this  effect  (for  be  was  not  confidant  as  b> 
the  VB17  words),  '  Oh,  sinner '.  did  I  suffer  Oiia  for  thee,  and  aie  these  the 
returns!'  But  whether  this  were  an  audible  voice,  or  only  a  strong  impres- 
Bpn  on  his  mind  equally  striking,  ha  did  not  seem  very  confident ;  though, 
ta  the  beat  of  my  remembnuice,  be  rather  judged  it  to  be  the  fonner."— 
Dodduimb'b  SemarkfMf  Piuiaget  in  lite  Lift  qfColoarl  Oardintr,  |  32. 


oy  Google 


18  COLONEL  OARDINEE  AND  DODDRIDGE. 

o'clock;  and  he  told  us  the  reason  of  it,  which  was,  that 
the  surgeon,  or  apothecary,  had  shown  some  symptoms 
of  jealousy,  and  they  chose  a  time  of  day  when  he  was 
necessanly  employed  abroad  in  his  hosiness. 

I  have  also  conversed  with  my  father  upon  it,  after 
Doddridge's  book  was  published,  who  always  persisted 
in  saying  that  the  appointment  was  at  one  o'dodc, 
for  the  reason  mentioned,  and  that  Gardiner  having 
changed  his  lodging,  be  found  a  book  when  rummag- 
ing an  old  trunk  to  the  bottom,  which  my  father  said 
was  Gumall's  Christian  Armour,  but  to  which  Dod- 
dridge gives  the  name  of  The  Christian  Soldier;  or. 
Heaven  Taken  by  Storm,  by  Thomas  Watson.*  Dod- 
dridge, in  a  note,  says  that  his  edition  of  the  story 
was  confirmed  in  a  letter  from  a  Rev.  Mr  Spears,  in 
which  there  was  not  the  least  difference  from  the  ac- 
count he  had  taken  down  in  writing  the  very  night  in 
which  the  Colonel  had  told  him  the  story.  This  Mr 
Spears  had  been  Lord  Grange's  chaplain,  and  I  knew 
him  to  have  no  great  regard  to  truth,  when  deviating 

*  ' '  The  ChristiaD  in  Complete  Armour ;  or,  A  Treatasa  on  Hie  Sunts*  War 
with  the  Devil :  irhereiu  a  discovery  in  made  of  tlie  policy,  power,  wicked- 
ness, and  stratagems  made  luo  of  b;  that  enemy  of  Qod  and  hii  peo[de ;  a 
magazine  opened  £rom  whence  the  Chriitian  is  furmshed  with  special  arnu 
for  the  battle,  assisted  in  buckling  on  his  anoour,  and  taught  tlie  ose  of  his 
weapons — together  with  the  Happy  issue  of  the  whole  war. — By  Willuh 
Qdskall,  A.M.,  formeriy  of  I^venham,  Suffolk.  1656-62."  Three  volumes 
quarto.  !'A«  Cliridiaii  Soldier;  or,  Hemen  Takta  bg  Slorm,  one  of  many 
works  written  by  Thomas  Watson,  one  of  the  non-juring  clergy  driven  out 
by  the  Act  of  Conformity,  appears  to  be  very  rare ;  it  is  not  in  the  list  of  its 
author's  works  in  Watt's  Biblioth«ea,  Doddridge,  before  he  wrote  his  well- 
known  Bemariable  Pauaget,  had  preached  and  published  a  funenl  sermon 
OD  Colonel  Oardiner,  which  he  called  Tha  CArMCan  Warrior  AtiimaUd  ond 
Crowned—  -an  evident  assimilatioD  to  the  title  of  Wataon'e  book.— Ed. 


izecy  Google 


COLONEL  OARDIKBB  AND  DODDEIDaE.  19 

&om  it  suited  his  purpose ;  at  any  rate,  he  was  not  a 
man  to  contradict  Doddridge,  who  had  most  likely 
told  him  his  story.  It  is  remarkable  that,  thou^  the 
Doctor  had  written  down  everythiDg  exactly,  and 
could  take  his  oath,  yet  he  bad  omitted  to  mark  the 
day  of  the  week  on  which  the  conversion  happened, 
but,  if  not  mistaken,  thinks  it  was  Sabbath.  Tbis 
aggravates  the  sin  of  the  appointment,  and  hallows 
the  conversion. 

The  Colonel,  who  was  truly  an  honest  well-meaning 
man  and  a  pious  Christian,  was  very  ostentatious  ; 
though,  to  tell  the  truth,  he  boasted  oftener  of  his 
conversion  than  of  the  dangerous  battles  he  had 
been  in.  As  he  told  the  story,  however,  there  was 
nothing  supernatural  in  it ;  for  many  a  rake  of  about 
thirty  years  of  age  has  been  reclaimed  by  some  cir- 
cumstance that  set  him  a-thinking,  as  the  accidental 
reading  of  this  book  had  done  to  Gardiner.  He  was 
a  very  skilful  horseman,  which  had  recommended  him 
to  Lord  Stair  as  a  suitable  part  of  his  train  when  he 
was  ambassador  at  Paris,  and  lived  in  great  splendour. 
Gardiner  married  Lady  Frances  Erskine,  one  of  the 
daughters  of  the  Earl  of  Bachan,  a  lively,  little,  de- 
formed woman,  very  religions,  and  a  great  breeder. 
Their  children  were  no  way  distinguished,  except  the 
eldest  daughter,  Fanny,  who  was  very  beautiful,  and 
becMne  the  wife  of  Sir  James  Baird. 

Lord  Drummore,  one  of  the  Judges,  was  a  second 
or  third  son  of  the  President  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  of 
North  Berwick,  a  man  very  popular  and  agreeable  in 


izecy  Google 


20  NEIGHBOURS. 

his  manaers,  and  an  universal  favourite  I  He  was  -a 
great  friend  of  the  poor,  not  merely  by  giving  alma, 
in  which  he  was  not  alack,  but  by  encouraging  agri- 
culture and  manufactures,  and  by  devoting  his  spare 
time  in  acting  as  a  justice  of  peace  in  the  two 
parishes  of  Inveresk  and  Prestoopana,  where  his  estate 
lay,  and  did  much  to  preserve  the  peace  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood, and  to  promote  the  peace  of  the  country. 
It  were  happy  for  the  country,  if  every  man  of  as 
much  knowledge  and  authority  as  the  Judges  are  sup- 
posed to  have,  would  lay  himself  out  as  this  good  man 
did.  By  doing  so  they  might  prevent  many  a  lawsuit 
that  ends  in  the  ruin  of  the  parties.  Lord  Drummore 
had  many  children. 

Mr  Robert  Keith  of  Craig,  who  was  afterwards  am- 
bassador at  many  courts,  and  who  was  a  man  of 
ability  and  very  agreeable  manners,  came  also  about 
this  time  to  live  in  the  parish.  His  sons.  Sir  Eobert 
Murray  Keith,  K.B.,  and  Sir  Basil  Keith,  were  after- 
wards well  known.* 

There  lived  at  the  same  time  there,  Colin  Campbell, 
Esq.,  a  brother  of  Sir  James,  of  Arbruchal,  who  was 
Collector  of  the  Customs  ;  and  when  he  was  appointed 

*  Abuiuilaiit  infonnatiou  about  this  family  will  be  fouod  in  the  iiemoin 
and  Corraprntdaux  qfSir  Bobert  Itarray  KtUh,  1849.  The  elder  K«th  was 
ambassador  kt  Vienna,  and  subsequently  at  St  Peterebnrg,dnriug  the  revolu- 
tion vhich  placed  the  Empress  Catherine  on  the  throne.  His  vife  was  the 
prototype  of  Scott's  sketch  of  Mrs  Bethune  Baliol.  The  son.  Sir  B«bett, 
was  the  ambassador  in  Denmark  who  saved  Queen  Caroline  Matilda,  George 
III. 'a  sister,  from  the  fate  to  which  she  was  daatined  on  account  of  the 
affur  of  Struensee. — Ed. 


oy  Google 


THE  FIRST  TOUn.  21 

a  Commissioner  of  the  Board  of  Customs,  George 
Cheap,  Esq.,  became  his  successor,  a  brother  of  the 
Laird  of  Eossie,  all  of  whom  had  large  families  of 
seven  or  eight  boys  and  girls,  which  made  up  a  society 
of  genteel  young  people  seldom  to  be  met  with  in  such 
a  place. 

When  I  was  very  young,  I  usually  passed  the  school 
vacation,  first  at  Mr  Menzies',  of  St  Germains,  and 
afterwards  at  Seton  House,  when  the  family  came  to 
live  there  upon  the  sale  of  their  estate.  I  was  very 
often  there,  as  1  was  a  great  favourite  of  the  lady's, 
one  of  the  Sinclairs  of  Stevenson,  and  of  her  two 
daughters,  who  were  two  or  three  years  older  than  I 
was.  These  excursions  from  home  opened  the  mind 
of  a  young  person,  who  had  some  turn  for  observation. 

The  first  journey  I  made,  however,  was  to  Dum- 
friesshire, in  the  summer  1733,  when  I  was  eleven 
years  of  age.  There  I  not  only  became  well  acquainted 
with  my  grandfather,  Mr  A.  Eobison  [minister  of 
Tinwald],  a  very  respectable  clergyman,  and  with  my 
grandmother,  Mrs  Jean  Graham,  and  their  then  un- 
married daughters ;  but  I  became  well  acquainted  with 
the  town  of  Dumfries,  where  I  resided  for  several 
weeks  at  Provost  Bell's,  whose  wife  was  one  of  my 
mother's  sisters,  two  more  of  whom  were  settled  in 
that  town — one  of  them,  the  wife  of  the  clergyman,  , 
Mr  Wight,  and  the  other  of  the  sherifi'-clerk.  I  was 
soon  very  intimate  with  a  few  boys  of  this  town 
about  my  own  age,  and  became  a  favourite  by  teach- 


izecy  Google 


22  TOUR  ON  THE  BOBDEE. 

ing  them  some  of  our  sports  and  plays  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  capital,  that  they  had  never  heard* 

At  this  time,  too,  I  made  a  very  agreeable  tour  round 
the  country  with  my  father  and  Mr  Robert  Jardine 
[minister  of  Lochmaben],the  father  of  Dr  Jardine,  after- 
wards minister  of  Edinburgh.  Though  they  were  very 
orthodox  and  pious  clergymen,  they  had,  both  of  them,  a 
verj'  great  turn  for  fun  and  buffoonery  ;  and  wherever 
they  went,  made  all  the  children  quite  happy,  and  set 
all  the  maids  on  the  titter.  That  they  might  not  want 
amusement,  they  took  along  with  them,  for  the  first 
two  days,  a  Mess  John  Allan,  a  minister  who  lay  in 
their  route,  with  whom  they  could  use  every  sort  of 
freedom,  and  who  was  their  constant  butt.     As  he  bad 

*  On  this  jonrDoy  it  wai  thab  I  fint  witnened  an  exeoutioii.  There  was 
one  Jock  Johnstone  who  had  been  condemned  for  robboy,  and,  beiog  kceb- 
Bory  to  a  mnrder,  to  be  executed  at  DumfrieB.  IIlU  fellow  was  bat  twenty 
jieaiB  of  age,  but  strong  and  bold,  and  a  great  ringleader.  It  was  atronglj 
reported  that  the  thiavee  were  collecting  in  all  quarters,  in  order  to  come  to 
DqhiMm  on  tbe  day  of  the  execution,  and  make  a  defonxment  as  they  were 
oondueting  Jock  to  the  gallows,  which  was  usoaUy  erected  on  a  muir  out  of 
town.  The  magistnteB  became  anxious  ;  and  there  being  no  military  force 
nearer  than  Edinburgh,  they  reeolved  to  erect  the  gallowB  before  the  ioot  of 
the  prison,  witii  a  scaffold  or  tdatfoim  leading  from  the  door  to  the  fatal 
tree,  and  they  armed  about  one  hundred  of  tiieii  atoutest  bnigeeaea  with 
Lochaber  ane  to  form  a  guard  round  the  scaffold.  The  day  and  hour  of 
execution  came,  and  I  was  [Jaced  in  the  window  of  tbe  piovaet's  bonae  directly 
of^NNnte  the  xnisoa :  Qia  crowd  was  great,  and  the  preparations  alarming  to  a 
young  imagination  :  at  last  Uie  prison-door  opened,  and  Jock  appeared, 
enclosed  by  tdx  towu-officert.  When  he  fint  issued  from  the  door,  he 
looked  a  little  aetonished ;  but  looking  round  a  while,  he  proceeded  with  a 
bold  step.  Psalms  and  prayers  bong  over,  the  rope  was  foshmed  about  his 
neck,  and  he  was  prompted  to  ascend  a  short  ladder  fastened  to  the  gallows, 
to  be  tlirown  oB.  Hero  his  reeistaDce  and  my  terror  began.  Jock  was  onrly- 
luured  aod  fierce-loiduiig,  and  very  strong  of  his  size — about  five  feet  eight 
inches.  The  moment  ijiey  asked  him  to  go  up  the  ladder,  be  took  hold 
of  &a  rope  round  his  neck,  which  wss  fastened  to  the  gallows,  and,  with 


,1.0,  Google 


TOCR  ON  THE  BORDER.  23 

DO  resistance  in  him,  and  could  only  laugh  when  bhey 
rallied  him,  or  played  him  boyish  tricks,  I  thought  it 
but  Tery  dull  entertainment.  Nor  did  I  much  ap- 
prove of  their  turning  the  backsides  of  their  wiga 
foremost,  and  making  faces  to  divert  the  children,  in 
the  midst  of  very  grave  discourse  about  the  state  of  re- 
ligion in  the  country,  and  the  progress  of  the  gospel. 
Among  the  places  we  visited  was  Bridekirk,  the  seat 
of  the  eldest  cadet  of  Lord  Carlyle's  fwnily,  of  which 
my  father  was  descended.  I  saw,  likewise,  a  small 
pendicle  of  the  estate  which  had  been  assigned  as  the 
portion  of  his  grandfather,  and  which  he  himself  had 
tried  to  recover  by  a  lawsuit,  but  was  defeated  for 
want  of  a  principal  paper.     We  did  not  see  the  laird, 

rspoted  noknt  pulla,  attampted  to  pull  it  down ;  and  hia  efibrts  were  bo 
strong  that  it  was  feared  lie  would  have  aucceeded.  The  crowd,  in  the 
mean  lime,  felt  mnch  emotJon,  and  Uie  fear  of  tlie  magistratea  incraaaed.  I 
wiahed  myself  on  the  top  of  Ciifiel,  or  anywlierB  bat  there.  But  the  at- 
tempt to  go  through  the  crowd  appeared  more  dangerona  than  to  stay  where 
I  was,  out  of  sight  of  the  gallowi,  I  returned  to  my  station  agun,  resolving 
maiifQlly  to  abide  the  wMHt  extremity. 

Jook  struggled  and  roared,  for  he  became  like  a  furiouB  wild  beaat,  and  all 
that  six  men  could  do,  thej  could  not  bind  him ;  and  having  with  wresUiug 
hanl  foreed  up  the  pinioni  on  his  arms,  they  wen  atnud,  and  he  became 
more  formidable ;  wheaone  of  the  magistiBtce,  recollecting  Hat  there  wai  a 
master  masoa  or  carpenter,  of  the  name  of  Baxter,  who  was  by  fsr  the 
strongest  man  in  Dumfries,  they  with  difficulty  prevailed  with  him,  for  the 
honour  of  the  town,  to  come  on  the  scaflbld.  He  came,  and,  putting  aside 
the  six  men  who  were  keeping  him  down,  he  aeiaed  him,  and  made  no  more 
difficulty  than  a  nurse  does  in  handling  her  child  :  he  bound  him  hand  and 
foot  in  a  few  minutes,  and  laid  him  quietly  down  on  his  face  near  the  edge 
of  the  seaffdd,  and  retired.  Jock,  the  moment  he  felt  hia  grasp,  found  him- 
self subdued,  and  became  calm,  and  reogned  himMlf  to  his  fate.  Thia 
dreadful  leene  coat  me  many  nights'  sleep. 

[N.  B.  —The  greater  portion  ol  this  narrative  is  taken  from  the  "  Recolleo- 
Uons,"  where  it  is  more  fully,  and,  as  it  seemed  to  the  Editor,  more  pictur- 
esquely told,  than  in  the  note  appended  by  the  anthor  to  his  Autobiography.  ] 


izecy  Google 


24  TOUR   ON   THE   BORDER. 

who  was  from  home  ;  but  we  saw  the  lady,  who  was 
a  much  greater  curiosity.  She  was  a  very  large  and 
powerful  virago,  about  forty  years  of  age,  and  received 
us  with  much  kindness  and  hospitality  ;  for  the 
brandy-bottle — a  Scotch  pint — made  its  appearance 
immediately,  and  we  were  obliged  to  take  our  morning, 
as  they  called  it,  which  was  indeed  the  universal 
fashion  of  the  country  at  that  time.  This  lady,  who,  I 
confess,  had  not  many  charms  for  me,  was  said  to  be 
able  to  empty  one  of  those  large  bottles  of  brandy, 
smuggled  from  the  Isle  of  Man,  at  a  sitting.  They 
had  no  whisky  at  that  time,  there  being  then  no  dis- 
tilleries in  the  south  of  Scotland.* 

The  face  of  the  country  was  particularly  desolate 
not  having  yet  reaped  any  benefit  from  the  union  of 
the  Parliaments  ;  nor  was  it  recovered  from  the  effects 

*  This  mterview  is  thus  reUted  in  the  "  EecoUcctions :  "— 
"The  laird  ■viae  gone  to  Diuufries,  mucli  to  our  diBappoLntment ;  but  the 
lady  come  out,  and,  in  her  eiccsa  of  kinduese,  had  almost  pulled  Mr  Jardine 
ciff  his  horse  ;  but  they  were  ohstinai*,  and  mid  they  were  obliged  to  go  to 
Kelhead  ;  but  the;  delivered  up  Mess  John  Allan  to  her,  as  they  had  no 
farther  ubb  for  hiin,  1  had  never  seen  Buch  a  virago  as  Lady  Bridokitk,  not 
oven  among  the  oyBter-women  of  PreatonpaDS.  She  was  like  a  sergeant  of 
foot  in  women  8  clothes ;  or  nrtherlike  an  overgrown  coachman  of  a  Quaker 
l>era\uision.  On  our  peremptory  refusal  to  alight,  she  darted  into  the  house 
like  a  hogshead  down  a  slope,  and  returned  instantly  with  a  pint  bottle  of 
biXLody — a  Scots  piut,  I  mean — and  a  stray  beer-glass,  into  which  she  filled 
almost  abnmper.  Aftera  long  gracesaid  by  Mr  Jardine— for  it  was  his  turn 
DOW,  being  the  third  brandy-bottle  we  had  seen  since  we  left  Louhmaben — 
she  emptied  it  to  our  healths,  and  made  tlie  gentlemen  follow  her  example : 
she  said  she  would  si>aie  me  as  I  was  so  yoimg,  but  ordered  a  maid  to  bring  a 
giugerbreadcakefrom  thecupboard,a  luncheon  of  which  she  putin  my  pocket 
Til  IB  lady  was  famous,  even  in  the  Annandale  border,  both  at  the  bowl  and 
in  battle  :  she  could  drink  a  Scots  pint  of  brandy  with  ease ;  and  when  the 
men  grew  obstreperous  in  their  cups,  she  could  either  put  them  out  of  doore, 
or  to  be<l,  as  she  found  most  convenient-" 


,1.0,  Google 


TOUE  ON  THE  EOKDER.  25 

of  that  century  of  wretched  government  which  pre- 
ceded the  Kevolution,  and  commenced  at  the  accession 
of  James.  The  Border  wars  and  depredations  had 
happily  ceased ;  but  the  borderers,  having  lost  what 
excited  their  activity,  were  in  a  dormant  state  during 
the  whole  of  the  seventeenth  century,  unless  it  was 
during  the  time  of  the  grand  EebeDion,  and  the  strag- 
gles between  Episcopacy  and  Presbytery. 

On  this  excursion  we  dined  with  Sir  William  Dou- 
glas of  Kelbead,  vhose  grandfather  was  a  son  of  the 
family  of  Qucensberry.  When  he  met  us  in  his  stable- 
yard,  I  took  him  for  a  grieve  or  bamman,  for  he 
wore  a  blue  bonnet  over  his  thin  grey  hairs,  and  a 
hodden-grey  coat.  But  on  a  nearer  view  of  him,  he 
appeared  to  be  well-bred  and  sensible,  and  was  parti- 
cularly kind  to  my  father,  who,  I  undferstood,  had 
been  his  godson,  having  been  bom  iu  the  neighbour- 
hood on  a  farm  his  father  rented  from  Sir  William. 
My  father's  mother,  who  was  Jean  Jardine,  a  daughter 
of  the  family  of  Applegarth,  had  died  a  week  after  his 
birth  in  1690.     His  father  lived  till  1721. 

In  the  evening  we  went  to  visit  an  old  gentleman, 
a  cousin  of  my  father's,  James  Carlyle  of  Braken- 
wbate,  who  had  been  an  officer  in  James  IL's  time, 
and  threw  up  his  commission  at  the  Bevolution  rather 
than  take  the  oaths.  He  was  a  little  fresh-looking  old 
man  of  eighty-six,  very  lively  in  conversation,  and  par- 
ticularly fond  of  my  father.  His  house,  which  was  not 
much  better  than  a  cottage,  though  there  were  two 
rooms  above  stairs  as  well  as  below,  was  full  of  guns 


oy  Google 


26  TOUR  ON  THE  BORDER. 

and  swords,  and  other  warlike  instruments.  He  had 
been  so  dissolute  in  his  youth  that  his  nickname  in 
the  country  was  Jamie  Gaeloose.  His  wife,  who  ap- 
peared to  be  older  than  himself,  though  she  was  seven 
years  younger,  was  of  a  very  hospitable  disposition. 
This  small  house  being  easily  filled,  I  went  to  bed  in 
the  parlour  while  the  company  were  at  supper.  But, 
tired  as  I  was,  it  was  long  before  I  fell  asleep  ;  for  as 
nay  father  had  told  me  that  I  was  to  sleep  with  my 
cousin,  I  was  in  great  fear  that  it  would  be  the  old 
woman.  Weariness  overcame  my  fear,  however,  and 
I  did  not  awake  till  the  tea-things  were  on  the  table, 
and  did  not  know  that  it  was  the  old  gentleman  who 
slept  with  me  till  my  father  afterwards  told  me, 
which  relieved  me  from  my  anxious  curiosity.  After 
breakfast  our  old  friend  would  needs  give  us  a  con- 
voy, and  mounted  his  horse,  a  grey  stallion  of  about 
fourteen  and  a  half  hands  high,  as  nimbly  as  if  he 
had  been  only  thirty.  Not  long  after  he  separated 
from  us,  I  took  an  opportunity  of  asking  my  father 
what  had  been  the  subject  of  a  very  earnest  conversa- 
tion be  had  had  the  evening  before,  when  they  were 
walking  in  the  garden.  He  told  me  that  his  cousin 
had  pressed  him  very  much  to  accept  of  his  estate, 
which  he  would  dispose  to  him,  as  his  only  surviving 
daughter  had  distressed  him  by  her  marriage,  and  he 
had  no  liking  to  her  children.  My  father  had  rejected 
his  proposal,  and  taken  much  pains  to  convince  the 
old  gentleman  of  the  injustice  and  cruelty  of  his  pro- 
cedure, which  had  made  him  loud  and  angry,  and  had 


oy  Google 


TODTt  ON  THE  BORDER.  27 

drawn  my  curious  attention.  He  died  three  years 
after,  without  a  will,  and  the  little  estate  was  aoon 
drowned  in  debt  and  absorbed  into  the  gi-eat  one, 
whidi  made  my  father  say  afterwards  that  he  believed 
he  had  been  righteous  overmuch. 

This  was  the  first  opportunity  I  bad  of  being  well 
acqu^ted  with  my  grandfather,  Mr  Alexander  Robi- 
8011,  who  was  a  man  yeiy  much  respected  for  his  good 
sense  and  steadiness,  and  moderation  in  church  courts. 
He  had  been  minister  at  Tinwald  since  the  year  1697, 
and  was  a  member  of  the  commission  which  sat  during 
the  Union  Parliament.  He  was  truly  a  man  of  a 
sound  bead,  and  in  the  midst  of  very  warm  times  was 
resorted  to  by  hia  neighbours,  both  laity  and  clergy, 
for  temperate  and  sound  advice.  He  lived  to  the 
year  1761,  and  I  passed  several  summers,  and  one 
winter  entirely,  at  his  house,  when  I  was  a  student. 
He  had  a  tolerably  good  collection  of  boobs,  was  a 
man  of  a  liberal  mind,  and  had  more  allowance  to 
give  to  people  of  different  opinions,  and  more  indul- 
gence to  the  levities  of  youth,  than  any  man  I  ever 
knew  of  such  strict  principles  and  conduct.  His  wife, 
Jean  Graham,  connected  with  many  of  the  principal 
families  in  Galloway,  and  descended  by  her  mother 
from  the  Queensberry  family  (as  my  father  was,  at  a 
greater  distance  by  his  mother,  of  the  Jardine  Hall 
family),  gave  the  worthy  people  and  their  children  an 
air  of  greater  consequence  than  their  neighbours  of 
the  same  rank,  and  tended  to  make  them  deserve  the 
respect  which  was  shown  them.     When  I  look  back 


izecDy  Google 


28  TOUE  ON  THE  BORDEE. 

on  the  fulness  of  very  good  liviag  to  their  numeroua 
family,  and  to  their  cheerful  hospitality  to  strangers — 
when  I  recollect  the  decent  education  they  gave  their 
children,  and  how  happily  the  daughters  were  settled 
in  the  world ;  and  recollect  that  they  had  not  £70 
per  annum  besides  the  X500  which  was  my  grand- 
mother's portion,  XlOO  of  which  was  remaining  for 
the  three  eldest  daughters  as  they  were  married  off  in 
their  turns,  it  appears  quite  surprising  how  it  was 
possible  for  them  to  live  as  they  did,  and  keep  their 
credit.  What  I  have  seen,  both  at  their  house  and  my 
father's,  on  their  slender  incomes,  surpasses  all  belief. 
But  it  was  wonderful  what  moderation  and  a  strict 
economy  was  able  to  do  in  those  days. 

In  my  infancy  I  had  witnessed  the  greatest  trial 
they  had  ever  gone  through.  Their  eldest  son,  a 
youth  of  eighteen,  who  had  studied  at  Glasgow  Col- 
lege, but  was  to  go  to  the  Divinity  Hail  at  Edinburgh 
in  winter  1 724,  to  be  near  my  father,  then  removed  to 
Prestonpans,  went  to  Dumfries  to  bid  farewell  to  his 
second  sister,  Mrs  Bell,  and  left  the  town  in  a  clear 
frosty  night  in  the  beginning  of  December,  but  having 
missed  the  road  about  a  mile  from  Dumfries,  fell  into 
a  peat  pot,  as  it  is  called,  and  was  drowned.  He 
was  impatiently  expected  at  night,  and  next  morn- 
ing. My  brother  and  I  had  got  some  halfpence  to 
give  him  to  purchase  some  sugar-plums  for  ua,  so 
that  we  were  not  the  least  impatient  of  the  family. 
"What  was  our  disappointment,  when,  about  eleven 
o'clock,  information  came  that  he  had  been  drowned 


oyGoogk 


EDUfBUBQH  COLLGOE.  29 

and  our  comfits  lost !  This  I  mention  merely  to  note 
at  what  an  early  age  interesting  events  mako  an  im- 
pression on  children's  memories,  for  I  was  then  only 
two  years  and  ten  months  old,  and  to  this  day  I  re- 
member it  as  well  as  any  event  of  my  life* 

Two  years  after  this  journey  into  my  native  country, 
which  had  the  effect  of  attacliing  me  very  much  to  my 
grandfather  and  bis  family,  and  gave  him  a  great 
ascendant  over  my  mind,  I  was  sent  to  the  College  of 
Edinburgh,  which  I  entered  on  the  Ist  of  November 
l735.-f-  I  had  the  good-luck  to  be  placed  in  a  house 
in  Edinburgh  where  there  was  very  good  company  ; 
for  John,  afterwards  Colonel  Maxwell,  and  bis  brother 
Alexander,  were  boarded  there,  whose  tutor,  being  an 
acquaintance  of  my  father's,  took  some  charge  of  me. 
John  Witherspoon,  the  celebrated  doctor,  was  also  in 
the  house ;  and  Sir  Harry  Nlsbet  of  Dean,  and  John 

*  Here  it  maj  not  be  improper  to  reUte  an  extraordiulliy  incident  to  ahow 
how  loon  boyi  are  capable  of  deep  imposture.  There  was  a  boy  at  school  in 
the  Ratne  claa*  with  mo  whose  muna  was  Mathie.  He  iraa  very  intimate 
with  me,  and  was  between  eleven  and  twelve  yeara  old,  when  all  at  once  he 
jnodnced  more  money  than  anybody,  though  his  mother  wa>  an  indigent 
widow  of  a  ■hipmarter,  and  continued  only  to  deal  in  hoope  and  atavea  for 
the  support  of  her  family.  Thia  boy  having  at  different  times  showed  more 
money  than  I  thought  he  had  any  right  to  have,  I  pressed  him  veiy  close  to 
tdl  nw  how  he  had  got  it.  After  many  ahifta,  he  at  last  told  me  that  his 
grandfather  had  appeared  to  him  in  an  evening  and  dixclosed  a  hidden  trea- 
■ore  in  the  garret  of  his  mother's  house,  betweon  the  floor  and  the  ceiling. 
He  pretended  to  show  me  the  spot,  but  would  never  open  it  to  me.  Ho 
nude  sevetB]  appointments  with  me,  which  I  kept,  to  meet  the  old  gentle- 
man, but  he  never  appeared.  I  tried  every  method  to  make  him  confess  bis 
impoature,  but  without  effect.  Aftersometime,  I  heard  that  he  had  robbed 
hill  mother's  drawers. 

f  We  had  a  veiy  good  master  at  Frertonpani,  an  Alexander  Hannan,  an 
old  feUow-studeut  of  my  fa4her's,  whom  he  brought  there,  and  who  implicitty 
fottowad  his  direction*.     He  poHenad  eicell«Qt  tnuislations  of  the  classiest 


izecy  Google 


30  DE  WITHEESPOOS — SIR  J.   DALRTMPLE. 

Dalrymple,  now  Sir  John  of  Cranstoun,  not  being 
able  to  afford  tutors  of  their  own,  and  being  near 
relations  of  the  Maxwells,  came  every  afternoon  to 
prepare  their  lessons  under  the  care  of  our  tutor. 

The  future  life  and  public  character  of  Dr  Wither- 
spoon  are  perfectly  known.  At  the  time  I  speak  of 
he  was  a  good  scholar,  far  advanced  for  his  age,  very 
sensible  and  shrewd,  but  of  a  disagreeable  temper, 
which  was  irritated  by  a  flat  voice  and  awkward 
manner,  which  prevented  his  making  an  impression 
on  his  companions  of  either  sex  that  was  at  all  ade- 
quate to  his  ability.  This  defect,  when  he  was  a  lad, 
stuck  to  him  when  he  grew  up  to  manhood,  and 
so  much  roused  his  envy  and  jealousy,  and  made  him 
take  a  road  to  distinction  very  different  &om  that 
of  his  more  successful  companions.' 

John  Maxwell  was  remarkably  tall  and  well  made, 
and  one  of  the  handsomest  youths  of  his  time,  but  of 
such  gentle  manners  and  so  soft  a  temper  that  nobody 
could  then  foresee  that  he  was  to  prove  one  of  the 
bravest  officers  in  the  allied  army  imder  Prince  Ferdi- 
nand in  the  year  1759. 

Sir  Harry  Nisbet  was  a  very  amiable  youth,  who 
took  also  to  the  army,  was  a  distinguished  officer  and 
remarkably  handsome,  but  fell  at  an  early  age  in  the 
battle  of  Val  [?] 

The  character  of  Sir  John  Dalrymple,  whom  I  shall 
have  occasion  to   mention  afterwards,  is  perfectly 

*  Thoogh  Witlienpoon  it  now  littJe  nmemberad,  an  account  of  his  nHim 
remiirkabla  career  wiU  be  foimd  m  the  iffduury  tnogM[l)ical  diotioiuuies.  —  Ed. 


oy  Google 


PROFESSOR  AND  CLASS-FELLOWS.  31 

known  ;  it  is  Bufficient  to  say  here  that  the  bloBsom 
promised  better  fruit.* 

I  was  entered  in  Mr  Kerr's  class,  who  was  at  that 
time  Professor  of  Humanity,  and  was  very  much 
master  of  his  business.  Like  other  schoolmasters,  he 
was  very  partial  to  his  scholars  of  rank,  and  having 
two  lords  at  his  class — viz.,  Lord  Balgonie  and  Lord 
Dalziel — he  took  great  pains  to  make  them  {especially 
the  first,  for  the  second  was  hardly  ostensible)  appear 
among  the  best  scholars,  which  would  not  do,  and 
only  served  to  make  him  ridiculous,  as  well  as  his 
young  lord.  The  best  by  far  at  the  class  were  Colonel 
Robert  Hepburn  of  Keith;  James  Edgar,  Esq.,  after- 
wards a  Commissioner  of  the  Customs  ;-f-  Alexander 
Tait,  Esq.,  Clerk  of  Session  ;  and  Alexander  Bertram, 
of  the  Nisbet  family,  who  died  young.  William 
Wilkie  the  poet  and  I  came  next  in  order,  and  be 
(Mr  Kerr)  used  to  allege  long  after  that  we  turned 
Latin  into  English  better  than  they  did,  though  we 
could  not  so  well  turn  English  into  Latin ;  which 
was  probably  owing  to  their  being  taught  better  at 
the  High  School  than  we  were  in  the  country.  I 
mention  those  circumstances  because  those  gentle- 
men continued  to  keep  the  same  rank  in  society 
when  they  grew  up  that  they  held  when  they  were 
boys.     I  was  sent  next  year  to  the  first  class  of 

'  The  author  of  the  Memoirt  of  Oreal  Brilaxa  and  Ireland,  in  which  so 
nmchli^tiathrcnmoathehiatoryot  the  later  StowartB  and  the  Berolntioii 
period.  — Elk 

+  AnMOoontof  "ConiiniMioner  Edgar  "will  be  found  in  Kay't  Edinburgh 
/'ortraffa— Ed. 


izecy  Google 


32  PROFESSOR  AND  CLASS-FELLOWS. 

mathematics,  taught  by  Mr  M'Laurin,  which  cost  me 
little  trouble,  as  my  father  had  carried  me  through 
the  first  book  of  Euclid  in  the  summer.  In  this 
branch  I  gained  an  ascendant  over  <iur  tutor,  Pat. 
Baillie,  afterwards  minister  of  Borrowatounness,  which 
he  took  care  never  to  forget.  He  was  a  very  good 
Latin  scholar,  and  so  expert  in  the  Greek  that  he 
taught  Professor  Drummond's  class  for  a  whole  winter 
when  he  was  ill.  But  he  had  no  mathematics,  nor 
much  science  of  any  kind.  One  night,  when  I  was 
conning  my  Latin  lesson  in  the  room  with  him  and 
his  pupils,  he  was  going  over  a  proposition  of  Euclid 
with  John  Maxwell,  who  had  hitherto  got  no  hold  of 
the  science.  He  blundered  so  excessively  in  doing  this 
that  I  could  not  help  laughing  aloud.  Ho  was  en- 
raged at  first,  but,  when  calm,  he  bid  me  try  if  I  could 
do  it  better.  I  went  through  the  proposition  so 
readily  that  he  committed  John  to  my  care  in  that 
branch,  which  he  was  so  good-natured  as  not  to  take 
amiss,  though  he  was  a  year  older  than  I  was.  At 
the  end  of  a  week  he  fell  into  the  proper  train 
of  thinking,  and  needed  assistance  no  longer.  Mr 
M'Laurin  was  at  this  time  a  favourite  professor,  and 
no  wonder,  as  he  was  the  clearest  and  most  agreeable 
lecturer  on  that  abstract  science  that  ever  I  heard. 
He  made  mathematics  a  fashionable  study,  which  was 
felt  afterwards  in  the  war  that  followed  in  1743,  when 
nine-tenths  of  the  engineers  of  the  army  were  Scottish 
officers.  The  Academy  at  Woolwich  was  not  then 
estaUished. 


izecy  Google 


CHAPTER  II, 

1730-43;  A.QE,  11-2]. 

KTBNTa    or  THE  PORTEOUS    UaB-^SEBa  THE  XSOAPE   OF    ROBERTSON 
PROU    CHOBCn — PRESENT  AT   THE   EXECUTION   OF  WILSON,    AND 

POBTBODS  FIBINO   OB  THE   PEOPLE — THE   NIOHT  OP  THB  MOB 

UNtTKfiSITT   STUDIES — LOfllO — BIBE  OF  THE  UEDICAL  SCHOOL 

AMICDOTES  AND  ADVENTURES — RSMINIBCEt:CBB  OF  FELL0W-8TD- 
DBirTB — SIR  JOHN  PRINOLE — FIRST  ACQUAINTAKCE  WITH  ROBERT- 
BON  THE  HISTORIAN  AND  JOHN  HOUE  THE  DRAMATIST — ACHIEVE- 
HENTS    IN    DAXCINO— RUDDIHAN    THB    GBAUIIABUII — LOOEINO 

ABOUT  FOB  A  PBOFEBSION — HEDICIME — THE  ARMT THB  CHURCH 

— ^AN  EVENINO'B  adventures  WITH  LORD  LOVAT  AND  EBBEIHE  OF 
OBAKGE — ARRANQEHENTS  FOR  BTDDTIKG  IN  QLABOOW— CLERICAL 
CONVIVIALITIES — LAST  SESSION  AT  BDINBtlBaB. 

I  WAS  witness  to  a  very  extraordinary  scene  that 
happened  in  the  month  of  February  or  March  1736, 
which  was  the  escape  of  Bobertson,  a  condemned 
ciimina],  from  the  Tolbooth  Church  in  Edinburgh. 
In  those  days  it  was  usual  to  bring  the  criminals  who 
were  condemned  to  death  into  that  church,  to  attend 
public  worship  every  Sunday  after  their  condemna* 
tlon,  when  the  clergyman  made  some  part  of  his 
discourse  and  prayers  to  suit  their  situation ;  which, 
among  other  circumstances  of  solemnity  which  then 
attended  the  state  of  condemned  criminals,  had  no 
Bmall  effisct  on  the  public  mind.      Bobertson  and 


izecy  Google 


34  THE  FOUTEOUS  MOB. 

Wilson  were  smugglers,  and  had  been  condemned  for 
robbing  a  custom-bouse,  ■where  some  of  their  goods 
had  been  deposited  ;  a  crime  which  at  that  time  did 
not  seem,  in  the  opinion  of  the  common  people,  to 
deserve  so  severe  a  punishmeut.  I  was  carried  by  an 
acquaintance  to  church  to  see  the  prisoners  on  the 
Sunday  before  the  day  of  execution.  We  went  early 
into  the  church  on  purpose  to  see  them  come  in,  and 
were  seated  in  a  pew  before  the  gallery  in  front  of  the 
pulpit.  Soon  after  we  went  into  the  church  by  the 
door  from  the  Parliament  Close,  the  criminals  were 
brought  in  by  the  door  next  the  Tolbooth,  and  placed 
in  a  long  pew,  not  far  from  the  pulpit.  Four  soldiers 
came  in  with  them,  and  placed  Robertson  at  the  head 
of  the  pew,  and  Wilson  below  him,  two  of  themselves 
sitting  below  Wilson,  and  two  in  a  pew  behind  him. 

The  bells  were  ringing  and  the  doors  were  open, 
while  the  people  were  coming  into  the  church.  Bo- 
bertson  watched  his  opportunity,  and,  suddenly  spring- 
ing up,  got  over  the  pew  into  the  passage  that  led  in 
to  the  door  in  the  Parliament  Close,  and,  no  person 
offering  to  lay  hands  on  him,  made  his  escape  in  a 
moment — so  much  the  more  easily,  perhaps,  as  every- 
body's attention  was  drawn  to  Wilson,  who  was  a 
stronger  man,  and  who,  attempting  to  follow  Eobert- 
son,  was  seized  by  the  soldiers,  and  struggled  so  long 
with  them  that  the  two  who  at  laat  followed  Robert- 
son were  too  late.  It  was  reported  that  he  had  main- 
tained his  struggle  that  he  might  let  his  companion 
have  time.     That  might  be  his  second  thought,  but 


oy  Google 


THE  P0ETE0U3  UOB.  36 

his  first  certainly  was  to  escape  himself,  for  I  saw  bim 
set  his  foot  on  the  seat  to  leap  over,  when  the  aoldiets 
pulled  him  back.  Wilson  was  immediately  carried 
out  to  the  Tolbooth,  and  Robertson,  getting  unin- 
terrupted through  the  Parliament  Square,  down  the 
back  stairs,  into  the  Cowgate,  was  heard  of  no  more 
till  he  arrived  in  Holland.  This  was  an  interesting 
scene,  and  by  filling  the  public  mind  with  compassion 
for  the  unhappy  person  who  did  not  escape,  and  who 
was  the  better  character  of  the  two,  had  probably 
some  influence  in  producing  what  followed :  for 
when  the  sentence  against  Wilson  came  to  be  executed 
a  few  weeks  thereafter,  a  very  strong  opinion  pre- 
vailed that  there  was  a  plot  to  force  the  Town  Guard, 
whose  duty  it  is  to  attend  executions  under  the  order 
of  a  civil  magistrate. 

There  was  a  Captain  Porteous,  who  by  his  good 
behaviour  in  the  army  had  obtained  a  subaltern's 
commission,  and  had  afterwards,  when  on  half-pay, 
been  preferred  to  the  command  of  the  City  Guard. 
This  man,  by  his  skill  in  manly  exercises,  particularly 
the  golf,  and  by  gentlemanly  behaviour,  was  admitted 
into  the  company  of  his  superiors,  which  elated  his 
mind,  and  added  insolence  to  his  native  roughness,  so 
that  he  was  much  hated  and  feared  by  the  mob  of 
Edinburgh.  When  the  day  of  execution  came,  the 
rumour  of  a  deforcement  at  the  gallows  prevailed 
strongly ;  and  the  Provost  and  Magistrates  (not  in 
their  own  minds  very  strong)  thought  it  a  good  mea- 
sure to  apply  for  three  or  four  companies  of  a  march- 


oy  Google 


88  THE  PORTEOUS  MOB. 

ing  regiment  that  lay  in  the  Canongate,  to  be  drawn 
up  in  the  Lawnmarket,  a  street  leading  from  the 
Tolbooth  to  the  Grasemarket,  the  place  of  execution, 
in  order  to  overawe  the  mob  by  their  being  at  hand. 
Porteous,  who,  it  is  said,  had  hia  natural  courage  in- 
creased to  rage  by  any  suspicion  that  he  and  his  Guard 
could  not  execute  the  law,  and  being  heated  likewise 
with  wine— for  he  had  dined,  as  the  custom  then  was, 
between  one  and  two — became  perfectly  furious  when 
he  passed  by  the  three  companies  drawn  up  in  the 
street  as  he  marched  along  with  his  prisoner. 

Mr  Baillie  had  taken  windows  in  a  bouse  on  the 
north  side  of  the  Grassmaiket,  for  his  pupils  and  me, 
in  the  second  floor,  about  seventy  or  eighty  yards 
westward  of  the  place  of  execution,  where  we  went  in 
due  time  to  see  the  show ;  to  which  I  had  no  small 
aversion,  having  seen  one  at  Dumfries,  the  execution 
of  Jock  Johnstone,  which  shocked  me  very  much.* 
When  we  arrived  at  the  house,  some  people  who  were 
looking  from  the  windows  were  displaced,  and  went 
to  a  window  in  the  common  stair,  about  two  feet 
below  the  level  of  ours.  The  street  is  long  and  wide, 
and  there  was  a  very  great  crowd  assembled.  The 
execution  went  on  with  the  usual  forms,  and  "Wilson 
behaved  in  a  manner  very  becoming  his  situation. 
There  was  not  the  least  appearance  of  an  attempt  to 
rescue  ;  but  soon  after  the  executioner  had  done  his 
duty,  there  was  an  attack  made  upon  him,  as  usual 
on  such   occasions,  by  the  boys  and  blackguards 

*  See  above,  p.  22,  note. 


izecDy  Google 


THE  P0RTE0U8  MOB.  37 

throwing  atones  and  dirt  in  testimony  of  their  abhor- 
rence of  the  hangman.  Bat  there  was  no  attempt  to 
break  through  the  guard  and  cut  down  the  prisoner. 
It  was  generally  said  that  there  was  very  little,  if  any, 
more  violence  than  had  usually  happened  on  such 
occaaions.  Porteona,  however,  inflamed  with  wine 
and  jealousy,  thought  proper  to  order  his  Guard  to 
fire,  their  muskets  being  loaded  with  slugs ;  and 
when  the  soldiers  showed  reluctance,  I  saw  him  turn 
to  them  with  threatening  gesture  and  an  inflamed 
countenance.  They  obeyed,  and  fired ;  but  wishing  to 
do  as  little  barm  as  possible,  many  of  them  elevated 
their  pieces,  the  efiect  of  which  was  that  some  people 
were  wounded  in  the  windows ;  and  one  unfortunate 
lad,  whom  we  had  displaced,  was  killed  in  the  stair 
window  by  a  slug  entering  hia  head.  His  name  was 
Henry  Black,  a  journeyman  tailor,  whose  bride  was  the 
daughter  of  the  house  we  were  in.  She  fainted  away 
when  he  was  brought  into  the  house  speechless,  where 
he  only  lived  till  nine  or  ten  o'clock.  We  had  seen 
many  people,  women  and  men,  fall  on  the  street,  and 
at  first  thought  it  was  only  through  fear,  and  by  their 
crowding  on  one  another  to  escape.  But  when  the 
crowd  dispersed,  we  saw  them  lying  dead  or  wounded, 
and  had  no  looger  any  doubt  of  what  had  happened. 
The  numbers  were  said  to  be  eight  or  nine  killed,  and 
double  the  number  wounded ;  but  this  was  never 
exactly  known. 

This  unprovoked  slaughter  irritated  the  common 
people  to  the  last ;  and  the  state  of  grief  and  rage 


oy  Google 


38  THE  POETEODS  MOB. 

into  which  their  minds  were  thrown,  was  visible  in 
the  high  commotion  that  appeared  in  the  multituda 
Our  tutor  was  very  anxious  to  have  us  all  safe  in  our 
lodgiDgs,  but  durst  not  venture  out  to  see  if  it  was 
practicable  to  go  home.  I  offered  to  go ;  went,  and 
soon  returned,  offering  to  conduct  them  safe  to  our 
lodgings,  which  were  only  half-way  down  the  Lawn- 
market,  by  what  was  called  the  Castle  Wynd,  which 
was  just  at  hand,  to  the  westward.  There  we  re- 
mained safely,  and  were  not  allowed  to  stir  out  any 
more  that  night  till  about  nine  o'clock,  when,  the 
streets  having  long  been  quiet,  we  all  grew  anxious 
to  learn  the  fate  of  Henry  Black,  and  I  was  allowed 
to  go  back  to  the  house.  1  took  the  younger  Maxwell 
with  me,  and  found  that  he  had  expired  an  hour  be- 
fore we  arrived.  A  single  slug  had  penetrated  the 
side  of  his  head  an  inch  above  the  ear.  The  sequel 
of  this  affair  was,  that  Porteous  was  tried  and  con- 
demned to  be  hanged ;  but  by  the  intercession  of 
some  of  the  Judges  themselves,  who  thought  his  case 
hard,  he  was  reprieved  by  the  Queen-Regent  The 
Magistrates,  who  on  this  occasion,  as  on  the  former, 
acted  weakly,  designed  to  have  removed  him  to  the 
Castle  for  greater  security.  But  a  plot  was  laid  and 
conducted  by  some  persons  unknown  with  the  great- 
est secrecy,  policy,  and  vigour,  to  prevent  that  design, 
by  forcing  the  prison  the  night  before,  and  executing 
the  sentence  upon  him  themselves,  which  to  effectuate 
cost  them  from  eight  at  night  till  two  in  the  morning; 
and  yet  this  plot  was  managed  so  dexterously  that 


oy  Google 


THE  POBTEOUS  MOB.  39 

they  met  with  no  iaterruptioD,  though  there  were 
five  companies  of  a  marching  regiment  lying  in  the 
Canongate. 

This  happened  on  the  7th  of  September  1736; 
and  BO  prepoBseesed  were  the  minds  of  every  person 
that  something  extraordinary  would  take  place  that 
day,  that  I,  at  Prestonpans,  nine  miles  from  Edinbui^h, 
dreamt  that  I  saw  Captain  Porteoiis  hanged  in  the 
Grassmarket.  I  got  up  betwixt  six  and  seven,  and 
went  to  my  father's  servant,  who  was  thrashing  in 
the  barn  which  lay  on  the  roadside  leading  to  Aber- 
lady  and  North  Berwick,  who  said  that  several  men 
on  horseback  had  passed  about  five  in  the  morning, 
whom  having  asked  for  news,  they  replied  there  was 
none,  but  that  Captain  Forteous  had  been  dragged 
out  of  prison,  and  hanged  on  a  dyer's  tree  at  two 
o'clock  that  morning. 

This  bold  and  lawless  deed  not  only  provoked  the 
Queen,  who  was  Regent  at  the  time,  but  gave  some 
uneasiness  to  Government.  It  was  represented  as  a 
dangerous  plot,  and  was  ignorantly  connected  with  a 
great  meeting  of  jKalous  Covenanters,  of  whom  many 
still  remained  in  Galloway  and  the  west,  which  had 
been  held  in  summer,  in  Fentland  Hills,  to  renew  the 
Covenant.  But  this  was  a  mistake  ;  for  the  murder 
of  Forteous  had  been  planned  and  executed  by  a  few 
of  the  relations  or  friends  of  those  whom  he  had 
shun ;  who,  being  of  a  rank  superior  to  mere  mob, 
had  carried  on  their  design  with  so  much  secrecy, 
abditr,  and  steadiness  as  made  it  be  ascribed  to  a 


izecy  Google 


40  THE  PORTEODS  MOB. 

atUl  higher  order,  who  were  political  euetniea  to  Gov- 
ernment. Tliis  idea  provoked  Lord  Isla,  who  then 
managed  the  affairs  of  Scotland  under  Sir  Kobert 
Walpole,  to  carry  through  an  Act  of  Parliament  in 
next  seaeiou  for  the  discovery  of  the  murderers  of 
Captain  Porteoua,  to  be  published  by  reading  it  for 
twelve  months,  every  Sunday  forenoon,  in  all  the 
ehurcbea  in  Scotland,  immediately  after  divine  service, 
or  rather  in  the  middle  of  it,  for  the  minister  was  or- 
diuned  to  read  it  between  the  lecture  and  the  sermon, 
two  discourses  usually  given  at  that  time.  This 
clause,  it  was  said,  was  intended  to  purge  the  Church 
of  fanatics,  for  as  it  was  believed  that  most  clergymen 
of  that  description  would  not  read  the  Act,  they 
would  become  liable  to  the  penalty,  which  was  depo- 
sition. By  good-luck  for  the  clergy,  there  was  an- 
other party  distinction  among  them  (besides  that 
occasioned  by  their  ecclesiastical  diflferences),  viz., 
that  of  Argathelian  and  Squadroue,  of  which  po- 
litical divisions  there  were  some  both  of  the  high- 
flying and  moderate  clergy.*  Some  very  sensible 
men  of  the  latter  class  having  discovered  the  design 
of  the  Act,  either  by  information  or  sagacity,  convened 

*  The  term  "  Argfttiieliaii"  is  now  to  tlie  Editor,  bat  the  motning  ia 
obviova.  "  Argatholia  "  is  the  Latin  luune  of  the  provinoe  of  Aigyle,  and 
the  word  doubtless  applied  to  those  who  favoured  that  unlimited  influence 
in  the  afiirs  of  Scotland  exercised  by  the  family  of  Argyle  befoie  the 
ascendancy  of  Lord  Bute.  The  name  of  "  Squadrone  "  bad  been  long  uaed  to 
designate  a  public  party  piofeasing  entire  independence.  The  "  ecdeaiaa- 
tical  differences  "  concentrated  themselvcB  in  a  diepnte,  of  memorable  im- 
portance to  the  Chunh  of  Scotland,  called  "The  Marrow  ControTemy," 
from  one  party  standing  by,  and  tte  other  impugning,  Fiiiher'a  Mamm  of 
Modem  Divinity. — Ed. 


izecDy  Google 


TUB  POBTEOUS   MOB.  41 

meetings  of  cle]^  at  Edinburgh,  aiid  formed  resolu- 
tioDB,  and  carried  on  correspondeDce  through  the 
Church  to  persuade  as  many  aa  poaaible  to  disobey 
the  Act^  that  the  great  number  of  offenders  might 
secure  the  safety  of  the  whole.  This  was  actually  the 
case,  for  as  one-half  of  the  clergy,  at  least,  disobeyed 
in  one  shape  or  other,  the  idea  of  inflicting  the 
penalty  was  dropt  altogether.  In  the  mean  time,  the 
distress  and  perplexity  which  this  Act  occasioned  in 
many  families  of  the  clergy,  was  of  itself  a  cruel 
ponishment  for  a  crime  in  which  they  had  no  hand. 
The  anxious  days  and  sleepless  nights  which  it  occa- 
sioned to  such  ministers  as  had  families,  and  at  the 
same  time  scrapies  about  the  lawfulness  of  reading 
the  Act,  were  such  as  no  one  could  imagine  who  had 
not  witnessed  the  scene. 

The  part  my  grandfather  took  was  manly  and 
decided ;  for,  not  thinking  the  reading  of  the  Act 
unlawful,  he  pointedly  obeyed.  My  father  was  very 
scrupulous,  being  influenced  by  Mr  Erskine  of  Grange, 
and  other  enemies  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  good  sense  of  his  wife,  and  the  con- 
sideration of  eight  or  nine  children  whom  he  then 
had,  and  who  were  in  danger  of  being  turned  out  on 
the  world,  pulled  him  very  hard  on  the  aide  of  obe- 
dience. A  letter  from  my  grandfather  at  last  settled 
hia  mind,  and  he  read  the  Act. 

What  seemed  extraordinary,  after  all  the  anxiety 
of  ti^ovemment,  and  the  violent  means  they  took  to 
make  a  discovery,  not  one  of  those  murderers  was 


oy  Google 


42  PR0FES30E3  AND  COMP.UIIONS. 

ever  found.  Twenty  years  afterwards,  two  or  three 
persons  returned  from  different  parts  of  the  world, 
who  were  supposed  to  be  of  the  number  ;  but,  so  far 
as  I  heard,  they  never  disclosed  themselves. 

In  my  second  year  at  the  College,  November  1736, 
besides  attending  M'Laurin's  class  for  mathematics, 
and  Kerr's  private  class,  in  which  he  read  Juvenal, 
Tacitus,  &c.,  and  opened  up  the  beauties  and  peculiar- 
ities of  the  Latin  tongue,  I  went  to  the  Logic  class, 
taught  by  Mr  John  Stevenson,  who,  though  he  had 
no  pretensions  to  superiority  in  point  of  learning  and 
genius,  yet  was  the  most  popular  of  all  the  Professors 
on  account  of  his  civility  and  even  kindness  to  his 
students,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  useful ;  for 
being  a  man  of  sense  and  industry,  he  had  made  a 
judicious  selection  from  the  French  and  English 
critics,  which  he  gave  at  the  morning  hour  of  eight, 
when  he  read  with  us  Aristotle's  Poetics  and  Longinus 
On  the  Sublime.  At  eleven  he  read  Heineccius'  Logic, 
and  an  abridgement  of  Locke's  Essay:  and  in  the 
afternoon  at  two — for  such  were  the  hours  of  attend- 
ance in  those  times — he  read  to  us  a  compendious 
history  of  the  ancient  philosophers,  and  an  account  of 
their  tenets.  On  all  these  branches  we  were  carefully 
examined  at  least  three  times  a-week.  Whether  or 
not  it  was  owing  to  the  time  of  life  at  which  we 
entered  this  class,  being  all  about  fifteen  years  of  age 
or  upwards,  when  the  mind  begins  to  open,  or  to  the 
excellence  of  the  lectures  and  the  nature  of  some  of 
the  subjects,  we  could  not  then  say,  but  all  of  us 


oy  Google 


PHOFESSORS   AND  COMPANIONS.  43 

received  the  same  impression — viz.,  that  our  minds 
were  more  enlarged,  and  that  we  received  greater 
benefit  from  that  class  than  from  any  other.  With  a 
due  regard  to  the  merit  of  the  Professor,  I  must 
ascribe  this  impression  chiefly  to  the  natural  effect 
which  the  subject  of  criticism  and  of  rational  logic 
has  upon  the  opening  mind.  Having  learned  Greek 
pretty  well  at  school,  my  father  thought  fit  to  make 
me  pass  that  class,  especially  as  it  was  taught  at  that 
time  by  an  old  sickly  man,  who  could  seldom  attend, 
and  employed  aubstitufcea. 

This  separated  me  from  some  of  my  companions, 
and  brought  me  acquainted  with  new  ones.  Sun- 
dry of  my  clasa-feUows  remained  another  year  with 
Kerr,  and  Sir  Gilbert  Elliott,  John  Home,  and  many 
others,  went  back  to  him  that  year.  It  was  this  year 
that  I  attended  the  French  master,  one  Kerr,  who,  for 
leave  given  him  to  teach  in  a  College  room,  taught 
his  scholars  the  whole  session  for  a  guinea,  which  was 
then  all  that  the  regents  could  demand  for  a  session 
of  the  College,  from  the  lat  of  November  to  the  1st  of 
June.  During  that  course  we  were  made  sufficiently 
masters  of  French  to  be  able  to  read  any  book.  To 
improve  our  pronunciation,  he  made  us  get  one  of 
Moli^re's  plays  by  heart,  which  we  were  to  have 
acted,  but  never  did.  It  was  the  Medecin  malgr^ 
lui,  in  which  1  had  the  part  of  Sganarelle. 

Besides  the  young  gentlemen  who  had  resided  with 
og  in  tiie  former  year,  there  came  into  the  lodging 
below  two  Irish  students  of  medicine,  whose  names 


izecy  Google 


44  PROFESSORS  AND   COMPANIONS. 

were  Conway  and  Lesly,  who  were  perfectly  wdi-bred 
and  agreeable,  and  with  whom,  though  a  year  or  two 
older,  I  waa  very  intimate.  They  were  among  the 
first  Irish  atudenta  whom  the  fame  of  the  first  Monro 
and  the  other  medical  Professors  had  brought  over ; 
and  they  were  not  disappointed.  They  were  sober 
and  studious,  as  well  as  well-bred,  and  had  none  of 
that  restless  and  turbulent  disposition,  dignified  with 
the  name  of  spirit  and  fire,  which  has  often  since 
made  the  youth  of  that  country  such  troublesome 
members  of  society.  Mr  Lealy  was  a  clergyman's 
son,  of  Scottish  extraction,  and  was  acknowledged  as 
a  distant  relation  by  some  of  the  Eglintoun  family. 
Conway's  relations  were  all  beyond  the  Channel.  I 
was  so  much  their  favourite  both  this  year  and  the 
following,  when  they  returned,  and  lived  so  much 
with  them,  that  they  had  very  nearly  persuaded  me 
to  be  of  their  profession.  At  this  time  the  medical 
school  of  Edinburgh  was  but  rising  into  fame.  There 
were  not  bo  many  as  twenty  English  and  Irish 
students  this  year  in  the  College.  The  Professors 
were  men  of  eminence.  Besides  Monro,  Professor  of 
Anatomy,  there  were  Dr  Sinclair,' 

I  was  in  use  of  going  to  my  father's  on  Saturdays 
once  a-fortnight,  and  returning  on  Monday ;  but  this 
little  journey  was  less  frequently  performed  this 
winter,  as  Sir  Harry  Nisbet's  mother.  Lady  Nisbefc,  a 
sister  of  Sir  Robert  Morton's,  very  frequently  invited 
me  to  accompany  her  son  and  the  Mslxwells  to  the 

*  3lc  He  aeenu  to  bftTB  intonded  to  add  other  names. — Go. 


oy  Google 


PROFESSOES  AND  COMPANIONS.  46 

house  of  Dean,  within  a  mile  of  Edinburgh,  where  we 
passed  the  day  in  hunting  with  the  greyhounds,  and 
generaUy  returned  to  town  in  the  evening.  Here  I 
had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  a  new  set  of  company 
(my  circle  having  been  very  limited  in  Edinburgh), 
whose  manners  were  more  worthy  of  imitation,  and 
whose  conversation  had  more  the  tone  of  the  world. 
Here  I  frequently  met  with  Mr  Baron  I)alr}'mple,  the 
youngest  brother  of  the  then  Earl  of  Stwr,  and  grand- 
father of  the  present  Earl.  He  was  held  to  be  a  man  of 
wit  and  humour  ;  and,  in  the  langaage  and  manners  of 
the  gentlemen  of  Scotland  before  the  Union,  exhibited 
a  specimen  of  conversation  that  was  so  free  as  to 
border  a  Httle  on  licentiousuess,  especially  before  the 
ladies;  but  he  never  failed  to  keep  the  table  in  a  roar. 

Having  passed  the  Greek  class,  I  missed  many  of 
my  most  intimate  companions,  who  either  remained 
one  year  longer  at  the  Latin  class,  or  attended  the 
Greek.  But  I  made  new  ones,  who  were  very  agree- 
able, such  as  Sir  Alexander  Cockbum  of  Langton,  who 
had  been  bred  in  Eogland  till  now,  and  John  Gibson, 
the  son  of  Sir  Alexander  Gibson  of  Addison,  both  of 
whom  perished  in  the  war  that  was  approaching. 

In  summer  1737  I  was  at  Prestonpans ;  and  in 
July,  two  or  three  days  before  my  youngest  sister 
Jenny  was  bom,  afterwards  Mrs  Bell,  I  met  with  an 
accident  which  confined  me  many  weeks,  which  was  a 
shot  in  my  leg^  occasioned  by  the  virole  of  a  ramrod 
having  fallen  into  a  musket  at  a  review  in  Mussel- 
burgh Links,  part  of  which  lodged  in  the  outside  of 


izecy  Google 


4()  PBOFE3SOB3  AND  COMPANIONS. 

the  calf  of  my  leg,  and  could  not  be  extracted  till  after 
the  place  had  been  twice  laid  open,  when  it  came  out 
with  a  dressing,  and  was  about  the  size  of  the  head  of 
a  nail.  This  was  the  reason  why  I  made  no  excursion 
to  Dumfriesshire  this  summer. 

Early  in  the  summer  I  lost  one  of  the  dearest  friends 
I  ever  had,  who  died  of  a  fever.  We  had  often  settled 
it  between  us,  that  whoever  should  die  first,  should 
appear  to  the  other,  and  tell  him  the  secrets  of  the 
invisible  world.  I  walked  every  evening  for  hours  in 
the  fields  and  links  of  Prestonpans,  in  hopes  of  meet- 
ing my  friend ;  but  he  never  appeared.  This  disap- 
pointment, togetlier  with  the  knowledge  I  had  acquired 
at  the  Logic  class,  cured  me  of  many  prejudices  about 
ghosts  and  hobgoblins  and  ■witches,  of  which  till  that 
time  I  stood  not  a  little  in  awe. 

The  next  session  of  the  College,  beginning  in  No- 
vember 1737,  I  lodged  in  the  same  house  and  had  the 
same  companions  as  I  had  the  two  preceding  years. 
Besides  Sir  Robert  Stewart's  Natural  Philosophy  class, 
which  was  very  ill  taught,  as  he  was  worn  out  with 
age,  and  never  had  excelled,  I  attended  M'lvaurin's 
second  class,  and  Dr  Pringle's  Moral  Philosophy,  be- 
sides two  hours  at  the  writing-master  to  improve  my 
hand,  and  a  second  attendance  on  Mr  Kerr's  private 
class.  The  circle  of  my  acquaintance  was  but  little 
enlarged,  and  I  derived  more  agreeable  amusement 
from  the  two  Irish  students,  who  returned  to  their 
former  habitation,  than  from  any  other  acquaintance, 
except  the  Maxwells  and  their  friends.    My  acquaint- 


oy  Google 


DANCING.  47 

ance  with  Br  fiobertsou  b^an  about  this  time.  I 
never  waa  at  the  same  class  with  him,  for,  though  but 
a  few  months  older,  he  was  at  College  one  session  before 
me.  One  of  the  years,  too,  he  was  seized  with  a  fever, 
which  was  dangerous,  and  confined  him  for  the  greater 
part  of  the  winter.  I  weat  to  see  him  sometimes  when 
he  waa  recovering,  when  in  his  conversation  one  could 
perceive  the  opening  dawn  of  that  day  wbich  after- 
wards shone  so  bright.  I  became  also  acquainted  with 
John  Home  this  year,  though  he  was  one  year  behind 
me  at  College,  and  eight  months  younger.  He  was  gay 
and  talkative,  and  a  great  favourite  with  his  com- 
panions. 

I  was  very  fond  of  dancing,  in  which  1  was  a  great 
proficient,  having  been  taught  at  two  different  periods 
in  the  country,  though  the  manners  were  then  so  strict 
that  I  was  not  allowed  to  exercise  my  talent  at  penny- 
weddings,  or  any  balls  but  those  of  the  dancing-school. 
Even  this  would  have  been  denied  me,  as  it  was  to 
Robertson  and  Witherspoon,  and  other  clei^ymen's 
sons,  at  that  time,  had  it  not  been  for  the  persuasion 
of  those  aunts  of  mine  who  had  been  bred  in  England, 
and  for  some  papers  in  the  Spectator  which  were 
pointed  out  to  my  father,  which  seemed  to  convince 
him  that  dancing  would  make  me  a  more  accomplished 
preacher,  if  ever  I  had  the  honour  to  mount  the  pulpit. 
My  mother  too,  who  generally  was  right,  used  her 
sway  in  this  article  of  education.  But  I  had  not  the 
means  of  using  this  talent,  of  which  I  was  not  a  little 
vain,  till  luckily  I  waa  introduced  to  Madame  Violante, 


izecDy  Google 


48  SIB  JOHN  PEINQLE. 

an  Italian  stage-dancer,  who  kept  a  mncli-frequeiit;ed 
school  for  young  ladies,  bat  admitted  of  no  boys  above 
seven  or  eight  years  of  age,  so  that  she  wished  very 
much  for  senior  lads  to  dance  with  her  grown-up 
misses  weekly  at  her  practiaiogs.  I  became  a  favourite 
of  this  dancing-mistress,  and  attended  her  very  faith- 
fully with  two  or  three  of  my  companions,  and  had 
mj  choice  of  partners  on  all  occasions,  insomuch  that 
I  became  a  great  proficient  in  this  branch  at  little  or 
no  expense.  It  must  be  confessed,  however,  that,  hav- 
ing nothing  to  do  at  Stewart's  class,  through  the  in- 
capacity of  the  master,  and  M'Laurin's  giving  me  no 
trouble,  as  I  had  a  great  promptitude  in  learning 
mathematics,  I  had  a  good  deal  of  spare  time  this 
session,  which  I  spent,  as  well  as  all  the  money  I  got, 
at  a  billiard-table,  which  unluckily  was  within  fifty 
yards  of  the  College.  I  was  so  sensible  of  the  folly 
of  this,  however,  that  next  year  I  abandoned  it  alto- 
gether. 

Dr  Pringle,  afterwards  Sir  John,  was  an  agreeable 
lecturer,  though  no  great  master  of  the  science  he 
taught.*  His  lectures  were  chiefly  a  compilation  from 
Lord  Bacon's  works  ;  and  had  it  not  been  for  Puffen- 
dorfs  small  book,  which  he  made  his  text,  we  should 
not  have  been  instructed  in  the  rudiments  of  the 
science.  Once  a-week,  however,  he  gave  us  a  lecture 
in  Latin,  in  which  language  he  excelled,  and  was  even 
held  equal  to  Dr  John  Sinclair,  Professor  of  the  Theoiy 

*  Afterwuda  well  known  in  scientific  Bociety  in  London,  where  he  becsmn 
Pregident  of  the  Hojsl  Society.  — Ed. 


oy  Google 


THB  METAPHYSICAL  SCHOOL.  49 

of  Medicine,  the  most  eminent  Latin  scholar  at  that 
time,  except  the  great  grammarian  Euddiman.  The 
celebrated  Dr  Hutchison  of  Glasgow,  who  was  the  first 
that  distinguished  himself  in  that  important  branch 
of  literature,  was  now  beginning  his  career,  and  had 
drawn  ample  stores  from  the  ancients,  which  he  im- 
proved into  system,  and  embellished  by  the  exertions 
of  an  ardent  and  virtuous  mind.  He  was  soon  followed 
by  Smith,  who  had  been  his  scholar,  and  sat  for  some 
years  in  his  chair ;  by  Ferguson  at  Edinburgh ;  by  Keid 
and  Beattie,  which  last  was  more  an  orator  than  a 
philosopher ;  together  with  David  Hume,  whose  works, 
though  dangerous  and  heretical,  illustrated  the  science, 
and  called  forth  the  exertions  of  men  of  equal  genius 
and  sounder  principles. 

I  passed  the  greater  part  of  this  summer  (1738)  at 
my  grandfather's,  at  Tinwald,  near  Dumfries,  who  had 
a  tolerably  good  collection  of  books,  and  where  I  read 
for  many  hours  in  the  day.  I  contracted  the  greatest 
respect  for  my  grandfather,  and  attachment  to  his 
family  ;  and  became  well  acquainted  with  the  young 
people  of  Dumfries,  and  afterwards  held  a  correspond- 
ence by  letters  with  one  of  them,  which  was  of  use 
in  forming  my  epistolary  style. 

A  new  family  came  this  year  to  Prestonpans ;  for 
Colin  Campbell,  Esq.,  the  brother  of  Sir  James  of 
Arbmchal,  had  fallen  in  arrears  as  Collector  of  the 
Customs,  and  was  suspended.  But  his  wife  dying  at 
that  very  time,  an  excellent  woman  of  the  family  of 
Sir  James  Holbum,  and  leaving  him  eight  or  nine 


oy  Google 


50  m'laurin  the  mathematician. 

children,  bis  situation  drew  compaBsiou  from  his  friends, 
especially  from  Archibald,  Earl  of  Isla,  and  James 
Campbell  of  St  Germains,  who  were  his  securities,  and 
who  had  no  chance  of  being  reimbursed  the  sum  of 
£800  or  £1000  of  arrears  into  which  he  had  fallen, 
but  by  his  preferment.  He  was  soon  made  a  Commis- 
sioner of  the  Board  of  Customs,  an  office  at  that  time  of 
£1000  per  annum.  This  deprived  us  of  a  very  agree- 
able family,  the  sons  and  daughters  of  which  were  my 
companions.  Mr  Campbell  was  succeeded  by  Mr 
George  Cheap,  of  the  Cheapa  of  Eossie  in  Fife,  whose 
wife,  an  aunt  of  the  Lord  Chancellor  Wedderbum, 
had  just  died  and  left  a  family  of  eight  children,  two 
of  them  beautiful  girls  of  sixteen  or  eighteen,  and  six 
sons,  the  eldest  of  whom  was  a  year  older  than  I,  but 
was  an  apprentice  to  a  "Writer  to  the  Signet  in  Edin- 
burgh. This  family,  though  less  sociable  than  the 
former,  soon  became  intimate  with  ours  ;  and  one  of 
them  very  early  made  an  impression  on  me,  which 
had  lasting  effects. 

In  November  1738  I  again  attended  the  Collie  of 
Edinburgh  ;  and,  besides  a  second  year  of  the  Moral 
Philosophy,  I  was  a  third  year  at  M'Laurin's  class, 
who,  on  account  of  the  advanced  age  and  incapacity 
of  Sir  Robert  Stewart,  not  only  taught  Astronomy, 
but  gave  us  a  course  of  experiments  in  Mechanics,  with 
many  excellent  lectures  in  Natural  Philosophy,  which 
fully  compensated  the  defects  of  the  other  class.  About 
this  time  the  choice  of  a  profession  became  absolutely 
necessary.     I  had  thoughts  of  the  army  and  the  law. 


oy  Google 


CHOICE  OF  A   PROFESSION.  51 

but  was  persaaded  to  desist  from  any  views  on  tbem 
by  my  father's  being  unable  to  cany  on  my  educa- 
tion for  the  length  of  time  necessary  in  the  one,  or  to 
support  me  tiU  he  could  procure  a  commission  for  me, 
as  he  had  no  money  to  purchase ;  and  by  means  of 
the  long  peace,  the  establishment  of  the  army  was  low. 
Both  these  having  failed,  by  the  persuasion  of  Lealy 
and  Conway,  my  Irish  friends,  I  thought  of  surgery, 
and  had  prevailed  so  far  that  ray  father  went  to  Edin- 
burgh in  the  autumn  to  look  out  for  a  master  in  that 
profession* 

In  the  mean  time  came  a  letter  from  my  grandfather, 
in  favour  of  his  own  profession  and  that  of  my  father, 
written  with  so  much  force  and  energy,  and  stating 
BO  many  reasons  for  my  yielding  to  the  wish  of  my 
friends  and  the  conveniency  of  a  family  still  consisting 
of  eight  children,  of  whom  I  was  the  eldest,  that  I 
yielded  to  the  influence  of  parental  wishes  and  advice, 
which  in  those  days  swayed  the  minds  of  young  men 
much  more  than  they  do  now,  or  have  done  for  many 
years  past.      I  therefore  consented  that  my  name 

*  I  drev  up  with  them  [Leslie  and  Conway],  and  they  had  almost  induced 
me  to  be  a  doctor,  hod  not  the  diasection  of  a  child,  which  they  bought  of  a 
poor  tailor  for  6b.,  diegoated  me  completely.  The  man  had  asked  6s.  6d., 
bnt  they  beat  him  down  the  Gd.  by  assertdog  that  the  bargain  won  to  him 
worth  more  than  12a.,  as  it  saved  him  all  the  expense  of  burioL  The  hcoiing 
ofthisbnigoia,  together  with  that  of  the  dialogue  in  which  they  carried  it  on, 
were  not  lees  grating  to  my  feelings  than  the  dissection  itself.  Before  that 
I  had  been  captivated  by  the  si^t  of  a  handsome  comet  of  the  Oreya,  and 
would  needs  be  a  soldier ;  but  my  father  having  no  money  to  purchase  a 
oommindOD  for  me,  and  not  being  able,  he  said,  to  spare  as  much  money  per 
day  as  would  make  me-  live  like  a  gentleman,  althoogb  Colonel  Gardiner 
■aid  he  wonldKcommend  me  foracadet  in  a  verygood  regiment,  I  deaiat«d 
boia  this  also. — £ecoU«eii<m». 


oy  Google 


DUMFRIES. 


should  this  year  be  enrolled  in  the  liat  of  atudents  of 
divinity,  though  regular  attendance  was  not  enjoined. 

On  the  13th  of  January  1739,  there  was  a  total 
eclipse  of  the  moon,  to  view  which  M'Laurin  invited 
his  senior  scholars,  of  whom  I  was  one.  About  a  dozen 
of  us  remained  till  near  one  o'clock  on  the  Sunday 
morning,  when  the  greatest  tempest  arose  that  I  re- 
member. Eight  or  ten  of  us  were  so  much  alarmed  with 
the  fall  of  bricks  or  slates  in  the  College  Wynd,  that 
we  called  a  council  of  war  in  a  stair-foot,  and  got  to 
the  High  Street  safe  by  walking  in  file  down  the 
Cowgate  and  up  Niddry's  Wynd. 

I  passed  most  of  the  summer  this  year  in  Bumfries- 
shire,  where  my  grandfather  kept  me  pretty  close  to 
my  studies,  though  I  frequently  walked  in  the  after- 
noons to  Dumfries,  and  brought  him  the  newspapers 
from  Provost  Bell,  his  son-in-law,  who  had  by  that 
time  acquired  the  chief  sway  in  the  burgh,  having 
taken  the  side  of  the  Duke  of  Queensberry,  in  oppo- 
sition to  Charles  Erskine  of  Tinwald,  at  that  time  the 
Solicitor.  George  Bell  was  not  a  man  of  ability,  but 
he  was  successful  in  trade,  was  popular  in  his  man- 
ners, and,  having  a  gentlemanly  spirit,  was  a  iavourite 
with  the  nobility  and  gentry  in  the  neighbourhood. 
He  had  a  constant  correspondence  with  the  Duke  of 
Queensberry,  and  retained  his  frieodship  till  his  death 
in  1757.  What  Bell  wanted  in  capacity  or  judgment 
was  fully  compensated  by  his  wife,  Margaret  Robison, 
the  second  of  my  mother's  sisters,  and  afterwards  still 
more  by  my  sister  Margaret,  whom  they  reared,  as 


oy  Google 


FRIENDS  AND  COMPANIONS.  53 

thej  had  no  children,  and  who,  when  she  grew  up, 
ndded  beauty  and  address  to  a  very  uncommon  un- 
deretanding.  During  the  period  when  I  so  much 
frequented  Dumfries,  there  was  a  very  agreeable  so- 
ciety in  that  town.  They  were  not  numerous,  but 
the  few  were  better  informed,  and  more  agreeable  in 
society,  than  any  to  be  met  with  in  so  small  a  town. 

I  returned  home  before  winter,  but  did  not  attend 
the  College,  though  I  was  enrolled  a  student  of  divi- 
nity. But  my  father  had  promised  to  Lord  Drum- 
more,  his  great  friend,  that  I  should  pass  most  of  my 
time  with  his  eldest  son,  Mr  Hew  H.  Dalrymple,  who, 
not  liking  to  live  in  Edinburgh,  was  to  pass  the 
winter  in  the  house  of  Walliford,  adjacent  to  his  estate 
of  Drummore,  where  he  had  only  a  farmhouse  at  that 
tune,  with  two  rooms  on  a  ground-floor,  which  would 
have  ill  agreed  with  Mr  Hew's  health,  which  was 
threatened  with  symptoms  of  consumption,  the  dis- 
ease of  which  he  died  five  or  six  years  afterwards, 
having  been  married,  but  leaving  no  issue. 

Mr  Hew  H.  Dalrymple  had  been  intended  for  the 
Church  of  England)  and  with  that  view  had  been 
educated  at  Oxford,  and  was  an  accomplished  scholar; 
but  his  elder  brother  John  having  died  at  Naples,  he 
fell  heir  to  his  mother's  estate.  He  was  five  or  six 
years  older  than  I,  and  being  frank  and  communica- 
tive, I  received  much'  benefit  from  his  conversation, 
which  was  instructive,  and  his  manners,  which  were 
elegant.  "With  this  gentleman  I  lived  all  winter, 
returning  generally  to  my  father's  house  on  Saturdays, 


oy  Google 


5+  THE  DALEYMPLES  AND  KEITHS. 

when  Lord  Drummore  returned  from  Edinburgh,  and 
went  back  again  on  Monday,  when  I  re&umed  my 
station.  We  passed  great  part  of  the  day  in  Novem- 
ber and  December  planting  trees  round  the  enclosurea 
at  Drummore,  which,  by  their  appearance  at  present, 
prove  that  they  were  not  well  chosen,  for  they  are 
very  small  of  their  age ;  but  they  were  too  old  when 
they  were  planted.  After  the  frost  set  in  about 
Christmas,  we  passed  our  days  very  much  in  following 
the  greyhounds  on  foot  or  on  horseback,  and  though 
our  evenings  were  generally  solitary,  between  reading 
and  talking  we  never  tired.  Mr  Hew's  manners  were 
as  gentle  as  hia  mind  was  enlightened.  We  had  little 
intercourse  with  the  neighbours,  except  with  my 
father's  family,  with  Mr  Cheap's  {the  Collector),  where 
there  were  two  beautiful  girls,  and  with  Mr  Keith, 
afterwards  ambassador,  whose  wife's  sister  was  the 
widow  of  Sir  Roljert  Dalrymple,  brother  of  Lord 
Drummore.  They  were  twins,  and  so  like  each  other, 
that  even  when  I  saw  them  first,  when  they  were  at 
least  thirty,  it  was  hardly  possible  to  distinguish 
them.  In  their  youth,  their  lovers,  I  have  heard  them 
say,  always  mistook  them  when  a  sign  or  watdiword 
had  not  been  agreed  on.  Mr  Keith  was  a  very  agree- 
able man,  had  much  knowledge  of  modem  history 
and  genealogy,  and,  being  a  pleasing  talker,  made  an 
agreeable  companion.  Of  him  and  bis  intimate  friend, 
Mr  Hepburn  of  Keith,  it  was  said  that  the  witty  Lady 
Dick  (Lord  Royston's  daughter)  said  that  Mr  Keith 
told  her  nothing  but  what  she  knew  before,  though  in 


oy  Google 


THE  DALRYMPLES  AND  KEITHS.  56 

a  very  agreeable  manner,  but  that  Hepburn  never 
said  uiytbiog  tbat  wae  not  new  to  ber, — thus  marking 
the  difference  between  geniua  and  ability.  Keith  waa 
a  minion  of  the  great  Mareschid  Stair,  and  went 
abroad  with  him  in  1 743,  when  be  got  the  command 
of  the  army.  But  I  observed  that  Lord  Stair's  par- 
tiality to  Keith  made  him  no  great  favourite  of  the 
Dalrymplea.  Colonel  Gardiner  had  been  another 
minion  of  Lord  Stair,  but  being  illiterate,  and  con- 
sidered as  a  fanatic,  the  gentleman  I  mention  bad  no 
intimacy  with  him,  though  they  admitted  that  be  was 
a  very  honest  and  well-meaning  brave  man. 

My  father  had  sometimes  expressed  a  wish  that  I 
should  allow  myself  to  be  recommended  to  take  charge 
of  a  pupil,  as  tbat  was  the  most  likely  way  to  obtain 
a  church  in  Scotland ;  but  be  did  not  press  me  on 
this  snbject,  for  as  be  had  been  four  years  in  that 
station  himself,  though  he  was  very  fortunate  in  his 
pupils,  he  felt  how  degrading  it  was.  By  that  time  T 
had  been  acquainted  with  a  few  preceptors,  bad  ob- 
served bow  they  were  treated,  and  bad  contracted  an 
abhorrence  of  the  employment — insomucb  tbat,  when 
I  consented  to  follow  out  the  clerical  profession,  it 
was  on  condition  I  should  never  be  urged  to  go  into 
a  family,  as  it  was  called,  engaging  at  the  same  time 
to  make  my  expenses  as  moderate  as  possible. 

This  was  the  winter  of  the  hard  frost  which  com- 
meneetl  in  the  end  of  December  1 739,  and  lasted  for 
three  months.  As  there  were  no  canals  or  rivers  of 
extent  enough  in  this  part  of  the  country  to  encourage 


oy  Google 


56  PEOFESSOES  AST)  COMPANIOSS. 

the  fine  exercise  of  skating,  we  contented  ourselves 
with  the  winter  diversion  of  curling,  which  is  peculiar 
to  Scotland,  and  became  tolerable  proficients  in  that 
manly  exercise.  It  is  the  more  interesting,  as  it  is 
usual  for  the  young  men  of  adjacent  parishes  to  con- 
tend against  each  other  for  a  whole  ■winter's  day, 
and  at  the  end  of  it  to  dine  together  with  much 
jollity. 

I  passed  the  summer  of  this  year,  as  usual,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Dumfries,  and  kept  up  my  con- 
nection with  the  young  people  of  that  town  as  I 
had  done  formerly.  I  returned  home  in  the  autumn, 
and  passed  some  part  of  the  winter  in  Edinburgh, 
attending  the  divinity  class,  which  had  no  attrac- 
tions, as  the  Professor,  though  said  to  be  learned, 
was  dull  and  tedious  in  his  lectures,  insomuch  that 
at  the  end  of  seven  years  he  had  only  lectured  half 
through  Pictet's  CoDipend  of  Theology.  I  became 
acquainted,  however,  with  several  students,  with 
whom  I  had  not  been  intimate,  such  as  Dr  Hugh 
Blair,  aud  the  Bannatines,  and  Dr  Jardine,  all  my 
seniors ;  Dr  John  Blair,  afterwards  Prebendary  of 
Westminster ;  John  Home,  William  Robertson,  George 
Logan,  William  Wilkie,  &c.  There  was  one  advan- 
tage attending  the  lectures  of  a  dull  professor — viz., 
that  he  could  form  no  school,  and  the  students  were 
left  entirely  to  themselves,  and  naturally  formed 
opinions  far  more  liberal  than  those  they  got  from 
the  Professor.  This  was  the  answer  I  gave  to  Patrick 
Lord  Elibank,  one  of  the  most  learned  and  ingenious 


izecy  Google 


ORANGE  AND  LOVAT.  57 

noblemen  of  his  time,  when  he  asked  me  one  day, 
many  yeara  afterwards,  what  could  be  the  reason  that 
the  young  clergymen  of  that  period  so  far  surpassed 
their  predecessors  of  his  early  days  in  useful  accom- 
plishments and  liberality  of  mind — viz.,  that  the 
Professor  of  Theology  was  dull,  and  Dutch,  and  prolix. 
His  lordship  said  he  perfectly  understood  me,  and 
that  this  entirely  accounted  for  the  change. 

In  summer  1741  I  remained  for  the  most  part  at 
home,  and  it  was  about  that  time  that  my  old  school- 
master, Mr  Hanuan,  having  died  of  fever,  and  Mr 
John  Halket  having  come  in  his  place,  I  was  witness 
to  a  scene  that  made  a  strong  impression  upon  me. 
This  Mr  Halket  had  been  tutor  to  Lord  Lovat's  eldest 
son  Simon,  afterwards  well  known  as  General  Fraser. 
Halket  had  remained  for  two  years  with  Lovat,  and 
knew  all  his  ways.  But  he  had  parted  with  him  on 
his  coming  to  Edinburgh  for  the  education  of  that 
son,  to  whom  he  gave  a  tutor  of  a  superior  order,  Mr 
Hugh  Blair,  afterwards  the  celebrated  Doctor.  But 
he  still  retiuned  so  much  regard  for  Halket  that  he 
thought  proper  to  fix  his  second  son,  Alexander 
Fraser,  with  him  at  the  school  of  Prestonpans,  believ- 
ing that  ho  wa£  a  much  more  proper  hand  for  training 
an  untutored  savage  than  the  mild  and  elegant  Dr 
Blair.  It  was  in  the  course  of  this  summer  that 
Ifovat  brought  his  son  Alexander  to  be  placed  with 
Halket,  from  whom,  understanding  that  I  was  a  young 
scholar  living  in  the  town  who  might  be  useful  to  his 
son,  he  ordered  Halket  to  invite  me  to  dine  with  him 


oy  Google 


58  GRANGE  AMD  LOVAT. 

and  his  company  at  Lucky  Vint's,  a  celebrated  vil- 
lage tavern  in  the  west  end  of  the  town. 

His  company  consisted  of  Mr  Erskine  of  Grange, 
with  three  or  four  gentlemen  of  the  name  of  Eraser, 
one  of  whom  was  his  man  of  business,  together  with 
Halket,  his  son  Alexander,  and  myself.  The  two  old 
gentlemen  disputed  for  some  time  which  of  them 
should  say  grace.  At  last  Lovat  yielded,  and  gave 
UB  two  or  three  pious  sentences  in  French,  which  Mr 
Erskine  and  I  understood,  and  we  only.  As  soon  as 
we  were  set,  Lovat  asked  me  to  send  him  a  whiting 
from  the  dish  of  fish  that  was  next  me.  As  they 
were  all  haddocks,  I  answered  that  they  were  not 
whitings,  but,  according  to  the  proverb,  he  that  got  a 
haddock  for  a  whiting  was  not  ill  off.  This  saying 
takes  its  rise  from  the  superiority  of  haddocks  to  whit- 
ings in  the  Firth  of  Forth.  Upon  this  his  lordship 
stormed  and  swore  more  than  fifty  dragoons ;  he  was 
sxae  they  must  be  whitings,  as  he  had  bespoke  them. 
Halket  tipped  me  the  wink,  and  I  retracted,  saying 
that  I  had  but  little  skill,  and  as  his  lordship  had 
bespoke  them,  I  must  certainly  be  mistaken.  Upon 
thb  he  calmed,  and  I  sent  him  one,  which  he  was 
quite  pleased  with,  swearing  again  that  he  never  could 
eat  a  haddock  all  his  life.  The  landlady  told  me 
afterwards  that  as  be  had  been  very  peremptory 
against  haddocks,  and  she  had  no  other,  she  had  made 
her  cook  carefully  scrape  out  St  Peter's  mark  on  the 
shoulders,  which  she  had  often  done  before  with  suc- 
cess.    We  had  a  very  good  plain  dinner.     As  the 


oy  Google 


GRANGE  AND  LOVAT.  59 

claret  was  excellent,  and  circulated  fast,  the  two  old 
gentlemeii  grew  very  merry,  and  their  conversation 
became  youthful  and  gay.  What  I  observed  was,  that 
Grange,  without  appearing  to  flatter,  was  very  obser- 
vant of  Lovat,  and  did  everything  to  please  him.  He 
had  provided  Geordy  Sym,  who  was  Lord  Drum- 
more's  piper,  to  entertain  Lovat  after  dinner ;  but 
chough  he  wag  reckoned  the  best  piper  in  the  country, 
Lovat  despised  him,  and  said  he  was  only  fit  to  play 
reels  to  Grange's  oyster-women.  He  grew  frisky  at 
last,  however,  and  upon  Kate  Vint,  the  landlady's 
daughter,  coming  into  the  room,  he  insisted  on  her 
staying  to  dance  with  him.  She  was  a  handsome 
girl,  with  fine  black  eyes  and  an  agreeable  person  ; 
and  though  without  the  advantages  of  dress  or  man- 
ners, she,  by  means  of  her  good  sense  and  a  bashful 
air,  was  very  alluring.  She  was  a  mistress  of  Lord 
Drummore,  who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood ;  and 
though  her  mother  would  not  part  with  her,  as  she 
drew  much  company  to  the  house,  she  was  said  to  be 
faithful  to  him ;  except  only  in  the  case  of  Captain 
Merry,  who  married  her,  and  soon  after  went  abroad 
with  his  regiment.  When  he  died  she  enjoyed  the 
pension.  She  had  two  sons  by  Drummore  and  one 
by  Merry.  One  of  the  first  was  a  pretty  lad  and  a 
good  officer,  for  he  was  a  master  and  commander 
before  he  died.  Lovat  was  at  this  time  seventy-five, 
and  Grange  not  much  younger ;  yet  the  wine  and 
the  young  woman  emboldened  them  to  dance  a  reel, 
till  Kate,  observing  Lovat 's  legs  as  thick  as  posts,  fell 


oy  Google 


80  GRANGE   AND   LOVAT. 

a-laughing,  and  ran  oflF.  She  missed  her  second 
course  of  kisses,  as  was  then  the  fashion  of  the  coun- 
try, though  she  had  endured  the  first.  This  was  a 
Bcene  not  easily  forgotten. 

Lovat  was  tall  and  stately,  and  might  have  been 
handsome  in  his  youth,  with  a  very  flat  nose.  His 
manner  was  not  disagreeable,  though  his  address  con- 
sisted chiefly  in  gross  flattery  and  in  the  dae  appli- 
cation of  money.  He  did  not  make  on  me  the  im- 
pression of  a  man  of  a  leading  mind.  His  suppleness 
and  profligacy  were  apparent.  The  convivium  was 
not  over,  though  the  evening  approached.  He  con- 
veyed his  son  to  the  house  where  he  was  to  be  boarded, 
for  Hidket  had  not  taken  up  bouse ;  and  there,  while 
we  drank  tea,  he  won  the  heart  of  the  landlady,  a 
decent  widow  of  a  shipmaster,  and  of  her  niece,  by 
fair  speeches,  intermixed  with  kisses  to  the  niece,  who 
was  about  thirty,  and  such  advices  as  a  man  in  a 
state  of  ebriety  could  give.  The  coach  was  in  waiting, 
but  Grange  would  not  yet  part  with  him,  and  insisted 
on  his  accepting  of  a  banquet  from  him  at  his  house 
in  Preston.  Lovat  was  in  a  yielding  humour,  and  it 
was  agreed  to.  The  Frasera,  who  were  on  horseback, 
were  sent  to  Edinburgh,  the  boy  was  left  with  his 
dame,  and  Lovat  and  Grange,  and  Halket  and  I,  went 
up  to  Preston,  only  a  quarter  of  a  mile  distant,  and 
were  received  in  Grange's  library,  a  cube  of  twenty 
feet,  in  a  pavilion  of  the  house  which  extended  into  a 
small  wilderness  of  not  more  than  half  an  acre,  which 
was  sacred  to  Grange's  private  walks,  and  to  which 


oy  Google 


GBANGE  AND  LOVAT.  61 

there  was  no  entry  but  through  the  pavilion.  This 
wilderness  was  said  to  be  hia  place  of  retreat  from  bis 
lady  when  she  was  in  her  6ts  of  tennagancy,  which 
were  not  uufrequent,  and  were  said  by  bis  minions  to 
be  devoted  to  meditation  and  prayer.  But  as  there 
was  a  secret  door  to  the  fields,  it  was  reported  that  he 
had  occasionally  admitted  fair  maidens  to  solace  him 
for  his  Bufferings  from  the  clamour  of  his  wife.  This 
room  had  been  well  stored  with  books  from  top  to 
bottom,  but  at  this  time  was  much  thinned,  there 
remaining  only  a  large  collection  of  books  on  dsmo- 
nologia,  which  was  Grange's  particular  study.  In  this 
room  there  was  a  fine  collation  of  fruit  and  biscuits, 
and  a  new  deluge  of  excellent  claret.  At  ten  o'clock 
the  two  old  gentlemen  mounted  their  coach  to  Edin- 
burgh, and  thus  closed  a  very  memorable  day. 

In  the  following  winter — viz.,  November  1741 — I 
attended  the  Divinity  Hall  at  Edinburgh  again  for 
three  or  four  months,  and  delivered  a  discourse,  De 
Fide  Scdvifica,  a  very  improper  subject  for  so  young 
a  student,  which  attracted  no  attention  from  any  one 
but  the  Professor,  who  was  pleased  with  it,  as  it  re- 
sembled his  own  Dutch  Latin. 

The  summer  1742  I  passed  at  home,  making  only 
a  few  excursioDB  into  East  Lothian,  where  I  had 
sundry  companions.  My  father,  ever  attentive  to 
what  he  thought  was  best  for  me,  and  desirous  to 
ease  himself  as  much  as  possible  from  the  expense  of 
my  education,  availed  himself  of  my  mother's  being  a 
relation  of  the  Hon.  Basil  Hamilton — for  their  mothers 


oy  Google 


62  GLASGOW    BDKSARY. 

were  coueina — and  applied  to  the  Duke  of  Hamilton 
for  one  of  the  bursaries  given  by  Duchess  Ann  of 
that  family  in  the  former  century  to  students  in 
divinity  to  pass  two  winters  in  Glasgow  College,  and 
a  third  in  some  foreign  university,  the  salary  for 
the  first  two  years,  £lOO  Scots  annually,  and  for  the 
third,  X400  ;  which  might  have  been  competent  as 
far  back  as  1670,  but  was  very  far  short  of  the  most 
moderate  expense  at  which  a  student  could  live  in 
1 742.*  But  I  was  pleased  with  this  plan,  as  it  opened 
a  prospect  of  going  abroad.  The  presentation  was 
obtained,  and  my  father  and  I  set  out  on  horseback 
for  Glasgow  in  the  beginning  of  November,  and  ar- 
rived there  next  forenoon,  having  stayed  all  night  at 
Mr  Dundas's  of  Castle  Gary,  on  the  old  Roman  wall. 
My  father  immediately  repaired  to  the  College  to  con- 
sult with  an  old  friend  of  his,  Mr  Dick,  Professor  of 
Natural  Philosophy,  how  he  was  to  proceed  with  his 
presentation.  I  was  surprised  to  see  him  return  after 
in  a  great  flurry,  Mr  Dick  having  assured  him  that 
there  was  no  vacant  bursary,  nor  would  be  till  next 
year.  The  next  object  was  how  to  secure  it,  in  which 
we  were  both  mudi  interested — my  father,  to  prevent 
my  deviating  into  some  other  employment ;  and  I,  for 
fear  I  should  have  been  forced  to  become  tutor  to 
some  young  gentleman,  a  situation  which,  as  I  then 
observed  it,  had  become  an  object  of  my  abhorrenca 
Several  of  my  companions  had  the  same  turn  of  mind  ; 
for  neither  Robertson,  nor  John  Home,  nor  Geoi^ 
*  A  Irandied  pounds  Scots  ue  equivalent  to  £8,  Ga.  Sd.  iterling. — Ed. 


oy  Google 


0LA800W  BUBSARV.  63 

Logan  were  ever  tutors.  We  thought  we  had  oh- 
served  that  all  tutors  had  contracted  a  certain  ohse- 
quiousness  or  bassesse,  which  alarmed  us  for  ourselves. 
A  little  experience  corrected  tliis  prejudice,  for  I  knew 
many  afterwards  who  had  passed  through  that  sta- 
tion, and  yet  had  retained  a  manly  independency 
both  in  mind  and  manner. 

After  a  hasty  dinner,  we  took  our  horses  by  four 
in  the  afternoon,  and  riding  all  night  by  the  nearest 
road,  which  was  as  bad  as  possible,  we  arrived  in 
Edinburgh  by  eight  in  the  morning.  My  father 
dressed  himself,  and  went  down  to  the  Abbey,  where, 
to  his  great  joy,  he  found  that  Duke  Hamilton  was 
not  set  out  fox  London,  as  he  was  afraid  he  might 
have  been,  and  obtained  a  promise  that  the  presenta- 
tion should  be  renewed  next  year. 

In  compensation  for  this  disappointment,  I  passed 
the  greatest  part  of  this  winter  at  my  grandfather's,  at 
Tinwald,  where  I  read  for  many  hours  of  the  day,  and 
generally  took  the  weekly  amusement  of  passing  one 
day  and  night  at  Dumfries,  where  I  met  with  agree- 
able society,  both  male  and  female. 

I  returned  to  Edinburgh  in  March,  and  attended 
the  Divinity  Hall  for  a  few  weeks.  Living  at  Edin- 
burgh continued  still  to  be  wonderfully  cheap,  as  there 
were  ordinaries  for  young  gentlemen,  at  fourpence 
a^head  for  a  very  good  dinner  of  broth  and  beef,  and 
a  roast  and  potatoes  every  day,  with  fish  three  or  four 
times  a-week,  and  all  the  small-beer  that  was  called 
for  till  the  cloth  was  removed.     In  the  summer  T 


oy  Google 


61  SOCIAL  HABITS. 

passed  some  time  in  East  Lothian,  where  by  accident 
at  that  period  there  were  no  less  than  a  dozen  young 
scholarB,  preachers,  and  students  in  divinity,  who  gene- 
rally met  there  on  the  presbytery  day.  For  two  or 
three  times  we  dined  with  the  presbytery  by  invi- 
tation ;  but  finding  that  we  were  not  very  welcome 
guests,  and  that  whatever  number  there  were  in  com- 
pany they  never  allowed  them  more  than  two  bottles 
of  small  Lisbon  wiue,  we  bespoke  a  dinner  for  our- 
selves in  another  tavern  ;  and  when  the  days  were 
short,  generally  stayed  all  night.  By  this  time  even 
the  second  tavern  in  Haddington  (where  the  presby- 
tery dined,  having  quarrelled  with  the  first)  had  knives 
and  forks  for  their  table.  But  ten  or  twelve  years  be- 
fore that  time,  my  father  used  to  carry  a  shagreen  case, 
with  a  knife  and  fork  and  spoon,  as  they  perhaps  do 
still  on  many  parts  of  the  Continent.  When  I  at- 
tended, in  1 742  and  1 743,  they  had  still  but  one  glass 
on  the  table,  which  went  round  with  the  bottle. 

Very  early  in  the  afternoon,  Mr  Stedman,  a  minis- 
ter in  the  town,  and  one  or  two  more  of  the  clergy- 
men, used  to  resort  to  our  company,  and  keep  up 
an  enlightened  conversation  till  bedtime.  The  chief 
subjects  were  the  deistical  controversy  and  moral  phi- 
losophy, as  connected  with  theology.  Besides  Sted- 
man, Murray  and  Glen  almost  always  attended  us." 

John  Witherspoon  was  of  this  party,  he  who  was 

*  Mr  Edward  Stedman  waa  Becond  miluBter  ol  Haddington,  and  a  man 
of  vei7  superior  underetanding.  He  it  was  who  first  directed  Dr  Robertson 
how  to  obtain  his  leading  in  the  Cborcht  and  who  was  the  friend  and  aup- 


oy  Google 


WTTHEEaPOOH  OF  NEW   YORK.  65 

a^rwards  a  member  of  the  American  OoDgrees,  and 
Adam  Dickson,  who  afterwards  wrote  so  well  on  Hus- 
bandry. They  were  both  clergymen's  bods,  but  of 
very  different  characters ;  the  one  open,  frank,  and 
generous,  pretending  only  to  what  he  was,  and  sup- 
porting hia  title  with  spirit ;  the  other  close,  and 
suspicious,  and  jealous,  and  always  aspiring  at  a  supe- 
riority that  he  was  not  able  to  maintain.  I  used  some- 
times to  go  with  him  for  a  day  or  two  to  bis  father's 
house  at  Gifford  Hall,  where  we  passed  the  day  in  fish- 
mg,  to  be  out  of  reach  of  his  father,  who  was  very  sulky 
and  tyrannical,  but  who,  being  much  given  to  glut- 
tony, feU  asleep  early,  and  went  always  to  bed  at  nine, 
and,  being  as  &t  as  a  porpoise,  was  not  to  be  awaked, 
so  that  we  had  three  or  four  hours  of  liberty  every 
night  to  amuse  ourselves  with  the  daughters  of  the 
family,  and  their  cousins  who  resorted  to  us  from  the 
village,  when  the  old  man  was  gone  to  rest.  This  John 
loved  of  all  things  ;  and  this  sort  of  company  he  en- 
joyed in  greater  perfection  when  he  returned  my  visits, 
when  we  had  stUl  more  companions  of  the  fair  sex, 
and  no  restraint  from  an  austere  father  ;  so  that  I 
always  considered  the  austerity  of  manners  and  aver- 
Hion  to  social  joy  which  he  affected  afterwards,  as  the 
arts  of  hypocrisy  and  ambition  ;  for  he  had  a  strong 

praiv  of  Jolm  Home,  when  be  mm  in  danger  of  bdug  deposed  for  -writiiif; 
the  tngedy  of  Douglas.  It  was  Stedman  who,  wiOi  the  aid  of  Hiigh 
Samiatyiie,  then  minuter  of  Diiieton,  and  Robertson,  condncted  the  affairs 
of  the  pnsbyteiT  d  Hjtddington  in  such  a  maimer  that  thej  were  never 
able  to  n*ch  John  Home,  till  it  was  conTeoient  for  him  to  tengn  hia 


oy  Google 


66  THE   KEITH   FAMILY. 

and  enlightened  uhderstandiog,  far  above  entliusiasro, 
and  a  temper  that  did  not  seem  liable  to  it.* 

It  was  this  summer  that  my  father  received  from 
Mr  Keith  (afterwards  ambassador)  a  letter,  desiring 
that  I  might  be  sent  over  to  him  immediately.  He 
had  been  sent  for  by  Lord  Stair,  and  went  to  Ger- 
many with  him  as  his  private  secretary.  This  was 
after  the  battle  of-Dettingen.  But  I  knew  nothing 
of  it  for  some  years,  otherwise  I  might  probably  have 
broke  through  my  father's  plan.  When  Lord  Stair 
lost  the  command  of  the  army,  Mr  Keith  lived  with 
him  at  London,  and  had  a  guinea  a-day  conferred  on 
him,  till  he  was  sent  to  Holland  in  1746  or  1747  as 
Kesident.  His  knowledge  of  modem  history,  and  of 
all  the  treaties,  &c,  made  him  be  valued. 


*  TItonuui  Eepbum,  a  diiitmguifilied  minister,  vho  died  miniBter  itf 
Athdstuieford,  and  was  bom  and  bred  in  Oie  neighbourhood,  used  to 
■liege  that  a  Dr  Nisbet  of  Montrose,  a  man  of  sooie  learning  and  ability, 
which  he  used  to  display  with  Lttle  judgment  in  the  Assembly,  was  Wither- 
■poon'a  son,  and  that  he  was  attiiported  in  this  opinion  by  the  acaDdalona 
ohronicle  of  Uie  countiy.  Their  features,  no  douLt,  had  a  strong  resem- 
blance, but  their  petsons  were  unlike,  neither  were  their  tempera  at  tH 
(dinilar.  Any  likeneea  there  wa«  between  them  in  their  seatiiueats  and 
public  appearances  might  be  accounted  for  by  the  great  admiration  the 
junior  must  have  had  for  the  senior,  aa  he  was  bred  up  under  his  eye,  in 
the  same  parish,  in  which  he  was  much  admired.  Whetlier  or  not  he 
was  his  son,  he  followed  his  example,  for  he  became  discontented,  and 
migrated  to  America  during  the  Bchellioa,  where  he  was  Principal  of 
Cariisle  College,  Pennsylvania,  for  which  he  was  welt  qnalified  in  point  of 
learaing.  But  no  preferment  nor  climate  can  cure  a  discontented  mind,  for 
he  became  miaerable  at  one  time  because  he  could  not  return. 


,1.0,  Google 


CHAPTER    III. 

171^1T1G :  AQE,  21-28. 

OOES  TO  OLISOOW — LEEOHHAN,  HUTCHEBON,  AND  THE  OTHER  FBOFES- 
BORS — IJFE  AND  BOCIBIT  IN  GLABOOW — RISE  OF  TRADE — ORIQIN 

OF  OLASOOW  BUPPBBB CLtJBS — HUTCHESON  THE  UETAPBTSICtAH 

— SIliSON  AND  BTEWABT  THB  MATHEUATICIANB — HOORE — TOUR 
AHONO  THE  CLEROT    OF  HADDINGTON:  SKETCHES  OF  THEM — THE 

AUTHOR    OF    "THB  OHAYb"  —  RETURN    TO    OLASOOW COIXEOB 

THEATH1CAL8 TRAVBLLJNO    ADTENTCHES NEWS     OP    THE    LAN1>. 

INO  OF  PRINCE  CHARLH A  VOLUNTEER   CORPB — PREPARATIONS 

FOR  THB  DEFENCE  OP    EDINBCItaH THE    UARCH    AND  RECALL 

OF    THE    TOLtNTKERS THE    PROVOBT'B    COKDCCT — ADVENTURES 

AS    A    DISEIfBODIED    VOLUNTEER ADVENTURES    OP   JOHN  BOMB 

AND  ROBERTSON   THE  HISTORIAN EXPEDITION  TO   VIEW   COFE'S 

ARHT— THE  POSITION  OF  THE  TWO  ARMIES — HIS  LAST  INTER- 
VIEW WITH  COLONEL  GARDINER — 1NSTHUCT10S8  TO  BE  WAKENED 
WHEN     THE    BATTLE     BEGINS — IB    WAKENED,     AND    DESCRIPTION 

OF    WHAT    HE    BEES THE    BATTLE — INCIDENTS — INSPECTION    OF 

THB    BIOBLAND    ARMT — PRINCE    CHARLES PREPARATIONS    FOR 

OOINO  TO  HOLLAND. 

In  November  1 743  I  went  to  Glasgow,  much  more 
opportnoely  than  I  should  have  done  the  preceding 
year,  for  the  old  Professor  of  Divinity,  Mr  Potter, 
who  had  been  a  very  short  while  there,  died  in  the 
week  I  went  to  College  ;  and  his  chair,  being  in  the 
gift  of  the  University,  waa  immediately  filled  by  Mr 
William  Leechman,  a  neighbouring  clergyman,  a  per- 
son thoroughly  well  qualified  for  the  office,  of  which 


izecy  Google 


68  GLASGOW  IN    1743. 

he  gave  the  most  satisfactory  proof  for  a  great  many 
years  that  he  continued  Professor  of  Theology,  which 
was  till  the  death  of  Principal  Neil  Campbell  raised 
him  to  the  head  of  the  University.  He  was  a  distin- 
guished preacher,  and  was  followed  when  he  was  occa- 
sionally in  Edinburgh.  His  appearance  was  that  of 
an  ascetic,  reduced  by  fasting  and  prayer  ;  but  in  aid 
of  fine  composition,  he  delivered  his  sermons  with  such 
fervent  spirit,  and  in  so  persuasive  a  manner,  as  cap- 
tivated every  audience."  This  was  so  much  the  case 
that  his  admirers  regretted  that  he  should  be  with- 
drawn from  the  pnlpit,  for  the  Professor  of  Theology 
baa  no  charge  in  Glasgow,  and  preaches  only  occasion- 
ally. It  was  much  for  the  good  of  the  Church,  how- 
ever, that  he  was  raised  to  a  station  of  more  extensive 
usefulness ;  for  while  his  interesting  manner  drew  the 
steady  attention  of  the  students,  the  judicious  choice 
and  arrangement  of  his  matter  formed  the  most  in- 
Btructive  set  of  lectures  on  theology  that  had,  it  was 
thought,  ever  been  delivered  in  Scotland.  It  was,  no 
doubt,  owing  to  him,  and  his  friend  and  colleague  Mr 
Huteheson,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy,  that  a  better 
taste  and  greater  liberality  of  sentiment  were  intro- 
duced among  the  clergy  in  the  western  provinces  of 
Scotland. 

Able  as  this  gentleman  was,  however,  and  highly 
unexceptionable  not  only  in  morals  but  in  decorum  of 

*  A  portrait  of  Leeclunan,  from  a  paintiiig  by  W.  Millar,  very  cbaracter- 
istic,  and  in  hannon;  willi  this  description,  is  preGxed  to  on  edition  of  hiv 
Semana;  Loudon,  2toIi.  Svo,  1TS9.— Ed. 


oy  Google 


GLASGOW  IN    1743.  69 

bcbaviour,  he  was  cot  allowed  to  ascend  bis  chair 
without  much  opposition,  and  even  a  prosecntion  for 
here^.  Invulnerable  as  he  seemed  to  be,  the  keen 
and  prying  eye  of  fanaticism  discovered  a  weak  place, 
to  which  they  directed  their  attacks.  There  had  been 
pubhshed  at  Glasgow,  or  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Dr 
Leechman's  church,  in  the  country,  before  he  came  to 
Glasgow,  about  that  period,  a  small  pamphlet  against 
the  use  of  prayer,  which  had  circulated  amongst  the 
inferior  ranks,  and  had  made  no  small  impression, 
being  artfully  composed.  To  counteract  this  poison 
Leechman  had  composed  and  published  his  sermon 
on  the  nature,  reasonableness,  and  advantages  of 
prayer ;  with  an  attempt  to  answer  the  objections 
against  it,  from  Matthew,  zxvi.  41.  In  this  sermon, 
though  admirably  well  composed,  in  defence  of  prayer 
as  a  duty  of  natural  religion,  the  author  had  forgot, 
or  omitted  to  state,  the  obligations  on  Christians  to 
pray  in  the  name  of  Christ.  The  nature  of  his  subject 
did  not  lead  him  to  state  this  part  of  a  Christian's 
prayer,  and  perhaps  he  thought  that  the  inserting 
anything  relative  to  that  point  might  disgust  or  lessen 
the  curiosity  of  those  for  whose  conviction  he  had 
published  the  sermon.  The  fanatical  or  high-flpng 
clei^  in  the  presbytery  of  Glasgow  took  advantnge 
of  this  omission,  and  instituted  an  inquiry  into  the 
heresy  contained  in  this  sermon  by  omission,  which 
lasted  with  much  theological  acrimony  on  the  part 
of  the  inquirers  (who  were  chiefly  those  who  had 
encouraged  Cambuslang's  work,  as  it  was  called,  two 


oy  Google 


70  GLASGOW  PROFESSORS — HUTCHESON. 

years  before),  till  it  was  finally  settled  in  favour  of  the 
Professor  by  the  General  Assembly  1 744.*  Instead  of 
laifiiug  any  anxiety  amoog  the  students  in  theology, 
or  creating  any  suspicion  of  Dr  Leechman's  orthodoxy, 
this  fit  of  zeal  against  him  tended  much  to  spread 
and  establish  bis  superior  character. 

I  attended  Hutcheson's  class  this  year  with  great 
satisfaction  and  improvement.  He  was  a  good-looking 
man,  of  an  engaging  countenance.  He  delivered  his 
lectures  without  notes,  walking  backwards  and  for- 
wards in  the  area  of  his  room.  As  his  elocution  was 
good,  and  his  voice  and  manner  pleasing,  he  raised 
the  attention  of  his  hearers  at  all  times  ;  and  when 
the  subject  led  him  to  explain  and  enforce  the  moral 
virtues  and  duties,  he  displayed  a  fervent  and  per- 
suasive eloquence  which  was  irresistible.  Besides  the 
lectures  he  gave  through  the  week,  he,  every  Sunday 
at  six  o'clock,  opened  his  class-room  to  whoever  cbose 
to  attend,  when  he  delivered  a  set  of  lectures  on 
Grotius  de  veritcUe  Rdigionis  ChristiancB,  which, 
though  learned  and  ingenious,  were  adapted  to  every 
capacity  ;  for  on  that  evening  he  expected  to  be 
attended,  not  only  by  students,  but  by  many  of  the 
people  of  the  city;  and  he  was  not  disappointed,  for 
this  free  lecture  always  drew  crowds  of  attendants. 

Besides  Hutcheson  and  Leechman,  there  were  at  that 

■  Cambudaaifi  Wari:  Rerivak  in  the  P&risli  of  Camlmskiig  in  IahstIe- 
■hire  in  the  jenr  1742.  Tttej  were  the  occmdon  of  &buiiduit  controrerejr ; 
but  the  fullest  account  ol  them  will  be  found  in  Narralive  <^  Ihe  uira- 
ordinaiy  Wort  i^lkt  Spirit  ofOod  at  CambiuUmg,  KU^ylh,  ic,  written  by 
tir  Jame*  Eobe  aod  othen. — Ed. 


izecy  Google 


■  GLASGOW   PEOFEaSOEa — SIMSON".  71 

period  several  eminent  profesaore  in  that  universitj  ; 
particularly  Mr  Hobert  Simson,  the  great  mathema- 
tician,  and  Mr  Alexander  Bunlop,  the  Professor  of 
Greek.  The  last,  besides  his  eminence  as  a  Greek 
scholar,  was  distinguished  by  his  strong  good  sense 
and  capacity  for  business ;  and  being  a  man  of  a  lead- 
ing mind,  was  supposed,  with  the  aid  of  Hutcheson, 
to  direct  and  manage  all  the  afTairs  of  the  Uniyersity 
(for  it  is  a  wealthy  corporation,  and  has  much  busi- 
ness), besides  the  charge  of  presiding  over  literature, 
and  maintaining  the  discipline  of  the  College. 

One  difference  I  remarked  between  this  University 
and  that  of  Edinburgh,  where  I  had  been  bred,  which 
was,  that  although  at  that  time  there  appeared  to  be  a 
marked  superiority  in  the  best  sdiolars  and  most  dUi- 
gent  students  of  Edinburgh,  yet  in  Glasgow,  learning 
seemed  to  be  an  object  of  more  importance,  and  the 
habit  of  application  was  much  more  general.  Besides 
the  instruction  I  received  from  Drs  Hutcheson  and 
Leechman,  I  derived  much  pleasure,  as  well  as  enlarge- 
ment of  skill  in  the  Greek  language,  from  Mr  Dunlop's 
translations  and  criticisms  of  the  great  tragic  writers 
in  that  language.  I  likewise  attended  the  Professor 
of  Hebrew,  a  Mr  Morthland,  who  was  master  of  his 
business.  I  had  neglected  that  branch  in  Edinburgh, 
the  professor  being  then  superanuuatfid. 

In  the  second  week  I  was  in  Glasgow  I  went  to  the 
dancing  assembly  with  some  of  my  new  acquaintance, 
and  was  there  introduced  to  a  married  lady  who 
claimed  kindred  with  me,  her  mother's  name  being 


izecy  Google 


72  GLASGOW  SOCIETY. 

Carlyle,  of  the  Limekiln  family.  She  carried  me  home 
to  6up  with  her  that  night,  with  a  brother  of  hers, 
two  years  younger  than  me,  and  some  other  young 
people.  This  was  the  commencement  of  an  intimate 
friendship  that  lasted  during  the  whole  of  the  lady's 
life,  which  was  four  or  five  and  twenty  years.  She 
was  connected  with  all  the  best  families  in  Glasgow 
and  the  country  round.  Her  husband  was  a  good  sort 
of  man,  and  very  opulent ;  and  as  they  had  no  chil- 
dren, he  took  pleasure  in  her  exercising  a  genteel 
hospitality.  I  became  acquainted  with  all  the  best 
families  in  the  town  by  this  lady's  means  ;  and  by  a 
letter  I  had  procured  from  my  friend  James  Edgar, 
afterwards  a  Commissioner  of  the  Customs,  I  also  soon 
became  well  acquainted  with  all  the  young  ladies  who 
Uved  in  the  College.  He  had  studied  law  the  preced- 
ing year  at  Glasgow,  under  Professor  Hercules  Lind- 
say, at  that  time  of  some  note.  On  asking  him  for  a 
letter  of  introduction  to  some  one  of  his  companions, 
he  gave  me  one  to  Miss  Mally  CampbeU,  the  daughter 
of  the  Principal ;  and  when  I  seemed  surprised  at 
his  choice,  he  added  that  I  would  find  her  not  only 
more  beautiful  than  any  woman  there,  but  more 
sensible  and  friendly  than  all  the  professors  put  to- 
gether, and  much  more  useful  to  me.  This  I  found  to 
be  literally  tnie. 

The  city  of  Glasgow  at  this  time,  though  very  in- 
dustrious, wealthy,  and  commercial,  was  far  inferior 
to  what  it  afterwards  became,  both  before  and  after 
the  failure  of  the  Virginia  trade.     The  modes  of  life. 


izecy  Google 


GLASGOW   SOCIETY.  73 

too,  and  manners,  were  different  from  what  they  are 
at  present.  Their  chief  branches  were  the  tobacco 
trade  with  the  American  colonies,  and  sugar  and  rum 
with  the  West  India.  There  were  not  manufacturers 
sufficient,  either  there  or  at  Paisley,  to  supply  an  out- 
ward-bound cargo  for  Virginia.  For  this  purpose  they 
were  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  Manchester.  Manu- 
factures were  in  their  infancy.  About  this  time  the 
inkle  manufactory  was  first  begun  by  Ingram  &  Glas- 
ford,  and  was  shown  to  strangers  as  a  great  curiosity. 
But  the  merchants  had  industry  and  stock,  and  the 
habits  of  business,  and  were  ready  to  seize  with  eager- 
ness, and  pi-osecute  with  vigour,  every  new  object  in 
commerce  or  manufactures  that  promised  success. 

Few  of  them  could  be  called  learned  merchants  ; 
yet  there  was  a  weekly  club,  of  which  a  Provost  Coch- 
rane was  the  founder  and  a  leading  member,  in  which 
their  express  design  was  to  inquire  into  the  nature  and 
principles  of  trade  in  all  its  branches,  and  to  communi- 
cate their  knowledge  and  views  on  that  subject  to  each 
other.  I  was  not  acquainted  with  Provost  Cochrane 
at  this  time,  but  I  observed  that  the  members  of  this 
society  had  the  highest  admiration  of  his  knowledge 
and  talents.  I  became  well  acquainted  with  him 
twenty  years  afterwards,  when  Drs  Smith  and  Wight 
were  members  of  the  club,  and  was  made  sensible  that 
too  much  could  not  be  said  of  his  accurate  and  exten- 
sive knowledge,  of  his  agreeable  manners,  and  collo- 
quifd  eloquence.  Dr  Smith  acknowledged  his  obliga: 
tions  to  this  gentleman's  information,  when  he  was 


oy  Google 


74  GLASGOW  SOCIETY. 

collectiDg  materials  for  his  WeaUk  of  Nations ;  and 
the  junior  merchants  who  have  flourished  since  his 
time,  and  extended  their  commerce  far  beyond  what 
was  then  dreamt  of,  confess,  with  respectful  remem- 
brance, that  it  was  Andrew  Cochrane  who  first  opened 
and  enlarged  their  views.* 

It  was  not  long  before  I  was  well  established  in  dose 
intimacy  with  many  of  my  fellow-students,  and  soon 
felt  the  superiority  of  an  education  in  the  College  of 
Edioburgh ;  not  in  point  of  knowledge,'  or  acquire- 
ments in  the  languages  or  sciences,  but  in  know- 
ledge of  the  world,  and  a  certain  manner  and  ad- 
dress that  can  only  be  attained  in  the  capital  It 
must  be  confessed  that  at  this  time  they  were  far 
behind  in  Glasgow,  not  only  in  their  manner  of  living, 
but  in  those  accomplishments  and  that  taste  that  be- 
long to  people  of  opulence,  much  more  to  persons  of 
education.  There  were  only  a  few  families  of  ancient 
citizens  who  pretended  to  be  gentlemen ;  and  a  few 
others,  who  were  recent  settlers  there,  who  had  ob- 
tained wealth  and  consideration  in  trade.  The  rest 
were  shopkeepers  and  mechanics,  or  successful  pedlars, 
who  occupied  large  warerooms  full  of  manufactures  of 
all  sorts,  to  furnish  a  cargo  to  Virginia.  It  was  usual 
for  the  sons  of  merchants  to  attend  the  College  for  one 
or  two  years,  and  a  few  of  them  completed  their 
academical  education.  In  this  respect  the  females 
were    still  worse  o^   for  at  that  period  there   was 

'  *  Far  iufornuttioa  reguiling  Cochrane,  Simaon,  and  the  other  Olugow 
oalebritiee  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  the  reader  ii  refeit«d  to  Qltuffou  and 
iU  Chibt,  by  Dr  Strang,  and  to  t^e  CochroM  CorraponcUnce,  printed  in  1836 
for  the  Maitlotid  Club.  —  En. 


oy  Google 


GLASGOW   SOCIETY.  75 

neither  a  teacher  of  French  nor  of  music  in  the  town. 
The  consequence  of  this  waa  twofold ;  first,  the  young 
ladies  were  entirely  without  accomplishments,  and  in 
general  had  nothing  to  recommend  them  but  good 
looks  and  fine  clothes,  for  their  manners  were  un- 
gainly. Secondly,  the  few  who  were  distinguished 
drew  all  the  young  men  of  sense  and  taste  about  them ; 
for,  being  void  of  frivolous  accomplishments,  which  in 
some  respects  make  all  women  equal,  they  trusted 
only  to  superior  understanding  and  wit,  to  natural 
elegance  and  unaffected  manners. 
■  There  never  was  but  one  concert  during  the  two 
winters  I  was  at  Glasgow,  and  that  waa  given  by 
■Walter  Scott,  Esq.  of  Harden,  who  was  himself  an 
eminent  performer  on  the  violin  ;  and  his  band  of 
assistants  consisted  of  two  danciDg-school  fiddlers 
and  the  town-waits. 

The  manner  of  living,  too,  at  this  time,  was  but 
coarae  and  vulgar.  Very  few  of  the  wealthiest  gave 
dinners  to  anybody  but  English  riders,  or  their  own 
relations  at  Christmas  holidaya  There  were  not  half- 
a-dozen  families  in  town  who  had  men-servants  ;  some 
of  those  were  kept  by  the  professors  who  had  boarders. 
There  were  neither  post-chaises  nor  hackney-coaches 
in  the  town,  and  only  three  or  four  sedan-chairs  for 
carrying  midwives  about  in  the  night,  and  old  ladies  to 
church,  or  to  the  dancing  assemblies  once  a-fortnight. 

The  principal  merchants,  fatigued  with  the  morn- 
ing's business,  took  an  early  dinner  with  their  families 
at  home,  and  then  resorted  to  the  coffeehouse  or  tavern 
to  read  the  newspapers,  which  they  generally  did  in 

Digitizecy  Google 


76  GLASGOW    CLUBS. 

companies  of  four  or  five  in  separate  rooms,  over  a 
bottle  of  claret  or  a  bowl  of  punch.  But  they  never 
staid  supper,  but  always  went  home  by  nine  o'clock, 
without  company  or  further  amusement.  At  last  an 
areh  fellow  from  Dublin,  a  Mr  Cockaine,  came  to  be 
master  of  the  chief  coffeehouse,  who  seduced  them 
gradually  to  stay  supper  by  placing  a  few  nice  cold 
thiugs  at  £rst  on  the  table,  as  relishers  to  the  wine, 
till  he  gradually  led  them  on  to  bespeak  fine  hot  sap- 
pers, and  to  remain  till  midnight. 

There  was  an  order  of  women  at  that  time  in  Glas- 
gow, who,  being  either  young  widows  not  wealthy,  or 
young  women  unprovided  for,  were  set  up  in  small 
grocery-shops  in  various  parts  of  the  town,  and  gene- 
rally were  protected  and  countenanced  by  some  credi- 
table merchant.  In  their  back  shops  much  time  and 
money  were  consumed- ;  for  it  being  customary  then 
to  drink  drams  and  white  wine  in  the  forenoon,  the 
tipplers  resorted  much  to  those  shops,  where  there  were 
bedrooms  ;  and  the  patron,  with  his  friends,  frequently 
passed  the  evening  there  also,  as  taverns  were  not  fre- 
quented by  persons  who  afl'ected  characters  of  strict 
decency. 

I  was  admitted  a  member  of  two  clubs,  one  entirely 
literary,  which  was  held  in  the  porter's  lodge  at  the 
College,  and  where  we  criticised  books  and  wrote 
abridgements  of  them,  with  critical  essays ;  and  to 
this  society  we  submitted  the  discourses  which  we 
were  to  deliver  in  the  Divinity  Hall  in  our  turns,  when 
we  were  appointed  by  the  professor.    The  other  club 


oy  Google 


GLASGOW  CLUBS.  77 

met  in  Mr  DugaWs  tavern  near  the  Crosa,  weekly, 
and  admitted  a  mixture  of  young  gentlemeii,  who 
were  not  intended  for  the  study  of  theology.  There 
met  there  John  Bradefoot,  afterwards  minister  of  Dun- 
sire  ;  James  Leslie,  of  Kilmarnock  ;  John  Robertson, 
of  Dunblane ;  James  Hamilton,  of  Paisley ;  and  Ro- 
bert Lawson,  of  London  Wall.  There  also  came  some 
young  merchants,  such  as  Bobin  Bogle,  my  relation  ; 
James  and  George  Anderson,  William  Sellers  and 
Robin  Craig.  Here  we  drank  a  little  pjinch  after  our 
beefsteaks  and  pancakes,  and  the  expense  never  ex- 
ceeded Is.  6d.,  seldom  Is. 

Our  conversation  was  almost  entirely  literary;  and 
we  were  of  such  good  fame,  that  some  ministers  of  the 
neighbourhood,  when  occasionally  in  Glasgow,  fre- 
quented our  club.  Hyndman  had  been  twice  intro- 
duced by  members  ;  and  being  at  that  time  passing 
his  trials  as  a  probationer  before  that  presbytery  in- 
which  his  native  town  of  Greenock  lay,  he  had  become 
well  acquainted  with  Mr  Robert  Paton,  minister  of 
Renfrew,  who,  though  a  man  well  accomplished  and  of 
liberal  sentiments,  was  too  much  a  man  of  worth  and 
principle  not  to  be  offended  by  licentious  manners  in 
students  of  divinity.  Hyndman,  by  way  of  gaining 
favour  with  this  man,  took  occasion  to  hint  to  him 
to  advise  his  nephew,  Robert  Lawson,  not  to  fre- 
quent our  club,  as  it  admitted  and  encouraged  conver- 
sation not  suitable  to  the  profession  we  were  to  follow. 
He  mentioned  two  instances,  one  of  which  Lawson  said 
was  false,  and  the  other  disguised  by  exaggeration. 


oy  Google 


78  GLASGOW  SOCIETY. 

Lawaon,  who  was  a  lad  of  pure  morals,  told  me  this  ; 
and  as  the  best  antidote  to  this  injurious  impression, 
which  had  been  made  chiefly  against  me,  I  begged  him 
to  let  his  uncle  know  that  I  would  accept  of  the  in- 
vitation he  had  given  through  him,  to  pass  a  night  or 
two  with  him  at  Renfrew.  We  accordingly  went  next 
Sattmiay,  and  met  with  a  gracious  reception,  and  staid 
aU  next  day  and  heard  him  preach,  at  which  he  was 
thought  to  excel  (though  he  was  almost  the  only  person 
who  read  in  those  days,  in  which  he  truly  excelled); 
and  being  a  very  handsome  man,  his  delivery  much 
enhanced  the  value  of  his  composition.  We  heard  him 
read  another  sermon  at  night  in  his  study,  with  much 
satisfaction,  as  he  told  us  it  was  one  of  his  best,  and 
was  a  good  model  ;  to  this  we  respectfully  assented, 
and  the  good  man  was  pleased.  When  we  took  leave 
on  Monday  morning,  he  politely  requested  another 
visit,  and  said  to  me,  with  a  smile,  he  was  now  forti- 
fied against  tale-bearers.  These  societies  contributed 
much  to  our  improvement ;  and  as  moderation  and 
early  hours  were  inviolable  niles  of  both  institutions, 
they  served  to  open  and  enlarge  our  minds. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  session,  however,  I  was 
introduced  to  a  club  which  gave  me  much  more  sat- 
isfaction— I  mean  that  of  Mr  Eolwrt  Simson,  the  cele- 
brated Professor  of  Mathematica  Mr  Robert  Dick, 
Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy,  an  old  friend  of  my 
father's,  one  evening  after  I  had  dined  with  him,  said 
he  was  going  to  Mr  Robert's  club,  and  if  I  had  a 
mind,  he  would  take  me  there  and  introduce  me.    I 


oy  Google 


GLASGOW  SOCIETY.  79 

readily  accepted  the  honour.  I  had  been  introduced 
to  Mr  Robert  before  in  the  College  court,  for  he  was 
extremely  courteous,  and  showed  civility  to  every 
student  who  fell  in  his  way.  Though  I  was  not  at- 
tending any  of  his  classes,  having  attended  M'Lanrin 
in  Edinburgh  for  three  sessions,  he  received  me  with 
great  kindness  ;  and  I  had  the  good  fortone  to  please 
him  so  much,  that  he  asked  me  to  be  a  member  of 
his  Friday's  club,  which  I  readily  agreed  to.  Mr 
Simaon,  though  a  great  humorist,  who  had  a  very 
particular  way  of  living,  was  well-bred  and  com- 
plaisant, was  a  comely  man,  of  a  good  size,  and  had 
a  very  prepossessing  countenance.  He  lived  entirely 
at  the  small  tavern  opposite  the  College  gate,  kept  by 
a  Mrs  Millar.  He  breakfasted,  dined,  and  supped 
there,  and  almost  never  accepted  of  any  invitations 
to  dinner,  and  paid  no  visits,  but  to  illustrious  or 
learned  strangers,  who  wished  to  see  tlie  University ; 
on  such  occasions  he  was  always  the  cicerone.  He 
showed  the  curiosities  of  the  College,  which  consisted 
of  a  few  manuscripts  and  a  large  collection  of  Boman 
antiquities,  from  Severus'  Wall  or  Graham's  Dyke,  in 
the  neighbourhood,  with  a  display  of  much  knowledge 
and  taste.  He  was  particularly  averse  to  the  com- 
pany of  ladies,  and,  except  one  day  in  the  year,  when 
he  drank  tea  at  Principal  Campbell's,  and  conversed 
with  gaiety  and  ease  with  his  daughter  Mally,  who 
was  idwaya  his  first  toast,  he  was  never  in  company 
with  them.  It  was  said  to  have  been  otherwise  with 
him  in  his  youth,  and  that  he  had  been  much  attached 


oy  Google 


80  ROBERT  S1M80N. 

to  one  lady,  tu  whom  he  had  made  proposals,  but  on 
her  refusing  him  he  became  disgusted  with  the  sex. 
The  lady  was  dead  before  I  became  acquainted  with 
the  family,  but  her  husband  I  knew,  and  must  confess 
that  in  her  choice  the  lady  had  preferred  a  satyr  to 
Hyperion. 

Mr  Simson  almost  never  left  the  bounds  of  the 
College,  having  a  lar^  garden  to  walk  in,  unless  it 
was  on  Saturday,  when,  with  two  chosen  companions, 
he  always  walked  into  the  country,  but  no  farther 
than  the  village  of  Andereton,  one  mUe  off,  where  he 
had  a  dinner  bespoke,  and  where  he  always  treated 
the  company,  not  only  when  he  had  no  other  than  his 
two  humble  attendants,  but  when  he  casually  added 
one  or  two  more,  which  happened  twice  to  myself 
If  any  of  the  club  met  him  on  Saturday  night  at  his 
hotel,  he  took  it  very  kind,  for  he  was  in  good  spirits, 
though  fatigued  with  the  company  of  his  satellites, 
and  revived  on  the  sight  of  a  fresh  companion  or  two 
for  the  evening.  He  was  of  a  mild  temper  and  an 
engaging  demeanour,  and  was  master  of  all  know- 
ledge, even  of  theology,  'which  he  told  us  he  had 
learned  by  being  one  year  amanuensis  to  his  uncle, 
the  Professor  of  Divinity.  His  knowledge  he  de- 
livered in  an  easy  colloquial  style,  with  the  simplicity 
of  a  child,  and  without  the  least  symptom  of  self- 
sufficiency  or  arrogance. 

His  club  at  that  time  consisted  chiefly  of  Hercules 
Lindsay,  Teacher  of  Law,  who  was  talkative  and 
assuming ;  of  James  Moore,  Professor  of  Greek  on 


oy  Google 


SIMSON — MATHEW  STEWART.  81 

the  death  of  Mr  Dunlop,  a  very  lively  and  witty  man, 
and  a  famous  Grecian,  but  a  more  famous  punster ; 
Mr  Dick,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy,  a  very 
worthy  man,  and  of  an  agreeable  temper  ;  and  Mr 
Jaraes  Furdie,  the  rector  of  the  grammar-school,  who 
had  not  much  to  recommeod  him  but  his  being  an 
adept  in  grammar.  Having  been  asked  to  see  a 
famous  comet  that  appeared  this  winter  or  the  fol- 
lowing, through  Professor  Dick's  telescope,  which  waa 
the  best  in  the  College  at  that  time,  when  Mr  Purdie 
retired  from  taking  his  view  of  it.,  he  turned  to  Mr 
Simson,  and  said,  "  Mr  Robert,  I  believe  it  is  hio  or 
kcEc  cometa,  a  comet."  To  settle  the  gender  of  the 
Latin  was  all  he  thought  of  this  great  and  uncommon 
phenomenon  of  nature. 

Mr  Simson's  most  constant  attendant,  however, 
and  greatest  favourite,  was  his  own  scholar,  Mr 
Mathew  Stewart,  afterwards  Professor  of  Mathematics 
in  the  College  of  Edinburgh,  much  celebrated  for  his 
profound  knowledge  in  that  science.  During  the 
course  of  summer  he  was  ordained  minister  of  Eose- 
neath,  but  resided  during  the  winter  iu  Glasgow  Col- 
lege. He  was  of  an  amiable  disposition  and  of  a 
most  ingenuous  mind,  and  was  highly  valued  in  the 
society  of  Glasgow  University;  but  when  he  was 
preferred  to  a  chair  in  Edinbiirgh,  being  of  diminu^ 
tive  stature  and  of  an  ordinary  appearance,  and 
having  withal  an  embarrassed  elocution,  he  was  not 
able  to  bring  himself  into  good  company  ;  and  being 
left  out  of  the  society  of  those  who  should  have  seen 


oy  Google 


through  the  shell,  and  put  a  due  value  on  the  kernel, 
he  fell  into  company  of  an  inferior  sort,  and  adopted 
their  habits  with  too  great  facility. 

With  this  club,  and  an  accidental  stranger  at 
times,  the  great  Mr  Eobert  Sim'son  relaxed  his  mind 
every  evening  from  the  severe  studies  of  the  day;  for 
though  there  was  properly  but  one  club  night  in  the 
week,  yet,  aa  he  never  failed  to  be  there,  some  one  or 
two  commonly  attended  him,  or  at  least  one  of  the 
two  minions  whom  he  could  command  at  any  time,  as 
he  paid  their  reckoning. 

The  fame  of  Mr  Hutcheson  had  filled  the  College 
with  students  of  philosophy,  and  Leechman's  high 
character  brought  all  the  students  of  divinity  from 
the  western  provinces,  as  Hutcheson  attracted  the 
Irish..  There  were  sundry  young  gentlemen  from 
Ireland,  with  their  tutors,  one  of  whom  was  Archibald 
M'Laine,  pastor  at  the  Hague,  the  celebrated  trans- 
lator of  Mosheim's  Ecclesiastical  History  (who  had 
himself  been  bred  at  Glasgow  College).  With  him 
I  became  better  acquainted  next  session,  and  I  have 
often  regretted  since  that  it  has  never  been  my  lot 
to  meet  him  during  the  many  times  I  have  been  for 
months  in  London,  as  his  enlightened  mind,  engaging 
manners,  and  animated  conversation,  gave  reason  to 
hope  for  excellent  fruit  when  he  arrived  at  maturity. 
There  were  of  young  men  of  fashion  attending  the 
College,  Walter  Lord  Blantyre,  who  died  young ;  Sir 

Kennedy,  and  bis  brother  David,  afterwards 

Lord   Caasilis ;    Walter    Scott    of   Harden ;    James 


oy  Google 


FELLOW-STUDENTS.  83 

Murray  of  Broughton ;  and  Dunbar  Hamilton,  after- 
wards Earl  of  Selkirk.  The  education  of  tliis  last 
gentleman  had  been  marred  at  an  English  academy 
in  Yorkshire.  When  his  father,  the  Hon.  Basil  Hamil- 
ton, died,  he  came  to  Glasgow,  but  finding  that  he 
was  80  HI  founded  in  Latin  as  to  be  unfit  to  attend 
a  public  class,  he  had  resolution  enough,  at  the  ago 
of  fifteen,  to  pass  seven  or  eight  hours  a-day  with 
Purdie  the  grammarian  for  the  greater  part  of  two 
years,  when,  having  acquired  Latin,  he  took  James 
Moore,  the  Greek  scholar,  for  his  private  tutor, 
fitted  up  rooms  for  himself  in  the  College,  and  lived 
there  with  Moore  in  the  most  retired  manner,  visiting 
nobody  but  Miss  M.  Campbell,  and  letting  nobody  in 
to  him  but  Lord  Blantyre  and  myself,  as  I  was  his 
distant  relation.  In  this  manner  he  lived  for  ten 
years,  hardly  leaving  the  College  for  a  few  weeks  in 
summer,  till  he  had  acquired  the  ancient  tongues  in 
perfection,  and  was  master  of  ancient  philosophy: 
the  effect  of  which  was,  that  with  much  rectitude  and 
good  intention,  and  some  talent,  he  came  into  the 
world  more  fit  to  be  a  Professor  than  an  Earl. 

There  was  one  advantage  I  derived  from  my  Edin- 
burgh education,  which  set  me  up  a  little  in  the  eyes 
of  my  equals,  though  I  soon  tired  of  the  employment. 
Professor  Leechman  devoted  one  evening  every, week 
from  five  to  eight  to  conversation  with  his  students, 
who  assembled  on  Fridays  about  six  or  seven  together, 
and  were  first  received  in  the  Professor's  own  library. 
But  Dr  Leechman  was  not  able  to  carry  on  common 


oy  Google 


81  GLASGOW  PROFESSOBS. 

converBatiou,  and  when  he  spoke  at  all,  it  was  a  short 
lecture.  This  was  therefore  a  very  dull  meeting,  and 
everybody  longed  to  be  called  in  to  tea  with  Mrs 
Leechman,  whose  talent  being  different  from  that  of 
her  husband,  she  was  able  to  maintain  a  continued 
conversation  on  plays,  novels,  poetry,  and  the  fashions. 
The  rest  of  the  lads  being  for  the  most  part  raw  and 
awkward,  after  tr^'ing  it  once  in  their  tuma,  they  be- 
came silent,  and  the  dialogue  rested  between  the  lady 
and  me.  When  she  observed  this,  she  requested  me 
to  attend  as  her  assistant  every  night.  I  did  so  for  a 
little  whUe,  but  it  became  too  intolerable  not  to  be 
soon  given  up. 

What  Dr  Leechman  wanted  in  the  talent  for  con- 
versation was  fully  compensated  by  bis  ability  as  a 
Professor,  for  in  the  chair  he  shone  with  great  lustre. 
It  was  owing  to  Hutcheson  and  him  that  a  new  school 
was  formed  in  the  western  provinces  of  Scotland,  where 
the  clergy  till  that  period  were  narrow  and  bigoted, 
and  had  never  ventured  to  range  in  their  mind  beyond 
the  bounds  of  strict  orthodoxy.  For  though  neither 
of  these  professors  taught  any  heresy,  yet  they  opened 
and  enlarged  the  minds  of  the  students,  which  soon 
gave  them  a  turn  for  free  inquiry;  the  result  of  which 
was,  candour  and  liberality  of  sentiment.  From  ex- 
perience, this  freedom  of  thought  was  not  found  so 
dangerous  as  might  at  first  be  apprehended ;  for  though 
the  daring  youth  made  excursions  into  the  unbounded 
regions  of  metaphysical  perplexity,  yet  all  the  judicious 
soon  returned  to  the  lower  sphere  of  long-established 
truths,  which  they  found  not  only  more  subservient  to 

Digitizecy  Google 


LEECHMAN   AND   HUTCHESON.  85 

the  good  order  of  society)  but  Deceasary  to  fix  their 
own  minds  in  some  de^ee  of  stabUity. 

HatchesoD  was  a  great  admirer  of  Shaftesbury,  and 
adopted  much  of  his  writings  into  his  lectures ;  and,  to 
recommend  him  more  to  his  students,  was  at  great 
pains  in  private  to  prove  that  the  noble  moralist  was 
no  enemy  to  the  Christian  religion ;  but  that  all  ap- 
pearances of  that  kind,  which  are  very  numerous  in 
his  works,  flowed  only  from  an  excess  of  generous 
indignation  against  the  fanatics  of  Charles  L's  reign. 
Leechman  and  he  both  were  supposed  to  lean  to 
Socinianism.  Men  of  eense,  however,  soon  perceived 
that  it  was  an  arduous  task  to  defend  Christianity  on 
that  ground,  and  were  glad  to  adopt  more  common 
and  vulgar  principles,  which  were  weU  compacted 
together  in  a  uniform  system,  which  it  was  not  easy 
to  demolish. 

Leechman's  manner  of  teaching  theology  was  excel- 
lent, and  I  found  my  sphere  of  knowledge  in  that 
science  greatly  enlarged,  though  I  had  attended  the 
ProfeSBOi:  in  Edinburgh  pretty  closely  for  two  or  three 
years ;  but  he  copied  the  Dutch  divines,  and,  bad  he 
lived,  would  have  taken  twenty  years  to  have  gone 
through  the  system  which  Dr  Leechman  accomplished 
in  two  years,  besides  giving  us  admirable  lectures  on 
the  Gospels,  on  the  proofs  of  Christianity,  and  the  art 
of  composition.  If  there  was  any  defect,  it  was  in  the 
small  number  of  exercises  prescribed  to  the  students, 
for  one  discourse  in  a  session  was  by  no  means  suffi- 
cient to  produce  a  habit  of  composition  :  our  literaiy 
clubs,  in  some  degree,  supplied  that  defect. 


oy  Google 


THE    OSWALDS. 


I  had  been  called  home  to  Frestonpans  in  January 
to  see  my  brother  James,  who  was  then  dying  of  a 
consumption  ;  he  was  in  his  nineteenth  year,  and  died 
in  March.  He  had  been  sent  to  London  several  years 
before  to  be  bred  to  business,  but  an  accident  threw 
him  into  bad  health,  and  he  had  been  at  home  for  two 
years  or  more.  He  was  not  a  lad  of  parts,  but  remark- 
ably handsome  and  agreeable.  1  found  him  perfectly 
reconciled  to  a  premature  death. 

I  had  left  my  original  companions  at  Edinburgh, 
who  had  every  kind  of  merit  to  create  attachment ; 
but  I  found  a  few  in  Glasgow  University  who  in  some 
degree  supplied  their  places,  who  were  worthy  and 
able  young  men,  and  afterwards  filled  their  ranks 
in  society  with  credit,  though  they  had  neither  the 
strength  nor  the  polish  of  the  Blairs,  and  Bobertsons, 
and  Fergusons,  and  Homes.  Near  the  end  of  the  ses- 
sion I  made  an  acquaintance  with  a  young  gentleman, 
which  next  year  grew  into  the  strictest  friendship. 
This  was  William  Sellar,  then  an  apprentice  in  his 
third  or  fourth  year  with  the  Oswalds,  at  that  time 
among  the  most  eminent  merchants  in  Glasgow.  He 
was  the  son  of  a  Writer  to  the  Signet  in  Edinburgh, 
had  been  two  or  three  years  at  the  College  there,  was 
handsome  and  well-bred,  and  of  very  agreeable 
manners.  Though  not  learned,  he  had  a  philosophical 
and  observing  mind,  and  was  shrewd  in  discerning 
charactera.  This  young  man,  my  junior  by  a  year  or 
two,  attached  himself  to  me  on  our  first  acquaintance, 
and  I  soon  repaid  him  with  my  affection,  for  I  found 


oy  Google 


THE   OSWALDS.  87 

that  the  qualities  of  his  heart  were  not  inferior  to 
those  of  his  understanding.  He  was  daily  conversant 
with  the  principal  merchants,  as  I  was  with  the  stu- 
dents and  menabers  of  the  University,  on  whom  our 
observations  were  a  great  source  of  instructive  enter- 
tainment. He  had  the  celebrated  Jenny  Fall  {after- 
wards Lady  Anstruther),  a  coquette  and  a  beauty,  for 
mouths  together  in  the  house  with  him  ;  and  as  his 
person  and  manner  drew  the  marked  attention  of  the 
ladies,  he  derived  considerable  improvement  from  the 
constant  intercourse  with  this  young  lady  and  her 
companions,  for  she  was  lively  and  clever,  no  less  than 
beautiful.  He  had  also  the  benefit  of  Mr  Bichard 
Oswald's  conversation,  a  man  afterwards  so  much  cele- 
brated as  to  be  employed  by  Government  in  settling 
the  peace  of  Paris  in  1788.  This  gentleman  was 
much  confined  to  the  house  by  sore  eyes,  and  yet  was 
able  to  pass  his  time  almost  entirely  in  reading,  and 
becoming  a  very  learned  and  intelligent  merchant ; 
and  having  acquired  some  thousand  ponnds  by  being 
prize  agent  to  his  cousins,  whose  privateer  had  taken 
a  prize  worth  £15,000,  be  a  few  years  after  this  period 
established  himself  in  London,  and  acquired  a  great 
fortune,  which,  having  no  children  of  his  own,  he  left 
to  the  grandson  of  his  brother,  a  respectable  clergy- 
man of  the  Church  of  Scotland ;  and  thus  founded 
that  family  of  Oswalds,  who  continue  to  flourish  in 
the  shire  of  Ayr. 

I  lived  this  winter  in  the  same  house  with  Dr  Robert 
Hamilton,  Professor  of  Anatomy,  an  ingenious  and 


oy  Google 


88  GLASGOW    PROFESSORS   AND   STUDENTS. 

welt-bred  man  ;  but  with  him  I  had  little  intercourse, 
except  at  breakfast  now  and  then,  for  he  always  dined 
abroad.  He  had  a  younger  brother,  a  student  of 
divinity,  afterwards  his  father's  successor  at  Bothwell, 
who  was  vain  and  showy,  but  who  exposed  himself 
very  much  through  a  desire  of  distinction.  He  was  a 
relation  of  Mrs  Leechman's,  and  it  had  been  hinted  to 
him  that  the  Professor  expected  a  remarkable  discourse 
from  him.  He  accordingly  delivered  one  which  gave 
universal  satisfaction,  and  was  much  extolled  by  the 
Professor.  But,  very  unfortunately  for  Hamilton,  half- 
a-dozen  of  students,  in  going  down  a  street,  resorted 
to  a  bookseller's  shop,  where  one  of  them,  taking  a 
volume  from  a  shelf,  was  struck,  on  opening  the  book, 
to  find  the  first  sermon  from  the  text  he  had  just 
heard  preached  upon.  He  read  on,  and  found  it  was 
verbatim  from  beginning  to  end  what  he  had  heard  in 
the  hall.  He  showed  it  to  his  companions,  who  laughed 
heartily,  and  spread  the  story  all  over  the  town  before 
night — not  soon  enough  to  prevent  the  vainglorious 
orator  from  circulating  two  fine  copies  of  it,  one 
among  the  ladies  in  the  College,  and  another  in  the 
town.  What  aggravated  the  folly  and  imprudence  of 
this  young  man  was,  that  he  was  by  no  means  defi- 
cient in  parts,  of  which  he  gave  us  sundry  specimens. 
His  cousin  and  namesake,  James  Hamilton,  afterwards 
minister  of  Paisley,  was  much  ashamed  of  him,  and 
being  a  much  more  sterling  mui,  was  able  to  keep 
down  his  vanity  ever  after.  He  had  submitted  his 
manuscript  to  the  club,  and  two  or  three  criticisms 


oy  Google 


GLASGOW   PK0FESS0E9   AND   STDDEKTS.  89 

bad  beeD  made  on  it,  but  he  would  alter  aothing. 
After  Dr  Eobert  Hamilton's  death,  which  was  prema- 
ture, a  younger  brother  succeeded  him  in  the  anatomi- 
cal chair,  who  was  very  abia  He  dying  young  also, 
his  sou  was  advanced,  who  was  said  to  have  surpassed 
all  his  predecessors  in  ability.  They  were  descended 
from  the  family  of  Hamiltons  of  Preston,  a  very 
ancient  branch  of  Duke  Hamilton's  family. 

Dr  Johnstone,  who  was  said  to  be  very  able,  was  at 
this  time  Professor  of  Medicine,  but  he  was  very  old, 
and  died  this  year  ;  and  was  succeeded  by  Dr  William 
Cullen,  who  had  been  settled  at  Hamilton.  In  those 
days  there  were  but  few  students  of  physic  in  Glasgow 
University.  Dr  Cullen,  and  his  successor  Dr  Black, 
with  the  younger  Hamiltons,  brought  the  school  of 
medicine  more  into  repute  there. 

In  the  month  of  March  or  April  this  year,  having 
gone  down  with  a  merchant  to  visit  New  Port-Glas- 
gow, as  our  dinner  was  preparing  at  the  iun,  we  were 
alarmed  with  the  howling  and  weeping  of  half-a-dozen 
of  women  in  the  kitchen,  which  was  so  loud  and  last- 
ing that  I  went  to  see  what  was  the  matter,  when, 
after  some  time,  I  leamt  from  the  calmest  among  them 
that  a  pedlar  had  left  a  copy  of  Peden's  Prophecies 
that  morning,  which  having  read  part  of,  they  found 
that  he  had  predicted  woes  of  every  kind  to  the  people 
of  Scotland ;  and  in  particular  that  Clyde  would  run 
with  blood  in  the  year  1744,  which  now  being  some 
months  advanced,  they  believed  that  their  destruction 
was  at  hand.    I  was  puzzled  how  to  pacify  them,  but 


izecy  Google 


90  CLEEICAL  TODE. 

calling  for  the  book,  I  found  that  the  passage  which 
had  terrified  them  was  contained  in  the  forty-fourth 
paragraph,  without  any  dlusion  whatever  to  the  year ; 
and  by  this  means  I  quieted  their  lamentations.  Had 
the  intended  expedition  of  Mareschal  Saxe  been  car- 
ried into  execution  in  that  year,  as  was  intended,  their 
fears  might  have  been  realised. 

Though  the  theological  lectures  closed  in  the  be- 
ginning of  May,  on  account  of  some  accidental  circum- 
stances, I  did  not  get  to  my  father's  till  the  middle  of 
that  month.  My  father's  wish  was,  that  I  should  pass 
through  my  trials  to  be  admitted  a  probationer  in 
summer  1745,  and  leave  nothing  undone  but  the 
finishing  forms,  when  I  returned  in  1746  from  a 
foreign  Protestant  university,  where  I  was  bound  to 
go  by  the  terms  of  the  exhibition  I  held.  I  was 
therefore  to  spend  a  part  of  this  summer,  1744,  in 
visiting  the  clergy  of  the  presbytery  of  Haddington, 
as  the  forms  required  that  I  should  perform  that  duty 
before  I  was  admitted  to  trials. 

I  made  my  tour  accordingly  early  in  summer,  and 
shall  give  a  short  specimen  of  my  reception  and  the 
characters  I  met  with.  I  first  passed  a  day  at  Aber- 
lady,  where  Mr  Andrew  Dickson  was  then  minister, 
the  father  of  Adam  Dickson,  the  author  of  many 
excellent  works  on  agriculture,  Mr  Dickson  was  a 
well-bred  formal  old  man,  and  was  reckoned  a  good 
preacher,  though  lame  enough  in  the  article  of  know- 
ledge, or  indeed  in  discernment.  Among  the  first 
questions  he  put  to  me  was,  "  Had  I  read  the  famous 


izecy  Google 


CLEBICAL  TOUR.  91 

pamphlet,  Christianity  not  founded  on  Argument  f" 
I  answered  that  I  had.  He  replied  that  certainly 
that  elaborate  work  was  the  ablest  defence  of  our  holy 
religion  that  had  been  published  in  our  times ;  and 
that  the  author  of  it,  who  was  \mknown  to  him,  de- 
served the  highest  praise.  I  looked  Burprised,  and 
was  going  to  make  him  an  answer  according  to  my 
opinion,  which  was  that  it  waa  the  shrewdest  attack 
that  ever  had  been  made  on  Christianity.  But  his 
son  observed  me,  and  broke  in  by  saying  that  he  had 
had  some  disputes  with  his  father  on  the  subject,  but 
now  yielded,  and  had  come  in  to  his  opinion :  I  only 
subjoined,  that  whoever  saw  it  in  that  light  must 
subscribe  to  its  superiority.  The  old  gentleman  was 
pleased,  and  went  on  descanting  on  the  great  merit 
of  this  new  proof  of  revealed  religion,  which  was  quite 
unanswerable.  Having  settled  that  point,  there  was 
no  danger  of  my  differing  from  him  in  any  other  of 
his  notions. 

Next  day  I  proceeded  to  Dirleton,  the  neighbouring 
parish,  where  Mr  James  Glen  was  the  incumbent 
This  was  a  man  of  middle  age,  fat  and  unwieldy, 
good-natured  and  open-hearted,  very  social,  though 
quick-tempered  and  jealous.  He  was  a  great  master 
of  the  Deistical  controversy,  had  read  aU  the  books, 
and  never  stopped,  for  it  was  his  first  topic  with  me, 
till  he  completely  refuted  Christianity  not  founded 
on  Argument,  which  he  said  was  truly  very  insidious. 
There  was  not  much  time,  however,  this  day  for 
theology,  as  it  happened  to  be  his  cherry  feast.    There 


oy  Google 


92  CLERICAL  TOUR. 

being  many  fine  trees  of  that  fruit  in  his  garden,  when 
they  were  fnlly  ripe  it  was  hi8  custom  to  invite  acme 
of  his  neighbours  and  their  families  to  pass  the  day 
with  him  and  his  daughters,  and  the  only  son  then 
at  home,  Mr  Alexander  Glen,  who  was  a  student,  and 
two  years  my  junior.  We  were  a  very  large  company, 
among  whom  were  Congalton  of  that  Ilk,  a  very  sin- 
gular gentleman,  of  very  good  parts,  and  extremely 
promising  when  he  passed  advocate,  but  who  had 
become  a  drunken  laird,  though  the  brilliancy  of  his 
wit  frequently  broke  through  the  cloud.  There  were 
likewise  four  Miss  Hepbums  of  Beanston,  who  were 
young,  handsome,  and  gay.  The  old  people  dispersed 
not  long  after  dinner,  and  went  their  several  way^  ; 
Congalton  and  his  swaggering  blades  went  to  the 
village  chaugebouse,  and  remained  there  all  night. 
There  not  being  lodging  in  the  house  for  us  aU,  the 
young  men  remained  as  late  as  they  could  in  the 
parlour,  and  then  had  mattresses  brought  in  to  sleep 
a  while  upon. 

When  I  wished  to  depart  nest  day  with  the  rest  of 
the  company,  the  old  man  protested  against  that,  for 
we  had  not  yet  sufficiently  settled  the  Deistical  con- 
troversy, and  the  foundations  of  moral  sentiment.  I 
consented,  and  as  his  daughters  had  detained  two 
Misses  Hepbums,  I  passed  the  day  very  well  between 
disputing  with  my  landlord  and  walking  about  and 
philandering  with  the  ladies.  When  I  came  to 
leave  him  after  breakfast  the  next  day,  it  was  with 
the  greatest  difficiUty  he  would  part  with  me,  and  not 


oy  Google 


CLERICAL   T0T7R.  '  93 

till  after  he  had  taken  my  solemn  promise  to  come 
soon  back,  as  I  was  the  only  friend  he  had  left  in  the 
world.  I  at  last  escaped,  after  he  had  shed  a  flood  of 
tears.  I  was  uneasy,  and  asked  afterwards  if  he  was 
not  a  very  solitary  man  :  "  No,"  they  said,  "  but  he 
was  of  a  jealous  temper,  and  thought  he  was  hated,  if 
he  was  not  resorted  to  more  than  was  possible." 

The  next  clergyman,  Mr  George  Murray  of  North 
Berwick,  was  in  appearance  quite  the  opposite  of  Mr 
Glen,  for  he  was  a  dry,  withered  stick,  and  as  cold 
and  repulsive  in  his  manner  as  the  other  was  kind 
and  inviting ;  but  he  was  not  the  less  to  be  depended 
on  for  that,  for  he  was  very  worthy  and  sensible, 
though,  at  the  age  of  fifty,  as  torpid  in  mind  as  in 
body.  His  wife,  however,  of  the  name  of  Reid,  the 
former  minister's  daughter,  by  whose  interest  he  got 
the  church,  was  as  swift  to  speak  as  he  was  slow ;  and 
as  he  never  interrupted  her,  she  kept  up  the  conver- 
sation, such  as  it  was,  without  ceasing,  except  that 
her  household  affairs  took  her  sometimes  out  of  the 
room,  when  he  began  some  metaphysical  argument, 
but  dropped  it  the  moment  she  appeared,  for  he  said 
Anny  did  not  like- those  subjects.  Worn  out,  how- 
ever, with  the  fatigue  of  the  cherry  feast,  I  longed  to 
be  in  bed,  and  took  the  first  opportunity  of  a  cessation 
in  Anny's  clapper  to  request  to  be  shown  to  my  room : 
this  was  complied  with  about  eleven  ;  but  the  worthy 
man  accompanied  me,  and  being  at  last  safe  and  at 
liberty,  he  began  a  conversation  on  liberty  and  neces- 
sity, and  the  foundation  of  morals,  and  the  Deistical 


oy  Google 


94  CLEBICAL  TOUK. 

controversy,  that  lasted  till  two  in  the  morning.  I 
got  away  time  enough  next  day  to  reach  Haddington 
before  dinner,  having  passed  by  Atheistaneford,  where 
the  minister,  Mr  Robert  Blair,  author  of  Tlie  Grave, 
was  said  to  be  dying  slowly  ;  or,  at  any  rate,  was  so 
austere  and  void  of  urbanity  as  to  make  him  quite 
disagreeable  to  young  people.  His  wife,  who  was  in 
every  respect  the  opposite  (a  sister  of  Sheriff  Law), 
was  frank  and  open,  and  uncommonly  handsome  ;  yet, 
even  with  her  allurements  and  his  acknowledged 
ability,  his  house  was  unfrequented.  I  passed  on  to 
Haddington,  and  dined  with  Mr  Edward  Stedman,  a 
man  of  first-rate  sense  and  ability,  and  the  leader  of 
the  presbytery.  We  called  on  his  father-in-law, 
Mr  Patrick  Wilkie,  who  had  as  little  desire  to  examine 
young  men  as  he  had  capacity  to  judge  of  their  pro- 
ficiency, so  that  I  had  only  to  pay  my  compliments 
and  pass  an  hour  or  two  with  Stedman,  whom  I  knew 
well  before,  and  who,  with  the  sombre  constrained  air 
of  a  Jesuit  or  an  old  Covenanter,  had  an  enlightened 
and  ardent  mind,  and  comprehended  all  things  human 
and  divine.  From  him  I  went  early  in  the  evening 
to  Mr  Barclay's  at  Moreham,  a  good  sensible  man,  but 
with  not  many  words  or  topics  of  conversation,  for  he 
was  a  great  mathematician  :  with  the  help  of  his  wife 
and  daughter,  however,  we  made  shift  to  spend  the 
evening,  and  retired  at  an  early  hour. 

I  passed  on  next  forenoon  to  Garvald,  where  his 
son-in-law,  Mr  Archibald  Blair,  brother  of  Mr  Robert, 
lived.     He  seemed  as  torpid  as  George  Murray,  and 


oy  Google 


CLERICAL  TOUB.  96 

not  more  enlightened  than  Patrick  Wilkie.  He  con- 
versed none.  As  we  walked  out  before  dinner  to  see 
the  views,  which  were  not  remarkable,  I  thought  I 
might  try  to  examine  him,  and  put  a  question  to  him 
as  we  entered  the  churchyard,  which  he  answered 
when  we  got  to  the  far  end  of  the  glebe.  His  wife, 
however,  made  it  well  up.  This,  with  other  instances, 
convinced  me  that  it  would  have  been  better  if  the 
wives  had  preached,  and  the  husbands  spun. 

From  hence  I  went  to  the  next  manse,  which  was 
Tester,  where  I  had  been  very  frequently  before  with 
John  Witherspoon,  afterwards  the  celebrated  doctor.* 
The  father,  who  had  very  few  topics  to  examine  on, 
as  the  depth  of  his  reading  was  in  the  sermons  of  the 
French  Calvinist  ministers,  which  he  preached  daily, 
was,  besides,  too  la:iy  to  engage  in  anything  so  arduous 
as  the  examination  of  a  student — how  to  eat  and 
drink  and  sleep  being  his  sole  care,  though  he  was  not 
without  parts,  if  the  soul  had  not  been  buried  under 
a  mountain  of  flesh.  The  next  I  went  to  was  old 
Lundie  of  Saltoun,  a  pious  and  primitive  old  man, 
very  respectful  in  his  manners,  and  very  kind.  He 
had  been  bred  an  old  Scotch  Episcopalian,  and  was 
averse  to  the  Confession  of  Faith  :  the  presbytery 
showed  lenity  towards  him,  so  he  did  not  sign  it  to 
his  dying  day,  for  which  reason  he  never  could  be 
a  member  of  Assembly. 

The  last  I  went  to  on  this  tour  was  Mathew  Sim- 
son,  of  Fencaitland,  a  brother  of  Professor  Simson's, 

•  Seo  above,  [i.  ft*. 


izecy  Google 


96  CLEKICAL  TOCE. 

who  had  been  suspended  for  heresy,  and  an  uncle  of 
the  celebrated  Dr  Kobert  Simaon,  both  of  Glasgow. 
Their  father  was  Mr  Patrick  Simsou,  of  Renfrew,  who 
had  been  tutor  to  some  of  the  family  of  Argyle.  Mr 
Mathew  was  an  old  man,  but  very  different  in  his 
manner  from  Mr  Lundie,  for  he  was  frank  and  open 
and  famihar,  as  much  as  the  other  was  reserved  and 
dignified.  He  was  an  excellent  examinator,  for  he 
answered  all  bis  own  questions,  and  concluded  all  with 
a  receipt  for  making  sermons,  which  he  said  would 
serve  as  a  general  rule,  and  answer  well,  be  the  text 
what  it  would.  This  was  to  begin  first  with  an  ac- 
count of  the  fall  of  man,  and  the  depravity  of  human 
nature;  then  a  statement  of  the  means  of  our  recovery 
by  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and,  thu-dly, . 
an  application  consisting  of  observations,  or  uses,  or 
reflections,  or  practical  references  tending  to  make  us 
good  men.  For  my  patient  hearing,  he  made  me  a 
present  of  a  pen-case  of  his  own  turning,  and  added,  if 
T  woiJd  come  and  stay  a  week  with  him  he  would 
teach  me  to  turn,  and  converse  over  the  system  with 
me,  for  he  saw  I  was  tolerably  well  founded,  as  my 
father  was  au  able  Calvinist.  He  said  he  would  order 
his  son  Patrick,  who  was  a  more  powerful  master  of 
the  turning-loom  than  he  was,  to  turn  me  a  nice  snuff- 
box or  egg-cup,  which  I  pleased.  But  Pat  was  lazy, 
and  liked  better  to  go  about  with  the  gun,  from  which 
he  did  not  restrain  him,  as  he  not  only  furnished  his 
sisters  with  plenty  of  partridges  and  hares,  but  like- 
wise gratified  the  Lady  Pencaitlaiid  with  many.   Thus 


oy  Google 


A  JODENEY,  97 

ended  my  preparatory  trial  by  visiting  the  clergy,  for 
with  the  two  or  three  nearer  home  I  was  wdl  ac- 
quainted. 

Early  in  November  this  year,  1744,  I  returned  to 
Glasgow.  As  it  was  a  hard  frost,  I  chose  to  walk,  and 
went  the  first  day  to  my  friend  Mr  Hew  Horn's  at  Foi- 
hall,  near  Kirkliston.  He  had  been  married  for  a  year 
or  two  to  Miss  Inglis,  a  daughter  of  Sir  John  Inglis,  a 
handsome,  agreeable  woman.  I  perceived  that  he  was 
much  changed,  and  thought  him  in  a  very  dangerous 
way.  He  was,  however,  very  cheerful  and  pleasant, 
and  sat  up  with  me  till  eleven  o'clock.  I  breakfested 
with  him  next  morning,  and  then  took  my  leave,  with 
a  foreboding  that  I  should  see  him  no  more,  which 
was  verified,  for  he  gave  way  not  many  months  after- 
wards. In  him  I  lost  a  most  valuable  friend.  I 
walked  to  Whitburn  at  an  early  hour,  but  could  ven- 
ture no  further,  as  there  was  no  tolerable  lodging- 
house  within  my  reach.  There  was  then  not  even  a 
cottage  nearer  than  the  Eirk  of  Shotts,  and  Whit- 
burn itself  was  a  solitary  house  in  a  desolate  country. 

Next  morning  the  firost  was  gone,  and  such  a  deluge 
of  rain  and  tempest  of  wind  took  possession  of  the 
atmosphere,  as  put  an  end  to  all  travelling.  This  was 
on  Thursday  morning ;  and  the  wet  thaw  and  bad 
weather  continuing,  I  was  obliged  to  remain  there  for 
several  days,  for  there  was  in  those  days  neither  coach 
nor  chaise  on  the  road,  and  not  even  a  saddle-horse  to 
be  had.  At  last,  on  Sunday  morning,  being  the  fourth 
day,  an  open  chaise  returning  &om  Edinburgh  to 


izecy  Google 


98  RETtniN  TO  GLASGOW. 

Glasgow  took  me  in,  and  conveyed  me  safe.  I  had 
passed  my  time  more  tolerably  than  I  expected ;  for 
though  the  landlord  waa  ignorant  and  stupid,  hia  wife 
was  a  sensible  woman,  and  in  her  youth  had  been 
celebrated  in  a  song  under  the  name  of  tlie  "  Bouny 
Lass  of  Livingstone,"  They  had  five  children,  but  no 
books  but  the  Bible  and  Sir  Eichard  Blackmore'a  epic 
poem  of  "  Prince  Arthur,"  which  the  landlord  brought 
me  ID  one  day  by  the  name  of  a  song-book,  which  he 
said  would  divert  me ;  and  so  it  did,  for  I  had  not  met 
with  it  before.  The  walls  and  windows  were  all  . 
scrawled  with  poetry ;  and  I  amused  myself  not  a 
little  in  composing  a  satire  on  my  predecessors,  which 
1  also  inscribed  on  the  walls,  to  the  great  delight  of 
my  landlady,  who  showed  it  for  many  years  afterwards 
with  vanity  to  her  travellers.  When  I  came  to  pay 
my  reckoning,  to  my  astonishment  she  only  charged 
me  3a.  6d.  for  lodging  and  board  for  four  days.  I  had 
presented  the  little  girls  with  ribbons  I  bought  from  a 
wandering  pedlar  whohad  taken  shelter  from  the  storm. 
But  my  whole  expense,  maid-servant  and  all,  was  only 
5a. ;  such  was  the  rate  of  travelling  in  those  days. 

I  had  my  lodging  this  session  in  a  college-room, 
which  I  had  furnished  for  the  session  at  a  moderate 
rent.  I  had  never  been  without  a  cough  in  the 
former  winter,  when  I  lodged  in  a  warm  house  in 
King  Street,  opposite  to  what  was  the  butchers'  market 
in  those  days  ;  but  such  waa  the  difference  between 
the  air  of  the  College  and  the  lower  streets  of  Glasgow, 
that  in  my  new  apartment,  though  only  bare  walls, 


oy  Google 


COLLEGE  THKATBICAI^.  99 

and  twenty  feet  by  Beventeen,  I  never  had  cold  or 
cough  all  the  winter.  John  Donaldson,  a  college  8ei> 
vant,  lighted  my  fire  and  made  my  bed  ;  and  a  maid 
from  the  landlady  who  furnished  the  room,  came  once 
a  fortnight  with  clean  linens.  There  were  two  Eng- 
Ibh  Btudents  of  theology  who  lived  on  the  floor  below, 
and  nobody  above  me.  I  again  attended  the  lectures 
of  Professors  Leechman  and  Hutcheson,  with  much 
satisfaction  and  improvement. 

Young  Sellar,  whom  1  mentioned  before,  became  my 
most  intimate  &iend  ;  he  came  to  me  whenever  he  was 
at  leisure,  and  we  passed  our  time  very  agreeably  to- 
gether. He  enlarged  my  circle  of  acquaintance  by 
introducing  me  to  the  ladies  whom  he  visited  ;  and  I 
introduced  him  to  my  two  intimates.  Miss  Campbell 
and  Mrs  D.,  who,  he  admitted,  were  superior  to  any  of 
his  former  acquaintance.  In  an  excursion  with  him 
to  Hamilton  the  year  before,  he  had  made  me  ac- 
quainted with  Dr  CuUen,  and  now  that  he  was  como 
to  -Glasgow,  I  improved  that  acquaintance.  I  became 
intimate  with  Dr  M'Lean,  whom  I  mentioned  before, 
and  on  his  suggestion  we  prepared  to  act  the  tragedy 
of  Cato  to  a  select  company  in  the  College.  Our 
parts  were  allotted,  and  we  rehearsed  it  well,  though 
we  never  acted  it  before  an  audience.  M'Lean  and  I 
allotted  the  parts  :  I  was  to  be  Cato ;  he  was  Marcus ; 
our  frifend  Seller,  Juba;  a  Mr  Lesly  was  to  do  Lucius ; 
an  English  student  of  the  name  of  Seddon  was  to  be 
Styphax;  and  Robin  Bogle,Sempronius.  MissCampbell 
was  our  Marcia,  and  Miss  Wood,  Lucia  :  I  have  for- 


oy  Google 


100  FRAITCIS  HUTCHESON. 

got  our  Portiua.  We  rehearsed  it  twice,  but  never 
acted  it.  Though  we  never  acted  our  play,  we  at- 
tained one  of  our  chief  purposes,  which  was,  to  become 
more  intimate  with  the  hidies.  Lord  Selkirk  would 
not  join  us,  though  he  took  much  pleasure  in  instruct- 
ing Miss  Campbell. 

In  our  literary  club  this  session  we  took  to  review- 
ing books  as  a  proper  exercise.  Mr  Thorn,  who  was 
afterwards  minister  of  Grovan,  a  learned  man,  of  a  very 
particular  but  ingenious  turn  of  mind,  though  much 
senior  to  any  of  us,  was  one  of  our  members,  and  had 
great  sway  among  us.  He  had  quarrelled  with 
Hutcheson ;  and  having  heard  me  aay  that  Hutche- 
BOn's  book  on  the  Passions  was  not  intelligible,  he 
assigned  it  to  me,  that  I  might  understand  it  better. 
I  accordingly  reviewed  it  in  a  few  pages,  and  took 
much  pains  to  unravel  certain  intricacies  both  of 
thought  and  expression  that  had  run  through  it :  this 
1  did  with  much  freedom,  though  not  without  respect 
to  the  author.  This  essay  pleased  my  friends ;  and 
one  of  them,  by  Thom's  instigation,  carried  a  copy  of 
it  to  Hutcheson.  He  glanced  it  over  and  returned  it, 
saying  that  the  young  gentleman  might  be  in  the 
right,  but  that  he  had  long  ago  made  up  his  mind  on 
those  subjects,  and  could  not  now  take  the  trouble  to 
revise  them. 

Not  long  after  this,  I  had  certain  proof  of  the  gen- 
tleness and  candour  of  this  eminent  Professor ;  for  when 
I  dehvered  a  discourse  in  the  Divinity  Hall,  it  hap- 
pened to  please  the  Professor  (Leechraau)  so  much,  that 


oy  Google 


PRAM0I8  HUTCHE80N 


he  gave  it  very  liberal  praise,  both  in  public  and  pri- 
vate ;  insomuch  that  it  was  borrowed  by  one  of  his 
minions,  and  banded  about  the  College  with  so  much 
approbation  that  Mr  Hutcheson  wished  to  see  it. 
When  he  had  read  it>  he  returned  it  with  unqualified 
applause  though  it  contained  some  things  which  a 
jealous  mind  might  have  interpreted  as  an  attack  on 
hia  favourite  doctrine  of  a  moral  sense.  His  civility 
was  now  accompanied  with  some  degree  of  confidence. 
I  preserved  my  intimacy  with  my  friends  of  last 
winter,  and  added  a  few  more  families  to  my  ac- 
quaintance, which  made  the  time  pass  very  agreeably. 
I  had  been  introduced  to  Mr  Purdie,  the  rector  of 
the  school,  who  had,  at  North  Berwick,  taught  many 
of  my  young  fiiends  in  the  Lothians,  and  particu^ 
larly  the  whole  name  of  Dalrymple.  He  had  half-a- 
dozen  or  eight  boarders,  for  whom  bis  daughters  kept 
a  very  good  table,  insomuch  that  I  was  often  invited 
to  dinner,  and  became  intimate  in  the  family.  The 
eldest  daughter,  who  was  a  sensible,  prudent  woman, 
and  mistress  of  the  house,  being  about  forty,  sent 
for  me  one  Saturday  morning  in  haste ;  and  when  I 
arrived,  she  took  me  into  a  room  apart  from  her 
sisters,  who  were  girls  under  twenty ;  and  there,  with 
many  tears,  informed  me  that  her  father,  having  been 
much  intoxicated  on  the  Friday  or  Saturday  before, 
had  never  since  been  sober ;  that  he  had  not  at- 
tended the  school  all  the  week,  and  that  he  now  was 
firmly  determined  to  resign  his  office,  as  he  was  sen- 
sible he  could  not  abstain  &om  dram-drinking.    She 


oy  Google 


AN   INCIDENT. 


added  that  he  had  uot  saved  much  money,  having 
been  held  down  by  some  idle  and  wasteful  sons,  and 
that  they  could  ill  afford  to  want  the  emoluments 
of  his  office.  She  concluded  by  telling  me  that  she 
had  previously  infonned  her  father  that  she  was  going 
to  send  for  me,  and  impart  his  secret  to  me  for  advica 
To  this  he  had  not  objected,  and  when  I  was  carried 
to  his  room  he  received  me  with  open  arms,  told  me 
bis  dismal  case  with  tears  and  lamentations,  and  his 
firm  resolution  to  resign,  as  he  was  sensible  he  could 
not  reform,  and  could  no  longer  be  of  usa  He  con- 
cluded by  asking  for  a  dram,  which  was  the  second 
he  had  called  for  before  nine  o'clock.  I  laughed  and 
rallied,  and  was  serious  and  grave  with  him  by  turns, 
and  used  every  argument  I  could  to  break  him  off 
his  habit,  but  to  no  purpose  ;  for  he  answered  all  my 
arguments  by  the  impossibility  of  his  ever  reforming, 
and  consequently  of  ever  appearing,  again  in  the 
world.  He  concluded  with  "  Nelly,  give  me  a  dram," 
which  she  durst  not  refuse,  otherwise  he  would  have 
fired  the  house.  To  have  time  to  think  and  consult 
about  him,  I  went  from  him  to  the  breakfast  parlour. 
When  I  was  leaving  him,  he  prayed  me  to  return  as 
soon  as  possible,  as  be  could  not  bear  his  own 
thoughts  alone. 

When  at  breakfast,  I  thought  of  an  expedient  which 
I  imagined  I  could  depend  upon  for  him,  if  it  took 
effect.  I  communicated  my  plan  to  his  daughter, 
and  she  was  pleased.  When  I  went  to  him  again,  I 
told  him  I  was  truly  sorry  I  could  not  pass  that  day 


oy  Google 


AS   INCIDENT.  103 

with  Mm,  as  I  was  obliged  to  go  to  Stirling,  by  my 
father's  orders,  upon  business,  and  that  I  had  made 
choice  of  that  day,  as  I  could  return  without  missing 
more  than  one  day  of  the  College.  I  addeil  that  I 
had  never  been  there,  and  had  not  been  able  to  find  a 
companion,  for  which  I  was  sorry.  "  Nelly,"  said  he, 
with  great  quickness,  "  do  you  think  I  could  sit  on  a 
hotse  ?  if  I  could,  I  would  go  with  him  and  show  him 
the  way."  I  cajoled  him  on  this,  and  so  did  his 
daughter ;  and,  in  short,  after  an  early  dinner  while 
the  horses  and  a  servant  were  preparing,  we  set  out 
for  Stirling  about  one  o'clock,  I  having  taken  liis 
word  before  his  daugliter,  that  in  all  things  he  would 
comply  with  my  will,  otherwise  I  would  certainly 
return. 

I  had  much  diflSculty  to  get  him  to  pass  the  little 
village  public-houses  which  were  in  our  way,  without 
calling  for  drams.  He  made  this  attempt  half-a-dozen 
times  in  the  first  stage,  but  I  would  not  consent,  and 
besides  promised  him  he  should  have  as  much  wine  as 
he  pleased.  With  much  difiiculty  I  got  him  to  KU- 
syth,  where  we  stopped  to  feed  our  horses,  and  where 
we  drank  a  bottle  of  claret.  lu  short,  I  got  him  to 
Stirling  before  it  was  quite  dark,  in  the  second  week 
of  April,  old  style :  he  ate  a  hearty  supper,  and  we 
had  another  bottle  of  claret,  and  be  confessed  he 
never  slept  sound  but  that  night,  since  he  was  taken 
ill  In  short,  we  remained  at  Stirling  all  Sunday, 
attended  church,  and  had  our  dinner  and  claret,  and 
our  walk  on  the  Castle-hill  in  the  evening.    I  brought 


izecy  Google 


104f  SOCIAL  aKETCHEB. 

him  to  his  own  house  on  Monday  by  five  o'clock. 
The  man's  habit  was  broken ;  he  was  again  of  a  sound 
mind,  and  he  attended  his  school  on  Tuesday  in  per- 
fect health  As  many  of  the  Professors  were  Purdie's 
friends,  this  successful  act  of  kindness  to  him  raised 
me  in  their  esteem,  and  atoned  for  many  levities 
with  which  I  had  been  taxed. 

He  lived  many  years  after  this,  but  did  not  leave 
his  family  independent.  One  of  his  daughters  was 
married  creditably  in  Edinburgh :  the  two  eldest 
camei  to  live  there  after  his  death,  but  were  in  indi- 
gence. In  the  year  1778  I  happened  to  be  for  a 
few  weeks  at  Buxton,  where  I  met  with  Sir  "William 
Gordon,  K.B.,  who  had  been  a  boarder  at  Purdie's  for 
two  or  three  years  before  1 745,  and  who  was  at  Ley- 
den  with  me  in  the  end  of  that  year.  Riding  out 
with  him  one  day,  he  happened  to  ask  me  in  what 
state  Purdie's  family  was  left  1  I  told  him  what  I 
knew,  and  added  that  they  had  a  kind  remembrance 
of  him,  for  that  not  many  months  after  he  had  left 
them,  I  heard  Nelly  say,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  upon 
an  insult  having  been  offered  them  by  some  of  their 
neighbours,  that  they  durst  not  have  done  so  if 
Willy  Gordon  had  been  in  the  house.  He  answered 
that  the  father  had  very  often  licked  him,  but  he  had 
no  resentment,  as  it  was  for  his  advantage,  and  that 
the  daughters  were  good  girls.  He  concluded  by 
offering  me  a  sum  of  money.  I  thought  it  better  to 
accept  of  an  annual  pension  of  £10,  which  he  remitted 
to  them  by  me  for  several  years. 


izecy  Google 


My  friendship  with  Mrs  D.  and  her  brother  never 
impaired,  though,  having  a  more  extended  acquaint- 
ance than  I  had  the  preceding  year,  I  was  frequently 
engaged  when  they  wished  to  have  me  with  them. 

I  became  acquainted  with  Mr  Wood's  family,  where 
there  were  three  or  four  very  agreeable  daughters, 
besides  the  Governor  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  and  Andrew 
the  clergyman,  who  died  rector  of  Gateshead,  by 
Newcastle,  in  the  year  1772,  of  a  fever  which  he  con- 
tracted by  exerting  himself  with  the  utmost  humanity 
to  save  his  parishioners  on  the  fatal  night  when  the 
bridge  of  Newcastle  fell.  Here  it  was  that  I  met 
with  Colonel  Robert  Hepburn  of  Keith  for  the  first 
time  since  we  had  been  at  the  same  class  together  in 
the  year  1736.  We  left  Mr  Wood's  early  in  an  even- 
ing after  drinking  tea,  retired  to  Cockaine's  tavern, 
and  did  not  part  till  near  five  in  the  morning.  Most 
unfortunately  for  me,  I  bad  made  an  appointment 
with  Mr  James  Hogg,  a  probationer,  and  tutor  to  the 
four  sons  of  Sir  John  Douglas  of  Kelhead,  to  ride  ten  or 
twelve  miles  with  them  on  their  way  to  Annandale  ; 
and  I  had  hardly  become  warm  in  bed  when  rap-rap 
he  came  to  my  door,  and  insisted  on  my  getting  up 
and  fulfilling  my  promise.  Never  in  my  life  had  I 
such  reluctance  to  fulfil  any  promise,  for  Hepburn  had 
proposed  to  make  rack  punch  our  beverage  after  sup- 
per, which  I  had  never  tasted  before,  and  which  had 
given  me  the  first  headache  I  had  almost  ever  felt. 
There  was  no  help  for  it.  It  was  a  fine  morning  in  the 
second  week  of  May ;  we  breakfasted  at  Hamilton, 


izecy  Google 


106  SOCIAL  8EBTCBE& 

and  I  rodo  sii  miles  farther  with  them  and  re- 
turned. 

James  Hogg  was  a  maa  of  a  good  heart  and  un- 
common generosity.  Sir  John's  affairs  were  com- 
pletely deranged,  and  he  could  raise  no  money  to 
carry  on  the  education  of  his  boys.  Hogg  had  a  little 
patrimony  of  his  own,  nearly  £200  :  rather  than  his 
pupils  should  suffer,  two  of  whom  were  fit  for  college, 
he  came  to  Glasgow  with  all  the  four,  and  with  a 
trusty  old  woman  of  a  servant :  he  kept  a  small  house 
for  them  in  King  Street,  and  being  an  excellent  econo- 
mist, fed  them  well  at  the  least  possible  expense.  I 
frequently  dined  with  him  and  them,  and  was  aston- 
ished at  his  good  manngement.  This  bo  continued 
all  the  next  year  also,  when  Sir  John  was  sent  to  the 
Tower  of  London  for  rebellious  practices.  This  debt, 
together  with  arrears  of  wages,  was  not  paid  till  many 
years  afterwards,  when  Hogg  was  minister  of  Linlith- 
gow, where  he  died  by  a  fall  from  his  horse  in  spring 
1770.  Had  his  understanding  been  as  strong  as  his 
heart  was  generous,  he  would  have  been  a  first-rate 
character. 

Tn  that  week,  or  that  immediately  following.  Will 
Sellar  and  I,  and  Kobin  Bogle  of  Shettleston,  went 
on  a  party  with  ladies,  two  Miss  Woods  and  Peggy 
Douglas  of  Mains,  a  celebrated  wit  and  a  beauty,  even 
then  in  the  wane.  When  we  came  to  Hamilton,  she 
prayed  us  to  send  a  messenger  a  few  miles  to  bring 
to  us  a  clergyman  of  a  neighbouring  parish,  a  Mr 
Thomas  Clelland.      He  came  to  us  when  we  were 


oy  Google 


SOCIAL  SKETCHES.  107 

viewing  the  romantic  gardens  of  Bamcluch,  which  lie 
between  Hamilton  and  the  Dog  Kennel. 

Thomas  CleUand  was  a  good-looking  little  man,  but 
his  hair  was  becoming  grey,  which  no  sooner  Margaret 
observed,  than  she  rallied  him  pretty  roughly  (which 
was  her  way)  on  his  being  an  old  fusty  bachelor,  and 
on  his  increasing  marks  of  age  since  she  had  seen  him, 
not  more  than  a  year  before.  After  bearing  patiently 
all  the  efforts  of  her  wit,  "  Margaret,"  saya  he,  "  you 
know  that  I  am  master  of  the  parish  register  where 
your  age  is  recordeil,  and  that  I  know  when  you  must 
be  with  justice  called  an  old  maid,  in  spite  of  your 
juvenile  airs."  "  What  care  I,  Tom  'i "  said  she  ;  "  for  I 
have  for  some  time  renounced  your  worthless  sex  :  I 
have  sworn  to  be  Duchess  of  Douglas,  or  never  to 
mount  a  marriage-bed."  This  happened  in  May  1745. 
She  made  her  purpose  good.  When  she  made  this 
prediction  she  was  about  thirty.  It  was  fulfilled  a 
few  years  after.* 

I  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  temper  and 
spirit  of  the  clergy  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Glasgow  a 
second  time  this  year,  by  means  of  a  trial  of  a  clergy- 
man in  the  county  of  Ajt  for  certain  alleged  crimes, 
which  came  by  appeal  before  the  Synod  of  Glasgow. 
The  person  tried  was  a  very  sensible  man,  of  much 
wit  and  humour,  who  had  made  a  butt  of  a  neigh- 
bouring clergyman,  who  was  weak,  and  at  the  same 

*  Margaret,  daughUi'  of  JameB  Douglu  of  Mains,  was  married  in  1768  to 
Archibald,  fimt  and  laat  Duke  of  Douf;laa.  She  di«d  in  1774,  leaving  a  tio- 
ditioiMl  npntattion  for  much  freedom  of  speech  and  action. — £d. 


oy  Google 


108  SOCIAL   SKETCHES. 

time  good-natured,  and  had  all  the  qualities  of  a  bntC. 
He  was  found  out,  however,  to  be  a  man  full  of  deep 
resentment,  and  so  malicious  as  to  turn  frolic  into 
crime.  After  many  very  late  sederunts  of  the  Synod, 
and  at  last  a  hearing  of  the  Qeneral  Assembly,  the 
afTair  was  dismissed.  The  gentleman  was  settled  in 
the  parish  to  which  he  was  presented,  and  many  years 
afterwards  died  minister  of  Glasgow,  where  his  good 
name  had  been  so  much  traduced,  much  regretted ; — a 
caution  to  young  men  of  wit  and  humour  to  beware 
of  fools  as  much  as  knaves. 

I  was  detained  later  at  Glasgow  than  I  would  have 
chosen,  that  I  might  obtain  my  credentials  from  the 
University,  as  by  the  tenor  of  the  Act  of  Bursary  I  was 
obliged  on  this  third  year  to  repair  to  some  foreign 
Protestant  university.  I  had  taken  my  degree  of  A,M. 
at  Edinburgh,  and  had  only  to  get  here  my  certifi- 
cate of  attendance  for  two  years,  and  my  Latin  letter 
recommending  me  to  foreign  academies.  I  must  ac- 
knowledge that  I  had  profited  much  by  two  years' 
study  at  Glasgow  in  two  important  branches — ^viz., 
moral  philosophy  and  theology;  along  with  which 
last  I  received  very  excellent  instructions  on  compo- 
sition, for  Leechman  was  not  only  fervent  in  spirit 
when  he  lectured,  but  ornamented  all  his  discourses 
with  a  taste  derived  firom  hia  knowledge  of  belles 
lettres. 

In  the  months  of  June  and  July  1745,  I  went 
through  most  of  my  trials  in  the  presbytery  of  Had- 
dington, as  my  father  was  resolved  I  should  be  ready 


izecy  Google 


BOCIAI,  BKETOHEa.  109 

to  take  out  my  licence  'vdthin  a  mouth  after  mj 
return  from  abroad.  In  the  month  of  August  I  went 
to  Dumfriesshire,  to  pass  a  few  weeks  there,  and  to 
take  leave  of  my  frienda.  About  the  end  of  that 
month  I  received  orders  from  my  father  to  repair  to 
Drumlanrig  Castl^  to  meet  his  friend  Dr  John  Sin- 
clair, M.D.,  who  was  to  be  some  days  there  on  his 
way  from  Mofiat  to  DumMes,  and  after  that  to  re- 
turn home  as  soon  as  I  could,  as  he  expected  to  be 
home  about  the  18th  of  next  month  with  my  mother 
from  Langton,  near  Dunse,  where  they  were  drinking 
goats'  whey. 

I  accordingly  met  Dr  Sinclair  at  Drumlanrig,  where 
I  had  been  frequently  before  with  my  friend  James 
Ferguson  of  CJraigdarroch,  who  was  then  acting  com- 
missioner for  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Queensberry.  He 
had  been  bred  to  the  law,  but  relinquished  the  bar 
for  this  employment,  which  seated  him  within  a  few 
miles  of  his  own  estate,  which  needed  improvement. 
His  first  lady  was  a  sister  of  Sir  Henry  Nisbet's,  who 
died  young ;  his  second  was  her  cousin,  a  daughter  of 
the  Hon.  Baron  Dalrymple.  Dr  Sinclair  had  been  my 
father's  class-fellow,  and  had  a  great  regard  for  him ; 
he  was  an  elegant  scholar,  and  remarkable  for  his  per- 
fect knowledge  of  the  Latin  tongue,  which  in  those 
days  was  much  cultivated  in  Scotland.  The  profes- 
sota  of  medicine  th^i  taught  in  Latin,  and  Dr  Sin- 
clair was  one  of  that  first  set  who  raised  the  fame  of 
the  school  of  medicine  in  Edinburgh  above  that  of 
any  other  in  Europe.    He  and  Dr  John  Clerk,  the 


izecy  Google 


110  LANDING   OP  PBINCE  CHARLES. 

great  practising  physician,  had  found  Moffat  waters 
agree  with  themselves,  and  frequented  it  every  season 
in  their  turns  for  a  month  or  six  weeks,  and  by  that 
means  drew  many  of  their  patients  there,  which  made 
it  be  more  frequented  than  it  has  been  of  late  years, 
when  there  is  much  better  accommodation. 

I  had  promised  Mr  R.  Bogle  and  his  sister  to  pass 
a  few  days  with  them  at  Moffat,  on  the  road  to  which 
I  passed  one  day  with  my  friend  William  Cunning- 
ham, minister  of  Durisdeer,  the  Duke  of  Qiieens- 
beny'a  parish  church.  He  was  knowing  and  accom- 
plished, and  pleasing  and  elegant  in  his  manners, 
beyond  most  of  the  Scottish  clergymen  of  that  day. 
The  Duchess  of  Queensberry  (Lady  K.  Hyde)  bad 
discovered  his  merit  on  her  visit  to  Scotland,  and  had 
him  constantly  with  her,  so  that  he  was  called  the 
Duchess's  Walking-staff.  From  his  house  I  crossed  to 
Moffat,  about  fifteen  miles  off,  but  did  not  reach  it 
that  night  on  account  of  a  thunder-storm  which  had 
made  the  waters  impassable,  so  that  I  was  obliged  to 
lodge  in  what  they  call  a  shieling,  where  I  was  used 
with  great  hospitality  and  uncommon  politeness  by 
a  young  farmer  and  his  sister,  who  were  then  residing 
there,  attending  the  milking  of  the  ewes,  the  business 
of  that  season  in  a  sheep  country. 

When  I  got  to  Moffat,  I  found  my  expecting  friends 
still  there,  though  the  news  had  arrived  that  the 
Chevalier  Prince  Charles  had  landed  in  the  north  with 
a  small  train,  had  been  joined  by  many  of  the  clan's, 
and  might  be  expected  to  break  down  into  the  low 


izecy  Google 


EDINBdRGH   IN  THE  '45.  Ill 

country,  unless  Sir  John  Cope,  who  was  then  on  his 
march  north,  should  meet  with  them  and  disperse 
them.  1  remained  only  a  few  days  at  Moflat,  as  the 
news  became  more  important  and  alarming  every 
day ;  and,  taking  leave  of  my  friends,  I  got  home  to 
Prestonpans  on  the  evening  of  the  12th  of  September, 
My  father,  &c.,  were  uot  returned,  but  I  was  perfectly 
informed  of  the  state  of  public  affairs  by  many  per- 
sona in  the  place,  who  told  me  that  Prince  Charles 
had  evaded  Sir  John  Cope,  who  found  himself  obliged 
to  march  cfn  to  Inverness,  not  venturing  to  attack  the 
Highlanders  on  the  hill  of  Corry-arrock,  and  M-aa  then 
proceeding  to  Aberdeen,  where  transports  were  Bent 
to  bring  hia  army  by  sea  to  the  Firth.  I  was  also 
informed  that  as  the  Highlanders  were  making  hasty 
marches,  the  city  of  Edinburgh  was  putting  itaelf  in 
some  state  of  defence,  so  as  to  be  able  to  resist  the 
rebels  in  case  of  an  attack  before  Sir  John  Cope 
arrived. 

On  this  news  I  repaired  to  Edinburgh  the  next 
day,  which  was  the  18th,  and,  meeting  many  of  my 
companions,  found  that  they  were  enlisting  them- 
selves in  a  corps  of  four  hundred  Volunteers,  which 
had  been  embodied  the  day  before,  and  were  thought 
necessary  for  the  defence  of  the  city.  Messrs  William 
Robertson,  John  Home,  William  M'Ghie,  Hugh  Ban- 
natync,  William  Cleghom,  William  Wilkie,  George 
Logan,  and  many  others,  had  enlisted  into  the  first  or 
College  Company,  as  it  was  called,  which  was  to  be 
commanded  by  Provost  Drummond,  who  was  expected 


oy  Google 


112  EDINBUEGH  IN  THE  '46. 

to  return  that  day  from  LondoD,  where  he  had  heeai 
for  some  time.  On  the  14th  I  joined  that  company, 
and  had  arms  put  into  my  hands,  and  attended  a 
drill-serjeant  that  afternoon  and  the  next  day  to 
learn  the  manual  exercise,  which  I  had  formerly  been 
taught  by  my  father,  who  had  himself  been  a  Volun- 
teer in  the  end  of  Queen  Anne's  reign,  when  there 
was  an  alarm  about  the  Pretender,  but  were  obliged 
to  hold  their  meetings  in  malt-bams  in  the  night,  and 
by  eaudle-light. 

The  city  was  in  great  ferment  and  bustle  at  this 
time;  for  besides  the  two  parties  of  Whigs  and  Jacob- 
ites— of  which  a  well-informed  citizen  told  me  there 
were  two-thirds  of  the  men  in  the  city  of  the  first 
description,  or  friends  to  Government ;  and  of  the 
second,  or  enemies  to  Government,  two-thirds  of  the 
ladies, — besidra  this  division,  there  was  another  be- 
tween those  who  were  keen  for  preparing  with  zeal 
and  activity  to  defend  the  city,  and  those  who  were 
averse  to  that  measure,  which  were  Provost  Stuart  and 
all  his  friends ;  and  this  appeared  so  plainly  from  the 
Provost's  conduct  and  manner  at  the  time,  that  there 
was  not  a  Whig  iu  town  who  did  not  suspect  that  he 
favoured  the  Pretender's  cause ;  and  however  cau- 
tiously he  acted  in  his  capacity  of  chief  magistrate, 
there  were  not  a  few  who  suspected  that  his  back- 
wardness and  coldness  in  the  measure  of  arming  the 
people,  was  part  of  a  plan  to  admit  the  Pretender  into 
the  city. 

It  was  very  true  that  a  half-armed  regiment  of  new 


izecy  Google 


BDINBUKGH  IN  THE  '45.  118 

raised  men,  with  four  hundred  Yoliinteers  from  the 
city,  and  two  hundred  from  other  plaeea,  might  not 
be  thought  sufficient  for  the  defence  of  the  city,  had 
it  been  serioualy  besieged  ;  yet,  considering  that  the 
Highlanders  were  not  more  than  1800,  and  the  half 
of  them  only  armed — that  they  were  averse  to  ap- 
proach walls,  and  afraid  of  cannon — I  am  persuaded 
that,  had  the  dragoons  proved  firm  and  resolute,  in- 
stead of  running  away  to  Dunbar  to  meet  Sir  John 
Cope,  it  was  more  than  two  to  one  that  the  rebels 
had  never  approached  the  city  till  they  had  defeated 
Cope,  which,  in  that  case,  they  would  not  probably 
have  attempted.  Farther,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  if 
that  part  of  the  Town  Council  who  were  Whigs  had 
found  good  ground  to  have  put  Stuart  under  arrest, 
the  city  would  have  held  out. 

In  this  opinion  of  Stuart  I  was  confirmed,  when  in 
London,  the  following  month  of  April.  I  happened 
to  be  in  the  British  or  Forrest's  Coffeehouse,  I  forget 
which,  in  the  afternoon  of  the  day  when  the  news  of 
the  victory  at  CuUoden  arrived.  I  was  sitting  at  a 
table  with  Dr  Smollett  and  Bob  Smith  {the  Duke  of 
Roxburgh's  Smith),  when  John  Stuart,  the  son  of  the 
Provost,  who  was  then  confined  in  the  Tower,  after 
turning  pale  and  murmuring  many  curses,  left  the 
room  in  a  rage,  and  slapped  the  door  behind  him  with 
much  violence.  I  said  to  my  two  companions,  that 
lad  Stuart  is  either  a  madman  or  a  fool  to  discover 
himself  in  this  manner,  when  his  father  is  in  the 
Tower  on  suspicion.      Smith,  who  knew  him  best, 


oy  Google 


114  THE   VOLUNTEBES  IN  THE   'i5. 

acquiesced  in  my  opinion,  and  added,  that  he  had 
never  Been  him  so  much  beside  himself. 

For  a  few  days  past  M'Laiirin  the  professor  had 
been  busy  on  the  walls  on  the  south  side  of  the  town, 
endeavouring  to  make  them  more  defensible,  and  had 
even  erected  some  small  cannon  near  to  Potterrow 
Port,  which  I  saw.  I  visited  my  old  master  when  he 
was  busy,  who  seemed  to  have  no  doubt  that  he  could 
make  the  walls  defensible  against  a  sudden  attack, 
but  complained  of  wEmt  of  service,  and  at  the  same 
time  encouraged  me  and  my  companions  to  be  dili- 
gent in  learning  the  use  of  arms.  We  were  busy  all 
Saturday,  when  there  arrived  in  town  Bruce  of  Ken- 
nett,  with  a  considerable  number  of  Volunteers,  above 
100  from  his  country,  and  Sir  Kobert  Dickson  with 
130  or  140  from  Musselburgh  and  the  parish  of  In- 
veresk  ;  this  increased  the  strength  and  added  to  the 
courage  of  the  loyal  inhabitants. 

On  Sunday  morning  the  15th,  however,  news  had 
arrived  in  town  that  the  rebel  army  had  been  at  Lin- 
lithgow the  night  before,  and  were  on  full  march  to- 
wards Edinburgh.  This  altered  the  face  of  affairs, 
and  made  thinking  people  fear  that  they  might  be  in 
possession  of  Edinburgh  before  Cope  arrived.  The 
Volunteers  rendezvoused  in  the  College  Yards  before 
ten  o'clock,  to  the  number  of  about  400.  Captain 
Drummond  appeared  at  ten,  and,  walking  up  in  front 
of  the  right  of  bis  company,  where  I  stood  with  all 
my  companions  of  the  corps,  he  addressed  us  in  a 
speech  of  some  length,  the  purport  of  which  was,  that 


izecy  Google 


THE  VOLUMTEEHS  IN  THE  '45.  115 

it  had  been  agreed  by  tbe  Oeneral,  and  the  Officers  of 
the  Crown,  that  the  military  force  should  oppose  the 
rebels  on  their  march  to  Edinburgh,  consisting  of  the 
Town  Guard,  that  part  of  the  new  regiment  who  had 
got  anns,  with  tbe  Volunteers  from  the  country.  What 
he  had  to  propose  to  us  was,  that  we  should  join  this 
force,  and  expose  our  lives  in  defence  of  the  capital  of 
Scotland,  and  the  security  of  our  country's  laws  and  ■ 
liberties.  He  added  that,  as  there  was  a  necessity  for 
leaving  some  men  in  arms  for  the  defence  of  the  city, 
that  any  persona  choosing  the  one  service  rather  than 
the  other  would  bring  no  imputation  of  blame,  but 
that  he  hoped  his  company  would  diatinguish  them- 
selves by  their  zeal  and  spirit  on  this  occasion.  Hiis 
was  answered  by  an  unanimous  shout  of  applause. 

We  were  marched  immediately  up  to  the  Lawn- 
market,  where  we  halted  till  tbe  other  companies  should 
follow.  They  were  late  in  making  their  appearance, 
and  some  of  their  officers,  coming  up  to  us  while  in 
the  street,  told  us  that  most  of  the  privates  were  un- 
willing to  march.  During  this  halt,  Hamilton's  dra- 
goons, who  had  been  at  Leith,  marched  past  our  corps, 
on  their  route  to  join  Gardiner's  regiment,  who  were 
at  tbe  Colt  Bridge.  We  cheered  them,  in  passing,  with 
a  huzzah ;  and  the  spectators  began  to  think  at  last, 
that  some  serious  fighting  was  likely  to  ensue,  though 
before  this  moment  many  of  them  had  laughed  at  and 
ridiculed  the  Volunteers.  A  striking  example  of  this 
we  had  in  our  company,  for  a  Mr  Hawthorn,  a  son  of 
Bailie  Hawthorn,  who  had  laughed  at  his  companions 


oy  Google 


IIG  THE  VOLTINTEERS  IS   THE  '45. 

among  the  Volunteers,  seeing  us  pass  through  the 
Luckenbooths  in  good  order,  aud  with  apparent  mili- 
taiy  ardour,  ran  immediately  up-stairs  to  his  father's 
house,  and,  fetching  hia  fowling-piece  and  his  small 
sword,  joined  us  before  we  left  the  Lawnmarket. 

While  we  remained  there,  which  was  great  part  of 
an  hour,  the  mob  in  the  street  and  the  ladies  in  the 
windows  treated  us  very  variously,  many  with  lamen- 
tation, and  even  with  tears,  and  some  with  apparent 
scorn  and  derision.  lu  one  house  on  the  south  side 
of  the  street  there  was  a  row  of  windows,  fuU  of 
ladies,  who  appeared  to  enjoy  our  march  to  danger 
with  much  levity  and  mirth.  Some  of  our  warm 
Volunteers  observed  them,  and  threatened  to  fire  into 
the  windows  if  they  were  not  instantly  let  down, 
which  was  immediately  complied  with.  In  marching 
down  the  Bow,  a  narrow  winding  street,  the  scene  was 
diflerent,  for  all  the  spectators  were  in  tears,  and  utter- 
ing loud  lamentations ;  insomuch  that  Mr  Kinloch,  a 
probationer,  the  son  of  Mr  Kinloch,  one  of  the  High 
Church  ministers,  who  was  in  the  second  rank  just 
behind  Hew  Ballantine,  said  to  him  in  a  melancholy 
tone, "  Mr  Hew,  Mr  Hew,  does  not  this  remind  you  of  a 
passage  in  Livy,  when  the  Gens  Fabii  marched  out  of 
Eome  to  prevent  the  Gauls  entering  the  city,  and  the 
whole  matrons  and  virgins  of  Rome  were  wringing  their 
hands,  and  loudly  lamenting  the  certain  danger  to 
which  that  generous  tribe  was  going  to  be  exposed  ? " 
"Hold  your  tongue,"  says  Ballantine,  "otherwise  I 
shall  complain  to  the  officer,  for  you'll  discourage  the 


izecy  Google 


THE  VOLUNTEERS  IN  THE  '45.  117 

men."  "  You  must  recoUect  the  end,  Mr  Hew,  omnes 
ad  unum  perteri."  This  occasioned  a  hearty  laugh 
among  those  who  heard  it,  which  beiag  over,  Ballan- 
tine  half  whispered  Kinloch,  "  Robin,  if  you  are  afraid, 
you  had  better  steal  off  when  you  can  find  an  oppor- 
tunity ;  I  shall  not  tell  that  you  are  gone  till  we  are 
too  far  off  to  recover  you." 

We  halted  in  the  Grassmarket,  near  the  West  Port, 
that  the  other  bodies  who  were  to  join  us  might  come. 
On  our  march,  even  our  company  had  lost  part  of 
their  number,  and  none  of  the  other  Volunteers  had 
come  up.  The  day  being  advanced  to  between  twelve 
and  one  o'clock,  the  brewers  who  lived  in  that  end  of 
the  street  brought  out  bread  and  cheese,  and  strong 
ale  and  brandy,  as  a  refreshment  for  us,  in  the  belief 
that  we  needed  it,  in  marching  on  such  an  enterprise. 
While  we  remained  in  this  position,  my  younger 
brother  William,  then  near  fifteen,  as  promising  a 
young  man  as  ever  was  bom,  of  a  fine  genius,  and  an 
excellent  scholar,  though  he  had  been  kept  back  with 
very  bad  health,  came  up  to  me.  He  had  walked 
into  town  that  morning  in  his  anxiety  about  me,  and 
leanuDg  that  I  was  with  the  company  on  our  march 
to  fight  the  rebels,  he  had  run  down  with  great 
anxiety  from  the  house  where  I  lodged,  to  learn  how 
things  really  stood.  He  was  melancholy  and  much 
alarmed.  I  withdrew  with  him  to  the  head  of  a 
neighbouring  close,  and  endeavoured  to  abate  his 
fears,  by  assuring  him  that  our  march  was  only  a 
feint  to  keep  back  the  Highlanders,  and  that  wo 


oy  Google 


118  THE  VOLUNTEEES  IN  THE  '45. 

Bhoald  in  a  little  while  be  ordered  back  to  our  field 
for  exercise  in  the  College.  His  anxiety  began  to 
abate,  when,  thinking  that,  whatever  should  happen, 
it  would  be  better  for  me  to  trust  him  with  a  Por- 
tugal piece  of  thirty-six  shillings  and  three  guineas 
that  I  had  in  my  pocket,  I  delivered  them  over  to 
him.  On  this  he  burst  into  tears,  and  said  I  surely 
did  not  think  as  I  said,  but  believed  I  was  going  out 
to  danger,  otherwise  I  would  not  so  readily  part  with 
my  money.  I  comforted  him  the  best  way  I  could,  and 
took  back  the  greater  part  of  the  money,  assuring  him 
that  I  did  not  believe  yet  that  we  would  be  sent  out, 
or  if  we  were,  I  thought  we  would  be  in  such  force  that 
the  rebels  would  not  face  us.  The  young  man  was  com- 
forted, and  I  gave  him  a  rendezvous  for  nine  at  night. 
"While  we  were  waiting  for  an  additional  force,  a 
body  of  the  clergy  {the  forenoon  service  being  but  ill 
attended  on  account  of  the  ringing  of  the  fire  bell, 
which  ia  the  great  alarm  in  Edinburgh),  who  were  the 
two  Wiaharts,  Wallace,  Glen,  Logan,  Sec,  came  to  us. 
Dr  William  Wishart,  Principal  of  the  College,  was 
their  prolocutor,  and  called  upon  us  in  a  most  pathetic 
speech  to  desist  from  this  rash  enterprise,  which  he 
said  was  exposing  the  flower  of  the  youth  of  Edin- 
burgh, and  the  hope  of  the  next  generation,  to  the  dan- 
ger of  being  cut  off,  or  made  prisoners  aod  maltreated, 
without  any  just  or  adequate  object ;  that  our  num- 
ber added  so  very  Httle  to  the  force  that  was  intended 
against  the  rebels,  that  withdrawing  us  wotUd  make 
little  differeiice,  while  our  loss  would  be  irreparable,  and 


oy  Google 


THE  VOLOMTEEKS  IN  THE  '45.  119 

tbat  at  any  rate  a  body  of  men  in  arms  was  necessary 
to  keep  the  city  quiet  during  the  absence  of  the  armed 
force,  and  therefore  he  prayed  and  besought  the  Volun- 
teers and  their  officers  to  give  up  all  thoughts  of  leav- 
ing the  city  defenceless,  to  be  a  prey  to  the  seditious. 
This  discourse,  and  others  similar  to  it,  had  an  effect 
upon  many  of  us,  though  youthful  ardour  made  us 
reluctant  to  abandon  the  prospect  of  showing  our 
prowess.  Two  or  three  of  the  warmest  of  our  youths 
remonstrated  against  those  unreasonable  speeches,  and 
seemed  eager  for  the  fight.  From  that  moment  I  saw 
the  impropriety  of  sending  us  out,  but  till  the  order 
was  recalled,  it  was  our  duty  to  remain  iu  readiness 
to  obey.  We  remained  for  near  an  hour  longer,  and 
were  joined  by  another  body  of  Volunteers,  and  part 
of  the  new  regiment  that  was  raising.  Not  long 
after  came  an  order  for  the  Volunteers  to  march 
back  to  the  College  Yards,  when  Provost  Drummond, 
who  had  been  absent,  returned  and  put  himself  at  our 
head,  and  marched  us  back.  Iu  the  mean  time  the 
other  force  that  had  been  collected,  with  ninety  men 
of  the  Town  Guard,  &c.,  &c.,  marched  out  to  the  Colt 
Bridge,  and  joined  the  dragoons,  who  were  watching 
the  approach  of  the  enemy.  Some  of  the  Volunteers 
imagined  that  this  manoeuvre  about  the  Volunteers 
was  entirely  Dnimmond's,  and  that  he  had  no  mind 
to  face  the  rebels,  though  he  had  made  a  parade  of 
courage  and  zeal,  to  make  himself  popular.  But  tliis 
was  not  the  man's  character — want  of  personal  courage 
was  not  his  defect.     It  was  civil  courage  in  which  he 


oy  Google 


120        THE  DEFENCE  OF  BDINBUROH. 

failed ;  for  all  his  life  he  had  a  great  deference  to  his 
superiors.  But  I  then  thought  as  I  do  now,  that  his 
offer  to  carry  out  the  Volunteers  was  owing  to  his  zeal 
and  prowess — for  personally  he  was  a  gallant  High- 
lander ;  but  on  better  considering  the  matter,  after  hear- 
ing the  remonstrance  of  the  clergy,  he  did  not  think 
that  he  could  well  be  answerable  for  exposing  so  many 
young  men  of  condition  to  certain  danger  and  uncer- 
tain victory. 

"When  we  were  dismissed  fiiom  the  College  Yards, 
we  were  ordered  to  rendezvous  there  again  in  the 
evening,  as  night  guards  were  to  be  posted  round  the 
whole  city.  Twelve  or  thirteen  of  the  most  intimate 
friends  went  to  a  late  dinner  to  a  Mrs  TurnbuU's, 
then  next  house  to  the  Tron  Church.  Many  thin^ 
were  talked  of  with  great  freedom,  for  the  company 
were  William  M'Ghie,  'William  Cleghorn,  William 
Robertson,  John  Home,  Hugh  Ballantine,  and  I.  The 
other  names  I  have  forgot.  Sundry  proposals  were 
made,  one  of  which  was  that  we  should  march  off 
with  our  arms  into  England,  and  raise  a  volunteering 
spirit ;  or  at  any  rate  that  we  should  join  Sir  John 
Cope's  army,  and  try  to  get  as  many  as  possible  to 
follow  us.  As  I  had  been  separated  from  my  com- 
panions for  two  years,  by  my  attendance  at  Glasgow, 
I  had  less  confidence  to  speak  my  mind,  especially 
as  some  of  my  warm  associates  thought  everybody 
cowardly,  or  a  secret  Jacobite,  who  did  not  agree  with 
them.  However,  perceiving  that  some  of  the  company 
did  not  agree  with  the  chief  speakers,  I  ventured  to 


izecy  Google 


THE  DEFENCE   OF  EDINBURGH.  121 

state,  that  before  we  resolved  to  march  off  with  our 
anns,  we  should  take  care  to  have  a  sufficient  namber 
of  followers ;  for  even  if  it  were  a  lawful  act  to  march 
off  with  our  arms  without  orders,  we  would  appear 
ridiculous  and  contemptible  if  there  were  no  more  of 
us  than  the  present  company,  and  I  guessed  we  could 
not  reckon  on  three  or  four  more.  This  brought  out 
MKirhie  and  Hew  Ballantine,  who  were  considered  the 
steadiest  men  amongst  us.  This  occasioned  a  warm 
altercation,  for  Cleghorn  and  Home,  in  those  days, 
were  very  fiery.  At  last,  however,  it  was  settled  that 
we  should  try,  in  the  course  of  next  day,  to  find  if  we 
could  prevail  on  any  considerable  number  to  follow 
us,  and  if  not,  that  we  should  carry  our  arms  to  the 
Castle,  that  they  might  not  fall  into  the  enemies' 
hands,  and  then  make  the  best  of  our  way  separately 
to  Sir  John  Cope's  army,  and  offer  our  service. 

When  the  night-watch  was  set,  aU  the  company  I 
have  now  mentioned  were  appointed  to  guard  the 
Trinity  Hospital,  iu  Leith  Wynd,  which  was  one  of  the 
weakest  parts  of  the  city.  There  twelve  of  us  were 
placed  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  Alexander 
Scott,  a  young  man  of  spirit,  a  merchant  in  the  city, 
and  not  two  or  three  years  senior  to  the  eldest  of  us. 
Here  we  had  nothing  to  do  all  night  but  make 
reaponses  every  half  hour,  as  the  "All's  well"  came 
round  from  the  other  guards  that  were  posted  at 
certain  distances,  so  that  a  stranger  who  was  ap- 
proaching the  city  would  have  thought  it  was  going 
to  be  gallantly  defended.     But  we  knew  the  contrary ; 


oy  Google 


122  THE  CAPTUEE  OF  EDINBURGH. 

for,  as  Frovost  Stuart  and  all  his  friends  had  been 
against  making  any  preparation  for  defence,  when 
they  yielded  to  the  zeal  of  their  opponents,  they 
hung  a  dead  weight  on  every  measure.  This  we 
were  all  sensible  of,  and  had  now  no  doubt  that  they 
wished  the  city  to  fall  into  the  Pretender's  hands, 
however  carefully  they  might  hide  their  intentions. 

At  one  o'clock,  the  Lord  Provost  and  his  guard 
visited  all  the  posts,  and  found  us  at  Trinity  Hospital 
very  alert.  "When  he  was  gone,  "  Did  you  not  see," 
said  John  Home  to  me,  "  how  pale  the  traitor  looked, 
when  he  found  us  so  vigilant  1 "  "  No,"  I  replied,  "  I 
thought  he  looked  and  behaved  perfectly  well,  and  it 
was  the  light  from  the  lantern  that  made  him  appear 
pale."  When  we  were  relieved  in  the  morning,  I  went 
to  my  lodging,  and  tried  to  get  a  few  hours'  sleep ; 
but  though  the  house  was  down  a  close,  the  noise 
was  so  great,  and  my  spirits  so  much  agitated,  that  I 
got  none. 

At  noon  on  the  16th,  when  I  went  to  the  streets,  I 
heard  that  General  Fowlks  had  arrived  from  London 
early,  and,  by  order  of  General  Guest,  had  taken  com- 
mand of  the  2d  Eegiment  of  Dragoons,  who,  having 
retired  the  night  before  from  Corstorphine,  where  they 
left  only  a  guard,  bad  marched  with  them  to  the  Colt 
Bridge,  a  mile  nearer  than  Corstorphine,  and  were 
joined  by  the  same  body  of  foot  that  had  been  with 
them  on  the  15th.  The  rebels,  however,  were  slowly 
approaching,  and  there  was  no  news  of  Sir  John  Cope's 
arrival  with  the  army  from  Aberdeen  ;  and  the  general 


izecy  Google 


TUB  CAPTURE  OF  EDIMBUHOH.  123 

opinion  was,  that  the  town  would  certainly  be  given 
up.  The  moBt  zealous  Whigs  came  now  to  thiuk  this 
necessary,  as  they  plainly  thought  they  saw  Provost 
Stuart  and  his  friends,  so  far  from  co-operating  with 
their  zeal,  retarded  every  measure. 

But  the  fate  of  the  city  was  decided  early  in  the 
afternoon,  when  the  two  regiments  of  dragoons  were 
seen  about  four  o'clock  on  their  march  from  the  Colt 
Bridge  to  Leith,  by  the  long  dykes,  as  then  called ; 
now  George  Street  in  the  New  Town.  Then  the 
damour  arose,  that  it  .would  be  madness  to  think  of 
defending  the  town,  as  the  dragoons  had  ded.  The 
alarm  bell  was  rung — a  meeting  of  the  inhabitants 
with  the  magistrates  was  convened,  first  in  the  Gold- 
smith's Hall,  and  when  the  crowd  increased,  in  the 
New  Church  aisla  The  four  companies  of  Volunteers 
rendezvoused  in  the  Lawnmarket,  and,  growing  im- 
patient, sent  two  of  their  lieutenants  to  the  Provost  for 
orders,  for  the  captains  had  been  sent  for  to  the  meet- 
ing. They  soon  returned  without  any  orders,  and 
said  all  was  clamour  and  discordance.  AVhile  they 
were  absent,  two  Volunteers  in  the  rear  rank  (Boyle 
and  Weir),  just  behind,  quarrelled,  when  debating 
whether  or  not  the  city  should  be  surrendered,  and 
were  going  to  attack  one  another,  one  with  his  musket 
and  bayonet,  and  the  other  with  his  small  sword, 
having  flung  down  his  musket.  They  were  soon 
separated  without  any  harm,  and  placed  asunder  from 
each  other.  At  this  time,  a  man  on  horseback,  whom 
nobody  knew,  came  up  from  the  Bow,  and,  riding  at  a 


izecy  Google 


124  THE   CAPTDUE    OF   EDINBURGH. 

quick  pace  along  the  line  of  Volunteera,  called  out 
that  -the  Highlanders  were  at  hand,  and  that  they 
were  16,000  strong.  This  fellow  did  not  stop  to  be 
examined,  but  rode  off  at  the  gallop.  About  this 
time,  a  letter  had  come,  directed  to  the  Provost,  sum- 
moning the  town  to  surrender,  and  alarming  them 
with  the  consequence  in  case  any  opposition  was 
made. 

The  Provost  made  a  scrupulous  feint  about  reading 
the  letter,  but  this  point  was  soon  carried,  and  all 
idea  of  defence  was  abandoned.  Soon  after.  Captain 
Drummond  joined  us  in  the  Lawnmarket,  with  an- 
other captain  or  two.  He  sent  to  General  Guest, 
after  conversing  a  little  with  the  Ueutenant,  to  acquaint 
him  that  the  Volunteers  were  coming  to  the  Castle  to 
deliver  their  arms.  The  messenger  soon  returned, 
and  we  marched  up,  glad  to  deliver  them,  lest  they 
should  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  which 
the  delay  of  orders  seemed  to  favour,  though  not  a 
little  ashamed  and  afflicted  at  our  inglorious  cam- 
paign. 

We  endeavoured  to  engage  as  many  as  we  could  to 
meet  us  at  Haddington,  and  there  deliberate  what 
WM  to  be  done,  as  we  conjectured  that,  now  that  the 
town  of  Edinburgh  had  surrendered.  Sir  John  Cope 
would  not  land  nearer  than  Dunbar.  Upon  being 
asked  by  two  of  my  friends  what  I  was  to  do — viz., 
William  Robertson  and  William  Cleghom — I  told  them 
that  I  meant  to  go  that  night  to  my  father's,  at 
Prestonpans,  where,  if  they  would  join  me  next  day. 


oy  Google 


THE  CAPTURE  OF  EDINBURGH.  125 

hj  that  time  events  might  take  place  that  would  fix 
our  resolution.  Our  ardour  for  arms  and  the  field 
was  not  abated. 

Aa  it  was  now  the  dusk  of  the  evening,  I  went  to  a 
house  near  the  Nether  Bow  Port,  where  I  had  ap- 
pointed my  brother  to  meet  me,  that  we  might  walk 
home  together.  Having  foreseen  the  events  that  took 
place,  as  the  rebels  were  so  near  the  to^ra,  I  wished 
to  take  the  road  as  soon  as  possible,  but  on  attempt- 
ing to  get  out  of  the  gate,  in  the  inside  of  which 
several  loaded  carta  or  waggons  were  standing,  I  found 
the  gates  locked,  and  the  key's  lodged  with  the  Pro- 
vost. The  carts  were  said  to  contain  the  baggage  of 
Sir  John  Cope's  army,  &c.,  and  each  party  interpreted 
the  shutting  of  the  gates  according  to  their  own  fancy 
— one  side  thinking  this  was  a  manceuvre  to  prevent 
their  reaching  Sir  John ;  and  the  other,  to  hinder 
them  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  Be 
that  as  it  may,  it  was  half-past  eight  o'clock  before 
the  gate  was  opened,  when  I  heard  the  baggage  was 
ordered  back  to  the  Castle.  At  a  later  hour  they 
were  sent  to  Dunbar. 

My  brother  and  I  set  out  immediately,  and  after 
passing  through  the  crowd  at  the  head  of  the  Canon- 
gate,  who  were  pressing  both  ways  to  get  out  and  in, 
we  went  through  the  Abbey,  by  St  Ann's  Yards  and 
the  Duke's  Walk,  to  Jock's  Lodge,  meeting  hardly  a 
mortal  the  whole  way  When  we  came  down  near 
the  sands,  I  chose  that  way  rather  than  the  road 
through  the  whins,  as  there  was  no  moonlight,  and 


oy  Google 


126  THE  EETREAT  OF  THE  DRAGOONS. 

the  whins  were  dark  and  solitary,  but  the  sands 
always  lightsome  when  the  sea  is  in  ebb,  which  was 
then  the  case.  We  walked  slowly,  as  I  had  been 
fatigued,  and  my  brother  not  strong ;  and,  having  met 
no  mortal  bat  one  man  on  horseback  as  we  entered 
the  sands,  riding  at  a  brisk  trot,  who  hailed  us,  we 
arrived  at  the  west  end  of  Preatonpans,  having  shunned 
Musselburgh  by  passing  on  the  north  side,  without 
meeting  or  being  overtaken  by  anybody.  When  we 
came  to  the  gate  of  Lucky  Vint'a  Courtyard,  a  tavern 
or  inn  then  much  frequented,  I  was  astonished  to 
meet  with  the  utmost  alarm  and  confusion  —  the 
officers  of  the  dragoons  calling  for  their  horses  in  the 
greatest  hurry.  On  stepping  into  the  Court,  Lord 
Drummore,  the  judge,  saw  me  (his  house  being  near, 
he  had  come  down  to  sup  with  the  officers).  He 
immediately  made  up  to  me,  and  hastily  inquired 
"  Whence  I  had  come  1 "  "  From  Edinburgh  direct." 
"Had  the  town  surrendered?"  "Nol  but  it  was 
expected  to  fall  into  the  bands  of  the  rebels  early  to- 
morrow." "Were  there  any  Highlanders  on  their 
march  this  way  1 "  "  Not  a  soul ;"  I  could  answer  for 
it,  as  I  had  left  Edinburgh  past  eight  o'clock,  and  had 
walked  out  deliberately,  and  seen  not  a  creature  but 
the  horseman  in  the  sands. 

He  turned  to  the  officers,  and  repeated  my  intelli- 
gence and  asserted  that  it  must  be  a  false  alarm,  as 
he  could  depend  on  me.  But  this  had  no  eflfect,  for 
they  believed  the  Highlanders  were  at  hand.  It  was 
in  vain  to  tdl  them  that  they  had  neither  wings  nor 


izecy  Google 


THE  EETEEAT  OF  THE  DRAGOONS.  127 

horses,  nor  -were  invisible — away  they  went,  as  fast 
as  they  could,  to  their  respective  corps,  who,  on 
marching  from  Leith,  where  they  thought  themselves 
not  safe,  had  halted  in  an  open  field,  above  the  west 
end  of  Prestonpans,  between  Frestongrange  and  the 
enclosares  of  Mr  Nisbefc,  lying  west  from  the  village 
of  Preston.  On  inquiring  what  was  become  of  Gai- 
diner,  Drummore  told  me,  that  being  quite  worn  out 
on  their  arrival  on  that  ground,  he  had  begged  to  go 
to  his  own  house,  within  half  a  mile,  where  he  had 
been  since  eight  o'clock,  and  where  he  had  locked 
himself  in,  and  could  not  be  awaked  till  four  in  the 
morning,  his  usual  hour.  I  went  through  the  town 
to  my  father's,  and  before  I  got  there  I  heard  the 
dragoons  marching  in  confusion,  so  strong  was  their 
panic,  on  the  road  that  leads  by  the  back  of  the 
giffdens  to  Port  Seaton,  Aberlady,  and  North  Berwick, 
all  the  way  by  the  shore.  My  father' and  mother 
were  not  yet  come  home. 

Before  six  on  Tuesday  morning,  the  17th,  Mr  James 
Hay,  a  gentleman  in  the  town,  who  was  afterwards  a 
lieutenant  in  the  Edinburgh  Regiment,  came  to  my 
bedside,  ^ni  eagerly  inquired  what  I  thought  was  to 
be  done,  as  the  dragoons,  in  marching  along  in  their 
confusion,  had  strewed  the  road  eastward  with  ac- 
coutrements of  every  kind — pistols,  swords,  skullcaps, 
&c.  I  said  that  people  should  be  employed  imme- 
diately to  gather  them  up,  and  send  them  after,  which 
was  done,  and  amounted  to  what  filled  a  close  cart 
and  a  couple  of  creels  on  horseback.     By  this  time  it 


izecy  Google 


128  THE   BETEEAT  OF  THE  DRAGOONS. 

was  reported  that  the  transports  with  Cope  were  seen 
off  Dunbar.  But  it  was  not  this  news,  for  it  was  not 
then  come,  that  made  the  dragoons  scamper  from 
their  ground  on  the  preceding  night.  It  was  an  un- 
lucky dragoon,  who,  slipping  a  little  aside  for  a  pea- 
sheaf  to  his  horse,  for  there  were  some  on  the  ground 
not  led  off,  fell  into  a  coal-pit,  not  filled  up,  when  his 
side-arms  and  accoutrements  made  such  a  noise,  as 
alarmed  a  body  of  men,  who,  for  two  days,  had  been 
completely  panic-struck. 

About  mid-day,  I  grew  anxious  for  the  arrival  of 
my  two  companions,  Cleghom  and  Kobertson.  I, 
therefore,  walked  out  on  the  road  to  Edinburgh,  when, 
on  going  as  far  as  where  the  turnpike  is  now,  below 
Drummore,  I  met  with  Robertson  on  horseback,  who 
told  me  that  a  little  way  behind  him  was  Cleghom 
and  a  cousin  of  his  own,  a  Mr  Fraser  of  the  Excise, 
who  wished'  to  accompany  us  to  Sir  John  Cope's 
camp,  for  it  was  now  known  that  he  was  to  land 
that  day  at  Dunbar,  and  the  city  of  Edinburgh  had 
been  surrendered  early  that  morning  to  the  Highland 
army. 

We  waited  till  our  companions  came  up,  and  walked 
together  to  my  father's  house,  where  I  had  ordered 
some  dinner  to  be  prepared  for  them  by  two  o'clock. 
They  were  urgent  to  have  it  sooner,  as  they  wished  to 
begin  our  journey  towards  Dunbar  as  long  before 
sunset  as  they  could. 

Ab  we  were  finishing  a  small  bowl  of  punch  that  I 
had  made  for  them  after  dioner,  James  Hay,  the 


oy  Google 


ADVENTCHE8  TN  THE  '45.  129 

gentleman  I  meDtioued  before,  paid  us  a  visit,  and 
immediately  after  the  ordinary  civilities,  said  earnestly 
that  he  had  a  small  favour  to  ask  of  us,  which  was 
that  we  would  be  so  good  as  accept  of  a  small  colla- 
tion which  his  sister  and  he  had  provided  at  their 
house — that  of  Charles  Sheriff,  the  most  eminent  mer- 
chant in  the  place,  who  had  died  not  long  before,  and 
left  a  widow  and  foor  daughters  with  this  gentleman, 
their  uncle,  to  manage  their  affairs.  We  declined 
accepting  this  invitation  for  fear  of  being  too  late. 
He  continued  strongly  to  solicit  our  company,  adding 
that  he  would  detain  ua  a  very  short  while,  as  he  had 
only  four  bottles  of  burgundy,  which  if  we  did  not 
accept  of,  he  would  be  obliged  to  give  to  the  High- 
landers. The  name  of  burgundy,  which  some  of  us 
had  never  tasted,  disposed  us  to  listen  to  terms,  and 
we  immediately  adjourned  to  Mrs  Sheriff's,  not  an 
hundred  yards  distant.  We  found  very  good  apples 
and  pears  and  biscuit  set  out  for  us,  and  after  one 
bottle  of  claret  to  wash  away  the  taste  of  the  whisky 
punch,  we  fell  to  the  burgundy,  which  we  thought 
excellent ;  and  in  little  more  than  an  hour  we  were 
ready  to  take  the  road,  it  being  then  not  long  after 
five  o'clock.  Robertson  mounted  his  horse,  and  left 
us  to  go  round  by  his  house  at  Gladsmuir  to  get 
a  little  money,  as  he  had  not  wherewithal  to  defray 
his  expenses,  and  mentioned  an  hour  when  he  pro- 
mised to  meet  us  at  Bangley  Braefoot,  Maggie  John- 
stone's, a  public-house  on  the  road  leading  to  Dunbai-, 
by  Garlton  HiUs,  a  mile  to  the  north  of  Haddington. 


izecy  Google 


130  ADVENTURES   IN   THE   'i5. 

There  were  no  horses  here  for  me,  for  though  my 
father  kept  two,  he  had  them  both  at  the  Goat  Whey 
quarters. 

When  we  came  within  sight  of  the  door  of  this 
house,  we  saw  Robertson  dismounting  from  his  horse: 
we  got  some  beer  or  porter  to  refresh  us  after  our 
walk,  and  having  broken  off  in  the  middle  of  a 
keen  dispute  between  Cleghom  and  a  recruiting  ser- 
geant, whether  the  musket  and  bayonet,  or  broad- 
sword and  target,  were  the  best  weapons,  we  proceed- 
ed on  our  journey,  still  a  little  doubtful  if  it  was 
true  that  Sir  John  Cope  had  arrived.  We  proceeded 
sbwly,  for  it  was  dark,  till  we  came  to  Linton  Bridge. 
Bobertson,  with  his  usual  prudence,  proposed  to  stay 
all  night,  it  being  ten  o'clock,  and  still  double  beds 
for  us  all.  Cl^horn's  ardour  and  mine  resisted  this 
proposal ;  and  getting  a  loan  of  Robertson's  horse,  we 
proceeded  on  to  the  camp  at  Dunbar,  that  we  might 
be  more  certain  of  Sir  John's  arrival  At  Belton  Inn, 
within  a  mile  of  the  camp,  we  were  certified  of  it, 
and  might  then  have  turned  in,  but  we  obstinately 
persisted  in  our  plan,  fancying  that  we  should  find 
friends  among  the  officers  to  receive  us  into  thdr 
tents.  When  we  arrived  at  the  camp  we  were  not 
allowed  admittance,  and  the  officer  on  the  picket, 
whom  Cleghom  knew,  assured  us  that  there  was  not 
an  inch  of  room  for  us  or  our  horse,  either  in  camp  or 
at  Dunbar,  and  advised  us  to  return.  Being  at  last 
persuaded  that  Cope  was  landed,  and  that  we  had 
played  the  fool,  we  first  attempted  Belton  Inn,  but  it 


oy  Google 


COLOHEL  QABDIKER.  131 

was  choked  full  by  tliat  time,  as  we  were  conviiiced 
by  eight  or  ten  footmeu  lonnging  in  the  kitchen  on 
tables  and  chairs.  We  tried  the  inn  at  Linton  with 
the  same  saccesa  At  last  we  were  obliged  to  knock 
up  the  minister.  Mat.  Reid,  at  two  in  the  morning, 
who,  taking  us  for  marauders  from  the  camp,  kept  us 
an  hour  at  the  door.  We  were  hardly  well  asleep,  when, 
about  six,  Bobertson  came  to  demand  his  horse,  quite 
stout  and  well  refreshed,  as  well  as  his  cousin  Fraser, 
while  we  were  jaded  and  undone ;  such  ia  the  difference 
between  wisdom  and  folly. 

-  After  breakfasting,  however,  at  the  inn,  we  set  out 
again  for  Dunbar,  in  sanguine  hopes  that  we  should 
soon  return  with  the  army,  and  give  a  good  account 
of  Sir  John  Cope.  On  our  way,  we  visited  the  camp, 
which  lay  a  mile  west  of  Dunbar.  As  soon  as  I 
arrived  at  the  town,  I  inquired  for  Colonel  Grardiner, 
and  went  and  visited  him  at  Mr  Pyot's  the  minister 
of  the  town,  where  he  lodged.  He  received  me  with 
kindness,  and  invited  me  to  dine  with  him  at  two 
o'clock,  and  to  come  to  him  a  little  before  the  hour. 
I  went  to  him  at  half-past  one,  and  he  took  me  to 
walk  in  the  garden.  He  looked  pale  and  dejected, 
which  I  attributed  to  his  bad  health  and  the  fatigue 
he  had  lately  undergone.  I  began  to  ask  him  if  he 
was  not  now  quite  satisfied  with  the  junction  of  the 
foot  with  the  dragoons,  and  confident  that  they  woidd 
give  account  of  the  rebels.  He  answered  dejectedly 
tjiat  he  hoped  it  might  be  so,  but — and  then  made  a 
long  pause.    I  said,  that  to  be  sure  they  had  made  a 


izecy  Google 


132  COLONEL  OARDINEE. 

very  hasty  retreat ;  "  a  foul  flight,"  said  he,  "  Sandie, 
and  they  have  not  recovered  from  their  panic;  and  I'U 
tell  you  in  confidence  that  I  have  not  above  ten  men 
iu  my  regiment  M-hom  I  am  certain  will  follow  me. 
But  we  must  give  them  battle  now,  and  God's  will  be 
done ! " 

We  were  called  to  dinner,  where  there  was  nobody 
but  the  family  and  Comet  Kerr,  a  kinsman  of  the 
colonel.  He  assumed  an  air  of  gaiety  at  dinner,  and 
inquiring  of  me  the  adventures  of  the  night,  rallied 
me  afi  a  raw  soldier  in  not  taking  up  with  the  first 
good  quarters  I  could  get ;  and  when  the  approach- 
ing event  was  mentioned,  spoke  of  victory  as  a  thing 
certain,  "if  God  were  on  our  side."  We  sat  very 
short  time  after  dinner.  The  Colonel  went  to  look 
after  his  regiment,  and  prepare  them  for  to-morrow's 
march,  and  I  to  look  out  for  my  companions ;  on  find- 
ing them,  it  was  agreed  to  return  back  to  Linton,  as 
between  the  dragoons  and  the  concourse  of  strangers, 
there  was  not  a  bed  to  be  had.  We  returned  accord- 
ingly to  Linton,  and  made  good  our  quarters  at  the 
minister's,  where  we  remained  till  the  army  passed 
in  the  morning  on  their  route  to  Haddington.  John 
Home  had  arrived  at  Dunbar  on  Wednesday  and 
said  he  had  numbered  the  Highlanders,  and  thought 
they  were  about  1900  ;  but  that  they  were  ill  armed, 
though  that  defect  was  now  supplied  at  Edinburgh. 
There  were  many  of  the  Volunteers  all  night  at  Linton, 
whom  we  saw  in  the  morning,  and  with  whom  we 
appointed  to  meet  in  an  inn  at  Haddington. 


oy  Google 


BATTLE  OP  PRESTONPANS.  133 

As  tile  army  paesed  about  eleven  or  twelve,  we 
joined  them  and  marched  along  with  them  ;  they  took 
the  hill  road  by  Charteris  Dykes ;  and  when  we  were 
about  Beanston,  I  was  accosted  by  Major  Bowles, 
whom  I  knew,  and  who,  desirous  of  some  conversa- 
tion with  me,  made  his  servant  dismount  and  give 
me  his  horse,  which  I  gladly  accepted  of,  being  a  good 
deal  worn  out  Ti'ith  the  fatigue  of  the  preceding  day. 
The  major  was  completely  ignorant  of  the  state  of  the 
country  and  of  the  character  of  the  Highlanders.  I 
found  him  perfectly  ignorant  and  credulous,  and  in 
the  power  of  every  person  with  whom  he  conversed. 
I  was  not  acquainted  with  the  discipline  of  armies ; 
but  it  appeared  to  me  to  be  very  imprudent  to  allow 
all  the  common  people  to  converse  with  the  soldiers 
on  their  march  as  they  pleased,  by  which  means  their 
panic  was  kept  up,  and  perhaps  their  principles  cor- 
rupted. Many  people  in  East  Lothian  at  that  time 
were  Jacobites;  and  they  were  moat  forward  to  mix 
with  the  soldiers.  The  commons  in  general,  as  well 
as  two-thirds  of  the  gentry  at  that  period,  had  no 
aversion  to  the  family  of  Stuart ;  and  could  their  re- 
ligion have  been  secured,  would  have  been  very  glad 
to  see  them  on  the  throne  again. 

Cope's  small  army  sat  down  for  the  afternoon  and 
night  in  an  open  &eld  on  the  west  side  of  Haddington. 
The  Volunteers,  to  the  number  of  twenty-five,  assem- 
bled at  the  principal  inn,  where  also  sundry  officers  of 
dragoons  and  those  on  the  staff  came  for  their  dinner. 
While  our  dinner  was  preparing,  an  alarm  was  beat 


izecy  Google 


■134  BATTLE  OP  PKESTOHPANS. 

in  the  camp,  whicli  occasioned  a  great  hurry-scurry 
in  the  courtyard  with  the  officers  taking  their  horses, 
which  EK>me  of  them  did  with  no  small  reluctance, 
either  through  love  of  their  dinner  or  aversion  to  the 
enemy.  I  saw  Colonel  Gardiner  passing  very  slowly, 
and  ran  to  him  to  ask  what  was  the  matter.  He  said 
it  could  be  nothing  but  a  false  alarm,  and  would  soon 
be  over.  The  army,  however,  was  drawn  out  imme- 
diately, and  it  was  found  to  be  a  false  alarm.  The 
Honourable  Francis  Charteris  had  been  married  the 
day  before,  at  Preatonhall,  to  Lady  Francis  Gordon, 
the  Duchess  of  Gordon's  daughter,  who  was  supposed 
to  favour  the  Pretender,  though  she  had  a  large  pen- 
sion from  Government.  How  that  might  be  nobody 
knew,  but  it  was  alleged  that  the  alarm  followed 
their  coach,  as  they  passed  to  their  house  at  New 
Amisfield. 

After  dinner,  Captain  Drommond  came  to  us  at 
the  inn,  to  whom  we  unanimously  gave  a  commission 
to  apply  to  the  general  for  arms  to  us,  and  to  appoint 
us  a  station  in  the  line,  as  we  had  not  only  our  cap- 
tain, but  one  of  our  lieutenants  with  ua  Drummond 
left  us  to  make  this  application,  but  was  very  long  in 
returning,  and  the  answer  he  brought  was  not  so 
agreeable.  It  was,  that  the  General  did  not  think  M'e 
could  be  so  serviceable  by  taking  arms,  as  we  might 
be  in  taking  post-horses  through  the  night,  and  re- 
connoitring the  roads  leading  from  the  enemy  towards 
our  army,  and  bringing  an  account  of  what  move- 
pients  there  were.    This  was  agreed  to  after  some 


izecy  Google 


BATTLE  OF  PEBST0NPAN3,  135 

heffltatdon,  and  sizteea  of  us  were  Belected  to  go  out, 
two  laid  two — one  set  at  eiglit  in  the  evening,  and 
another  at  twelve.  Four  of  those  were  thought  use- 
less, as  tha«  were  only  three  roads  that  could  be 
reconnoitred.  I  was  of  the  first  set,  being  chosen  by 
Mr  William  M'Ghie  as  his  companion,  and  we  chose 
the  road  by  the  sea-coast,  through  Longniddry,  Fort- 
seaton,  and  Frestonpans,  as  t^t  with  which  I  was 
best  acquainted.  We  set  out  not  long  after  eight 
o'clock,  and  found  everything  perfectly  quiet  as  we 
expected.  At  Frestonpans  we  called  at  my  father's, 
and  found  that  they  had  returned  home  on  Wednes- 
day ;  and  having  requested  thrau  to  wait  supper  till 
our  return,  we  rode  on  to  Westpans,  in  the  county  of 
Midlothian,  near  Musselburgh  j  and  still  meeting  with 
nothing  on  which  to  report,  we  returned  to  supper  at 
my  father's.  While  we  were  there,  an  application 
was  made  to  us  by  Bailie  Hepburn,  the  baron  bailie 
or  magistrate  of  the  place,  agunst  a  young  gentleman, 
a  student  of  medicine,  as  he  said,  who  had  appeared 
in  arms  in  the  town,  and  pretended  that  he  wished  to 
'  be  conducted  to  Cope's  army.  We  went  down  from 
the  manse  to  a  public-house,  where  this  gentleman 
was  confined.  At  the  first  glance,  M'Ghie  knew  him 
to  be  a  student,  though  not  personally  acquainted 
with  him,  and  got  him  relieved  immediately,  and 
brought  him  up  to  supper.  M'Ghie  took  all  the  pains 
he  could  to  persuade  this  gentleman,  whose  name  was 
Myrie,  to  attach  himself  to  the  Volunteers,  and  not  to 
join  the  army  ;  but  he  would  not  be  persuaded,  and 


izecDy  Google 


136  BATTLE   OF   PRESTONPANS. 

actually  joined  one  of  the  regiments  on  their  march 
next  morning,  and  was  sadly  wounded  at  the  battle. 

Francia  Gkrden,  afterwards  Lord  Gardenstone,  and 
Eobert  Cunningham,  afterwards  the  General  in  Ireland, 
followed  Mr  M'Ghie  and  me,  and  were  taken  prisoners, 
and  not  very  well  used.  They  had  gone  as  far  as 
Crystall'a  Inn,  west  of  Musselburgh,  and  had  sat  with 
a  window  open  after  daylight  at  a  regale  of  white  wioe 
and  oysters,  when  they  were  observed  by  one  of  the 
Prince's  Life  Guards  who  was  riding  past,  not  in  uni- 
form, but  armed  with  pistols ;  they  took  to  their 
horses,  when  he,  pretending  to  take  them  for  rebels, 
they  avowed  they  were  King's  men,  and  were  taken  to 
the  camp  at  Duddiugston. 

When  M'Ghie  and  I  returned  to  Haddington  about 
one  o'clock,  all  the  beds  were  taken  up,  and  we  had  to 
sleep  in  the  kitchen  on  benches  and  chairs.  To  our 
regret  we  found  that  several  Volimteers  had  single 
beds  to  themselves,  a  part  of  which  we  might  have 
occupied.  Sir  John  Cope  and  his  army  marched  in 
the  morning,  I  think,  not  till  nine  o'clock,  and  to  my 
great  surprise,  instead  of  keeping  the  post-road  through ' 
Tranent  Muir,  which  was  high  ground  and  com- 
manded the  country  south  for  several  miles,  as  it  did 
that  to  the  north  for  two  or  three  miles  towards  the 
sea,  they  turned  to  the  right  by  Elvingston  and  the 
village  of  Trabroun,  till  they  past  Longniddry  on  the 
north,  and  St  Germains  on  the  south,  when,  on  en- 
tering the  defile  made  by  the  enclosures  there,  they 
halted  for  near  an  hour,  and  then  marched  into  the 


izecy  Google 


BATTLE  OF  PEE8TOMPAN8.  137 

open  field  of  two  miles  in  length  and  one  and  a-half 
in  breadth,  extending  from  Seaton  to  Preeton,  and 
from  Tranent  Meadow  to  the  sea.  I  understood  after- 
wards that  the  General's  intention  was  (if  he  had  any 
will  of  his  own)  to  occupy  the  field  lying  between 
Walliford,  Smeaton,  and  Inveresk,  where  he  would  have 
had  the  river  Esk  running  through  deep  banks  in 
front,  and  the  towns  of  Dalkeith  and  Musselburgh  at 
hand  to  supply  him  with  provisions.  In  this  camp 
he  could  not  have  been  surprised  ;  and  in  marching  to 
this  groxmd  the  road  through  Tranent  was  not  more 
distant  by  100  yards  than  that  by  Seaton.  But  they 
were  too  late  in  marching ;  for  when  they  came  to  St 
Germains,  their  scouts,  who  were  chiefly  Lords  Home 
and  Loudon,  brought  them  intelligence  that  the  rebel 
army  were  on  their  march,  on  which,  after  an  hour's 
halt,  when,  by  turning  to  the  left,  they  might  have 
reached  the  high  ground  at  Tranent  before  the  rebels, 
they  marched  on  to  that  plain  before  described,  now 
called  the  field  of  battle.  This  field  was  entirely 
elear  of  the  crop,  the  last  sheaves  having  been  carried 
in  the  night  before ;  and  neither  cottage,  tree,  or  bush 
were  in  its  whole  extent,  except  one  solitary  thorn 
bush  whitih  grew  on  the  march  between  Seaton  and 
Preston  fields,  around  and  near  to  which  lay  the  great- 
est number  of  slain,  and  which  remains  there  to  this 
day,  though  the  fields  have  been  long  since  com- 
pletely enclosed. 

The  army  marched  straight  to  the  west  end  of  this 
field  till  they  came  near  the  wfdls  of  the  enclosures  of 


izecDy  Google 


138  BATTLE  OP  PEEST0NPAN3. 

Preston,  which  reached  from  the  road  leading  from 
the  village  of  Preston  north  to  Tranent  meadow  and 
Banktown,  down  almost  half-way  to  Prestonpans,  to 
which  town,  from  this  enclosure,  there  was  no  inter- 
ruption ;  and  the  whole  projections  of  those  enclosnrea 
into  the  plain  to  the  east  were  not  above  300  yards. 
That  part  of  it  which  belonged  to  Preston  estate  was 
divided  into  three  shots,  as  they  were  caUed,  or  rigg 
lengths,  the  under  shot,  the  middle,  and  the  upper.  A 
cart  road  for  carrj'ing  out  dung  divided  the  two  first, 
which  lay  gently  sloping  to  the  sea,  from  which  it  was 
separated  by  garden  walls,  and  a  large  enclosure  for 
a  rabbit  warren.  The  upper  shot  was  divided  irora 
the  middle  one  by  a  foot-path,  and  lay  almost  level, 
sloping  almost  imperceptibly  to  Tranent  Meadow.  This 
was  properly  the  field  of  battle,  which  on  account  of 
the  slope  was  not  seen  fully  from  the  lower  fields  or 
the  town.  Near  to  those  walls  on  the  east  the  army 
formed  their  first  line  of  battle  fronting  west  They 
were  hardly  formed,  when  the  rebel  army  appeared  on 
the  high  ground  at  Birsley,  south-west  of  our  army 
about  a  mile.  On  sight  of  them  our  army  shouted. 
They  drew  nearer  Tranent,  and  onr  army  shifted  a 
little  eastward  to  fix)nt  them.  All  this  took  place  by 
one  o'clock. 

Colonel  Gardiner  having  informed  the  General  and 
his  staff  that  I  was  at  hand  to  execute  anything  in 
my  power  for  the  good  of  the  service,  there  was  sent 
to  me  a  message  to  inq\iire  if  I  could  provide  a  pro- 
per person  to  venture  up  to  the  Highland  army,  to 


izecy  Google 


BiTTLB  OP  PEE8TONPAN3.  139 

make  his  observatious,  and  particularly  to  notice  if 
tbey  Lad  any  cannon,  or  if  they  were  breaking  ground 
anywhere.  With  some  difficulty  I  prevailed  on  my 
father's  church-officer,  a  fine  stout  man,  to  make  this 
expedition,  which  he  did  immediately.  A  little  fur- 
ther on  in  the  afternoon  the  same  aide-de-camp,  an 
unde  of  Sir  Balph  Abercrombie's,  came  to  request 
me  to  keep  a  look-out  from  the  top  of  the  steeple, 
and  observe  if  at  any  time  any  detachment  &om 
the  main  army  was  sent  westwards.  In  the  mean 
time  the  Highlanders  lay  with  their  right  close  to 
Tranent,  and  had  detached  some  companies  down  to 
the  churchyard,  which  was  close  by  a  waggon-way 
which  led  directly  down  to  our  army,  and  crossed 
the  road  leading  between  Preston  and  Seaton,  where 
CTope's  six  or  seven  pieces  of  cannon  were  placed,  not 
above  a  third  of  a  mile  distant  &om  the  church.  As 
the  Highlanders  appeared  north  of  the  church  in 
the  churchyard,  which  was  higher  than  the  waggon- 
way,  the  cannon  were  fired,  and  dislodged  them  from 
thence  Not  long  after  this,  about  four  in  the  after- 
noon, the  rebels  made  a  movement  to  the  westward  of 
Biraley,  where  they  had  first  appeared,  and  our  army 
took  their  first  position.  Soon  after  this  I  observed 
from  the  steeple  a  large  detachment  of  Highlanders, 
about  300  or  400,  lodge  themselves  in  what  was  called 
the  Thorny  Loan,  which  led  from  the  west  end  of 
Preston  to  the  village  of  Dolphingston  to  the  south- 
west. I  mounted  my  horse  to  make  this  known  to 
the  General,  and  met  the  aide-de-camp  riding  briskly 


izecDy  Google 


140  BATTLE  OF  PEEST0NPAN8. 

down  the  field,  and  told  him  vrbat  I  had  seen.  I  im- 
mediately returned  to  my  station  in  the  steeple.  As 
twilight  approached,  I  observed  that  detachment  with- 
drawn, and  was  going  up  the  field  to  tell  this  when 
my  doughty  arrived,  who  was  going  to  tell  me  his 
story  how  numerous  and  fierce  the  Highlanders  were 
— how  keen  for  the  fight — jmd  how  they  would  make 
bat  a  breakfast  of  our  men.  I  made  bim  go  with 
me  to  the  General  to  tell  his  own  story.  In  the 
mean  time  I  visited  Colonel  Gardiner  for  a  third  time 
that  day  on  his  post,  and  found  bim  grave,  but  serene 
and  resigned ;  and  he  concluded  by  praying  God  to 
bless  me,  and  that  he  could  not  wish  for  a  better  night 
to  lie  on  the  field  ;  and  then  called  for  bis  cloak  and 
other  conveniences  for  lying  down,  as  he  said  they 
would  be  awaked  early  enough  in  the  morning,  as  he 
thought,  by  the  countenance  of  the  enemy,  for  they  had 
now  shifted  their  position  to  a  sloping  field  east  from 
the  church,  and  were  very  near  our  army,  with  little 
more  than  the  morass  between.  Coming  down  the  field 
I  asked  my  messenger  if  they  bad  not  paid  him  for 
his  danger.  Not  a  farthing  had  they  given  him,  which 
being  of  a  piece  with  the  rest  of  the  General's  conduct, 
raised  no  sanguine  hopes  for  to-morrow.  I  gave  the 
poor  fellow  half-a-crown,  which  was  half  my  substance, 
having  delivered  the  gold  to  my  father  the  night  before. 
When  I  returned  to  my  Other's  house,  I  found 
it  crowded  with  strangers,  some  of  them  Volunteers, 
and  some  Merse  clergymen,  particularly  Monteith  and 
Laurie,  and  Pat.  Simson.    They  were  very  noisy  and 


oy  Google 


BAITLB  or  PEESTONPANS.  141 

boastful  of  their  achievements,  one  of  them  having 
the  dragoon's  broadsword  who  had  fallen  into  the 
coal-pit,  and  the  other  the  musket  he  bad  taken  from 
a  Highland  soldier  between  the  armies.  Simson, 
who  was  cousin  to  Adam  Dmmmond  of  Meginch, 
captain  and  paymaster  in  Lee's  regiment,  bad  a  pair 
of  saddle-bags  intrusted  to  him,  containing  400  guineas, 
which  Patrick  not  imprudently  gave  to  my  father  to 
keep  all  night  for  him,  out  of  aoy  danger  of  being 
plundered.  Perceiving  that  there  would  be  no  room 
for  me,  without  incommoding  the  strangers,  I  stole 
away  to  a  neighbouring  widow  gentlewoman's,  where 
I  bespoke  a  bed,  and  returned  to  supper  at  my  father's. 
But  no  sooner  had  I  cut  up  the  cold  surloin  which  my 
mother  had  provided,  than  I  fell  fast  asleep,  having 
been  much  worn  out  with  all  the  fatigues  of  the  pre- 
ceding week.    I  retired  directly. 

I  directed  the  maid  to  awake  me  the  moment  the 
battle  began,  and  fell  into  a  profound  sleep  in  an  in- 
stant. I  bad  DO  need  to  be  awaked,  though  the  maid 
was  punctual,  for  I  heard  the  first  cannon  that  was 
fired,  and  started  to  my  clothes  ;  which,  as  I  neither 
buckled  nor  gartered,  were  on  in  a  moment,  and  im- 
mediately went  to  my  father's,  not  a  hundred  yards  off. 
All  tie  strangers  were  gone,  and  my  father  had  been 
up  before  daylight,  and  had  resorted  to  the  steeple. 
While  I  was  conversing  with  my  mother,  he  returned 
to  the  house,  and  assured  me  of  what  I  had  guessed 
before,  that  we  were  completely  defeated.  I  ran  into 
the  garden  where  there  was  a  mount  in  the  south-east 


izecy  Google 


142  BATTLE  OP  PEE8TONPAN8. 

comer;  from  which  one  could  see  the  fields  almost  to 
the  verge  of  that  part  where  the  battle  was  fought. 
Even  at  that  time,  which  could  hardly  be  more  than  ten 
or  fifteen  minutes  after  firing  the  first  cannon,  the 
whole  prospect  was  filled  with  runaways,  and  High- 
landeis  pursuing  them.  Many  had  their  coats  turned 
as  prisoners,  but  were  still  trying  to  reach  the  town  in 
hopes  of  escaping.  The  pursuing  Highlanders,  when 
they  could  not  overtake,  fired  at  them,  and  I  saw 
two  fall  in  the  glebe.  By-and-by  a  Highland  officer 
whom  I  knew  to  be  Lord  Elcho  passed  with  his  train, 
and  bad  an  air  of  savage  ferocity  that  disgusted  and 
alarmed.  He  inquired  fiercely  of  me  where  a  public- 
house  was  to  be  found  ;  I  answered  him  very  meekly, 
not  doubting  but  that,  if  I  had  displeased  him  with  my 
tone,  his  reply  would  have  been  with  a  pistol  bullet. 

The  crowd  of  wounded  and  dying  now  approached 
with  all  their  followers,  but  their  groans  and  agonies 
were  nothing  compared  with  the  bowlings,  and  cries, 
and  lamentations  of  the  women,  which  suppressed  man- 
hood and  created  despondency.  Not  long  after  the 
Duke  of  Perth  appeared  with  his  train,  who  asked  me, 
in  a  very  difierent  tone,  the  way  to  Collector  Cheap's, 
to  which  house  he  had  ordered  our  wounded  officers. 
Knowing  the  family  were  irom  home,  I  answered  the 
questions  of  victorious  clemency  with  more  assurance 
of  personal  safety,  than  I  had  done  to  unappeased  fury. 
I  directed  him  the  way  to  the  house,  which  was  hard 
by  that  where  I  had  slept 

The  rebel  army  had  before  day  marched  in  three 


oy  Google 


BATTLE  OP  PEESTOHPANS.  H3 

divisionB,  one  of  which  went  straight  down  the  waggon- 
way  to  attack  our  cannon,  the  other  two  crossed  the 
Morass  near  Seaton  House ;  one  of  which  marched 
north  towards  Port-Seaton,  where  the  field  is  broadest, 
to  attack  our  rear,  but  over-marched  themselTes,  and 
fell  in  with  a  few  companies  that  were  guarding  the 
baggage  in  a  small  enclosure  near  Cockenzie,  and  took 
the  whole.  The  main  body  marched  west  through  the 
plains,  and  just  at  the  break  of  day  attacked  our  army. 
After  firing  once,  they  run  on  with  their  broadswords, 
and  OUT  people  fled.  The  dragoons  attempted  to 
cha^e,  under  Colonel  Whitney,  who  was  wounded, 
but  wheeled  immediately,  and  rode  ofT  through  the 
defile  between  Preston  and  Bankton,  to  DolphiDgston, 
half  a  mile  off.  Colonel  Gardiner,  with  his  division, 
attempted  to  charge,  but  was  only  followed  by  deven 
men,  as  he  had  foretold,  Comet  Kerr  being  one.  He 
oontinuod  fighting,  and  had  received  several  woimds, 
and  was  at  last  brought  down  by  the  stroke  of  a 
broadsword  over  the  head.  He  was  carried  to  the 
minister's  house  at  Tranent,  where  he  lived  tUl  next 
forenoon.  His  own  house,  which  was  nearer,  was  made 
an  hospital  for  the  Highlanders,  no  person  of  our  army 
being  carried  there  but  the  Master  of  Torphicben,  who 
was  BO  badly  wounded  that  he  could  be  s«it  to  no 
greater  distance.  Some  of  the  dragoons  fled  as  far  as 
Edinburgh,  and  one  stood  all  day  at  the  Castle-gate, 
as  General  Guest  would  not  allow  him  to  he  taken  in. 
A  considerable  body  of  dragoons  met  at  Dolphingston 
immediatdy  after  the  rout,  little  more  than  half  a 


izecy  Google 


Hi  BATTLE  OF  PRESTONPANS. 

mile  from  the  field,  where  Cope  joined  them ;  and 
where  it  was  said  Lord  Drummore  offered  to  conduct 
them  back,  with  assurance  of  victory  when  the  High- 
landei-s  were  busy  with  the  booty.  But  they  could 
not  be  prevailed  on  by  his  eloquence  no  more  than  by 
the  youthful  ardour  of  Earls  Home  and  Loudon. 
After  a  short  halt,  they  marched  over  Falside  HUl  to 
Lauder.  Sir  Peter  Halket,  a  captain  in  Lee's  regi- 
ment, acted  a  distinguished  part  on  this  occmiou  ;  for 
after  the  rout  he  kept  his  company  together ;  and  get- 
ting behind  a  ditch  m  Tranent  Meadow,  he  kept  firing 
away  on  the  rebels  till  they  were  glad  to  let  him  sur- 
render on  terms. 

In  the  mean  time  my  father  became  very  uneasy 
lest  I  should  be  ill  treated  by  the  rebels,  as  they  would 
discover  that  I  had  been  a  Volunteer  in  Edinburgh ; 
be  therefore  ordered  the  horses  to  be  saddled,  and 
telling  me  that  the  sea  was  out,  and  that  we  could 
escape  by  the  shore  without  being  seen,  we  mounted, 
taking  a  short  leave  of  my  mother  and  the  young 
ones,  and  took  the  way  he  had  pointed  out.  We 
escaped  without  interruption  till  we  came  to  Port- 
seton  harbour,  a  mile  oS,  where  we  were  obliged  to 
turn  up  on  the  land,  when  my  father  observing  a 
small  party  of  Highlanders,  who  were  pursuing  two 
or  three  carts  with  baggage  that  were  attempting  to 
escape,  and  coming  up  with  the  foremost  driver,  who 
would  not  stop  when  called  to,  they  shot  him  on  the 
spot  This  daunted  my  father,  who  turned  imme- 
diately, and  took  the  way  we  came.    We  were  back 


izecy  Google 


BATTLE  OF  FRESTONPANB.  145 

again  soon  after,  when,  taking  off  my  boots  and  put- 
ting OD  shoes,  I  had  the  appearance  of  a  person  who 
had  not  been  abroad.  I  then  proposed  to  go  to  Col- 
lector Cheap's  house,  where  I  understood  there  were 
twenty-three  wounded  officers,  to  offer  my  assistance 
to  the  surgeons,  Cunningham  and  Trotter,  the  first  of 
whom  I  knew.  They  were  surgeons  of  the  dragoons, 
and  had  surrendered  that  they  might  attend  the 
officers.  When  I  went  in,  I  told  Cunninghan  (after- 
wards the  most  eminent  surgeon  in  Dublin)  that  I 
had  come  to  offer  them  my  services,  as,  though  no 
surgeon,  I  had  better  hands  than  a  common  servant. 
They  were  obliged  to  me ;  but  the  only  service  I  could 
do  to  them  was  to  try  to  find  one  of  their  medicine- 
chests  among  the  baggage,  as  they  could  do  nothing 
for  want  of  instruments.  I  readily  undertook  this 
task,  provided  they  would  famish  me  with  a  guard. 
This  they  hoped  they  could  do ;  and  knocking  at  the 
door  of  an  inner  room,  a  Highland  officer  appeared, 
whom  they  called  Captain  Stewart.  He  was  good-look- 
ing, grave,  and  of  polished  manners.  He  answered  that 
he  would  soon  find  a  proper  conductor  for  me,  and  de- 
spatched a  servant  with  a  message.  In  the  mean  time 
I  observed  a  very  handsome  young  officer  lying  in  an 
easy-chair  in  a  faint,  and  seemingly  dying.  They 
led  me  to  a  chest  of  drawers,  where  there  lay  a  piece 
of  his  skul^  about  two  fingers'  breadth  aod  an  inch  and 
a-half  long.  I  said,  "  This  gentleman  must  die."  "  No," 
said  Cunningham,  "  the  brain  is  not  affected,  nor  any 
vital  part ;  he  has  youth  and  a  fine  constitution  on  bis 


oy  Google 


146  BATTLE   OF   PBESTOKPANS. 

side ;  and  could  I  but  get  my  instruments,  there 
would  be  no  fear  of  him."  This  man  was  Captain 
Blake.  Captain  Stewart's  messenger  arrived  with 
a  fine,  brisk,  little,  well-dressed  Highlander,  armed 
cap-a-pie  with  pistols,  and  dirk,  and  broadsword. 
Captain  Stewart  gave  him  his  orders,  and  we  set 
off  immediately. 

Never  did  any  young  man  more  perfectly  display 
the  boastful  temper  of  a  raw  soldier,  new  to  conflict 
and  victory,  than  this  Highland  warrior.  He  said  he 
had  that  morning  been  armour-bearer  to  the  Duke  of 
Perth,  whose  valour  was  as  conspicuous  as  his  cle- 
mency ;  that  now  there  was  no  doubt  of  their  final 
success,  as  the  Almighty  had  blessed  them  with  this 
almost  bloodless  victory  on  their  part ;  that  He  had 
made  tlio  sun  to  shine  upon  them  uninterruptedly 
since  their  first  setting  out ;  that  no  brawling  woman 
had  cursed,  nor  even  a  dog  had  barked  at  them  ;  that 
not  a  cloud  had  interposed  between  them  and  the 

blessings  of  Heaven,  and  that  this  happy  morning 

here  he  was  interrupted  in  his  harangue  by  observing 
in  the  street  a  couple  of  grooms  leading  four  fine 
blood-horses.  He  drew  a  pistol  from  his  belt,  and 
darted  at  the  foremost  in  a  moment.  "  Who  are  you, 
sir  ?  and  where  are  you  going  1  and  whom  are  you  seek- 
ing?" It  was  answered  with  an  uncovered  head  and 
a  dastardly  tone,  "  I  am  Sir  John  Cope's  coachman,  and 
I  am  seeking  my  master."  "  You'll  not  find  him  here, 
sir,  but  you  and  your  man  and  your  horses  are  my 
prisoners.     Go  directly  to  the  Collector's  house,  and 


izecy  Google 


BATTLE   OF   PEESTONPANS.  147 

piit  up  your  horses  in  the  stable,  and  wait  till  I  return 
from  a  piece  of  public  service.  Do  this  directly,  as 
you  regard  your  lives."  They  instantly  obeyed.  A 
few  paces  further  on  he  met  an  officer's  servant  with 
two  handsome  geldings  and  a  large  and  full  clothes- 
bag.  Similar  questions  and  answers  were  made,  and 
we  found  them  all  in  the  place  to  which  they  were 
ordered,  on  our  return. 

It  was  not  long  before  we  arrived  at  Cockenzie, 
where,  under  the  protection  of  my  guard,  I  had  an 
opportunity  of  seeing  this  victorious  army.  In  gene- 
ral they  were  of  low  stature  and  dirty,  and  of  a  con- 
temptible appearance.  The  officers  with  whom  I 
mixed  were  gentleman-like,  and  very  civil  to  me,  as  I 
was  on  an  errand  of  humanity.  I  was  conducted  to 
Locheil,  who  was  polished  and  gentle,  and  who  ordered 
a  soldier  to  make  all  the  inquiiy  he  could  about  the 
medicine-chests  of  the  dragoons.  After  an  hour's 
search,  we  returned  without  finding  any  of  them,  nor 
were  they  ever  afterwards  recovered.  This  view  I 
had  of  the  rebel  army  confirmed  me  in  the  prepos- 
session that  nothing  but  the  weakest  and  most  un- 
accoimtable  bad  conduct  on  our  part  could  have 
possibly  given  tbcm  the  victory,  God  forbid  that 
Britain  should  ever  again  be  in  danger  of  being  over- 
run by  such  a  despicable  enemy,  for,  at  the  best,  the 
Highlanders  were  at  that  time  but  a  raw  militia,  who 
were  not  cowards. 

On  our  return  from  looking  for  the  medicine-chests, 
we  saw  walking  on  the  sea-shore,  at  the  east  end  of 


oy  Google 


148  BATTLE  OF  PRESTONPAKS. 

PrestoDpans,  all  the  officers  who  were  taken  prisoners. 
I  then  saw  human  nature  in  its  most  abject  form,  for 
almost  every  aspect  bore  in  it  shame,  and  dejection, 
and  despair.  They  were  deeply  mortified  with  what 
had  happened,  and  timidly  anxious  about  the  future, 
for  they  were  doubtfid  whether  they  were  to  be  treated 
as  prisoners  of  war  or  as  rebels.  I  ventured  to  speak 
to  one  of  them,  who  was  nearest  me.  a  Major  Severn  ; 
forMajor  Bowles,  myacquaiotance,  was  much  wounded, 
and  at  the  Collector'a  He  answered  some  questions  I 
put  to  him  with  civility,  and  I  told  him  what  errand 
I  had  been  on,  and  with  what  humanity  I  had  seen 
the  wounded  officers  treated,  and  ventured  to  assert 
that  the  prisoners  would  be  well  used.  The  confi- 
dence with  which  I  spoke  seemed  to  raise  his  spirits, 
which  I  completed  by  saying  that  nothing  could  have 
been  expected  but  what  had  happened,  when  the  foot 
were  so  shamefully  deserted  by  the  dragoons. 

Before  we  got  back  to  the  Collector's  house,  the 
wounded  officers  were  all  dressed ;  Captain  Blake's 
head  was  trepanned,  and  he  was  laid  in  bed,  for  they 
had  got  instruments  from  a  surgeon  who  lived  in  the 
town,  of  whom  I  had  told  Cunningham ;  and  they 
were  ordered  up  to  Bankton,  Colonel  Gardiner's  house, 
where  the  wounded  Highlanders  were,  and  also  the 
Honourable  Mr  Sandilands.  Two  captains  of  ours  had 
been  killed  outright  besides  Gardiner — viz.  Captain 
Stewart  of  Physgill,  whose  wife  was  my  relation,  and 
who  has  a  monument  for  him  erected  in  the  church- 
yard of  Prestonpans  by  his  father-in-law,  Patrick 


oy  Google 


BATTLE  OF  PRESTONPANS.  UO 

Heron  of  Heron,  Esq. ;  the  otlier  waa  Captain  Biymer 
of  Edrom,  in  tbe  Merse. 

While  we  were  breakfasting  at  my  father's,  some 
young  friends  of  mine  called,  among  whom  was  James 
Dunlop,  junr.,  of  Gamkirk,  my  particular  acquaint- 
ance at  Glasgow.  He  and  his  companions  had  ridden 
throngfa  the  field  of  battle,  and  being  well  acquainted 
with  the  Highland  chiefs,  asaured  ub  there  was  no 
danger,  as  they  were  civil  to  everybody.  My  father, 
who  was  impatient  till  he  saw  me  safe,  listened  to 
this,  and  immediately  ordered  the  horses.  We  rode 
through  the  field  of  battle  where  the  dead  bodies  still 
lay,  between  eleven  and  twelve  o'clock,  mostly  stript. 
There  were  about  two  hundred,  we  thought.  There 
were  only  slight  guards  and  a  few  straggling  boys. 
We  rode  along  the  field  to  Seaton,  and  met  no  inter- 
ruption till  we  came  close  to  the  village,  when  four 
Highlanders  darted  out  of  it,  and  cried  in  a  wild  tone, 
presenting  their  pieces,  "Fouxich,  fourich!"  (i.e.  Stop, 
stop !)  By  advice  of  our  Glasgow  friends  we  stopped, 
and  gave  them  shillings  a-piece,  with  which  they 
were  heartily  contented.  We  parted  with  our  friends 
and  rode  on,  and  got  to  Mr  Hamilton's,  minister  of 
Bolton,  a  solitary  place  at  a  distance  from  any  road, 
by  two  o'dock,  and  remained  there  idl  day.  My  fa- 
ther, having  time  to  recollect  himself,  fell  into  a  new 
anxiety,  for  he  then  called  to  mind  that,  besides 
sundry  watches  and  purses  which  he  had  taken  to 
keep,  he  also  had  Fat.  Simeon's  four  hundred  guineas. 
After  many  proposals  and  projects,  and  among  the 


izecy  Google 


150  BATTLE  OF   PRESXOKPAMS. 

rest  my  eameat  desire  to  return  aloDe,  it  was  at  last 
agreed  to  write  a  letter  in  I-atia  to  John  Ritchie  the 
Bchoolraaster,  afterwards  minister  of  Abercom,  and 
instruct  him  how  to  go  at  night  and  secrete  the 
watches  and  purses  if  still  there,  and  bury  the  saddle- 
bags in  the  garden.  Ritchie  was  also  requested  to 
come  to  us  next  day. 

My  father  and  Mr  Hamilton  carried  on  the  work 
of  that  day,  Sunday,  with  zeal,  and  not  only  prayed 
fervently  for  the  King,  but  warned  the  people  against 
being  seduced  by  appearances  to  believe  that  the 
Lord  was  with  the  rebels,  and  that  their  cause  would 
in  the  end  be  prosperous.  But  no  sooner  had  we 
dined  than  my  father  grew  impatient  to  see  my 
mother  and  the  children,  Ritchie  having  written  by 
the,  messenger  that  all  was  quiet.  He  wanted  to  go 
alone,  but  that  I  could  not  allow.  We  set  out  in  due 
time,  and  arrived  before  it  was  dark,  and  found  the 
family  quite  well,  and  my  mother  in  good  spirits. 
She  was  naturally  strong-minded,  and  void  of  ima- 
ginary feara  ;  but  she  had  received  comfort  from  the 
attention  paid  to  her,  for  Captain  Stewart',  by  the 
Duke  of  Perth's  order,  as  he  said,  gave  one  of  bis 
ensigns,  a  Mr  Brydone,  a  particular  charge  of  our 
family,  and  ordered  him  to  call  upon  her  at  least  twice 
a-day. 

We  soon  began  to  think  of  my  father's  charge  of 
watches  and  money  ;  and  when  it  was  dark  enough 
I  went  into  the  garden  to  look  for  the  place  where 
Ritchie  had  buried  the  saddle-bajra.      This  was  no 


oy  Google 


BATTLE   OF   PRESTOHPANS.  151 

difficult  search,  for  he  had  written  ua  that  they  were 
below  a  particular  pear-tree.  To  be  sure,  he  had  buried 
the  treasure,  but  he  had  left  the  leather  belts  by  which 
they  were  fixed  fully  above  ground,  so  that  if  the 
Highlanders  had  been  of  a  curious  or  prowling  dis- 
position, they  must  have  discovered  this  important 
sum. 

Soon  after  this  Kitchie  anived.  He  had  set  out 
for  Bolton  early  in  the  afternoon  ;  but  taking  a  dif- 
ferent road,  that  was  nearer  for  people  on  foot,  he  did 
not  meet  us,  aud  had  returned  immediately.  On  set- 
ting out,  not  twenty  yards  from  the  manse  of  Preston- 
pans,  he  was  stopped  by  a  single  Highlander,  who 
took  from  him  all  the  money  that  he  had,  which  was 
six  sliillings  ;  but  as  he  spared  his  watch,  he  was  con- 
tented. Not  long  after  came  in  my  mother's  guard. 
Ensign  Brydone,  a  well- looking,  sweet-tempered  young 
man,  about  twenty  years  of  age.  He  was  Captain 
Stewart's  ensign.  Finding  all  the  family  assembled 
again,  he  resisted  my  mother's  faint  invitation  to 
supper.  She  replied  that  as  he  was  her  guard,  she 
hoped  he  would  come  as  often  as  he  could.  He  pro- 
mised to  breakfast  with  us  next  morning.  He  came 
at  the  hour  appointed,  nine  o'clock.  My  mother's 
custom  was  to  mask  the  tea  before  morning  prayer, 
which  she  did  ;  and  soon  after  my  father  came  into 
the  room  he  called  the  servants  to  prayers.  We  knelt 
down,  vhen  Brydone  turning  awkwardly,  his  broad- 
sword swept  ofiF  the  table  a  china  plate  with  a  roll  of 
butter  on  it.     Prayer  being  ended,  the  good  lady  did 


oy  Google 


152  BATTLE  OF  PEBSTONPAKS. 

not  forget  her  plate,  but,  taMng  it  up  whole,  she 
aaid,  smiling,  and  with  a  curtsy,  "  Captain  Brydone, 
thia  is  a  good  omen,  and  I  trust  our  cause  will  be 
as  safe  in  the  end  from  your  army  as  my  plate 
has  been  from  the  sweep  of  your  sword."  The  young 
man  bowed,  and  sat  down  to  breakfast  .and  ate 
heartily ;  but  I  afterwards  thought  that  the  bad 
success  of  his  sword  and  my  mother's  application 
had  made  him  thoughtful,  as  Highlanders  are  very 
superstitious. 

During  the  rest  of  the  week,  while  I  remained 
at  home,  finding  him  very  ignorant  of  history  and 
without  pohtical  principles,  unless  it  was  a  blind 
attachment  to  the  chief,  I  thought  I  convinced 
him,  in  the  many  walks  I  had  with  him,  that  his 
cause  would  in  the  end  be  unsuccessful.  I  learned 
afterwards,  that  though  he  marched  with  them  to 
England,  he  retired  before  the  battle  of  Falkirk, 
and  appeared  no  more.  He  was  a  miller's  son  near 
Drummond  Castle. 

On  Tuesday,  and  not  sooner,  came  many  young 
surgeons  from  Edinburgh  to  dress  the  wounded  sol- 
diera,  most  of  whom  lay  on  straw  in  the  schoolroom. 
As  almost  all  their  wounds  were  with  the  broadsword, 
they  had  suffered  little.  The  surgeons  returned  to 
Edinburgh  in  the  evening,  and  came  back  again  for 
three  days.  As  one  of  them  was  Colin  Simson,  a 
brother  of  Patrick's,  the  clergyman  at  Fala,  and  ap- 
prentice to  Adam  Drummond  their  unde,  we  trust- 
ed him  and  his  companions  with  the  four  hundred 


izecy  Google 


PBINCE   CHAKLES   EDWAKD,  153 

guineas,  which  at  different  times  they  carried  in  their 
pockets  and  delivered  safe  to  Captain  Adam  Drum- 
mond  of  Megginch,  then  a  prisoner  in  Queensberry 
House  in  the  Canongate. 

I  remained  at  home  all  this  week,  about  the  end  of 
which  my  friend  William  Seller  came  from  Edinburgh 
to  see  me,  and  pressed  me  much  to  come  to  Eldin- 
burgh  and  stay  with  him  at  his  father's  house.  Hav- 
ing several  things  to  purchase  to  prepare  for  my 
voyage  to  HoUand,  I  went  to  town  on  the  following 
Monday,  and  remained  with  him  till  Thursday.  Be- 
sides his  father  and  sisters,  there  lodged  in  the  house 
Mr  Smith,  and  there  came  also  to 'supper  every  night 
his  eon,  afterwards  Mr  Seton  of  Touch,  having  mar- 
ried the  heiress  of  that  name.  As  Prince  Charles 
had  issued  a  proclamation  allowing  all  the  Volunteers 
of  Edinburgh  three  weeks,  during  which  they  might 
pay  their  court  to  him  at  the  Abbey,  and  receive  a 
free  pardon,  I  went  twice  down  to  the  Abbey  Court 
with  my  friend  about  twelve  o'clock,  to  wait  till  the 
Prince  should  come  out  of  the  Palace  and  mount 
his  horse  to  ride  to  the  east  side  of  Arthur  Seat  to 
visit  his  army.  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  see  him 
both  days,  one  of  which  I  was  close  by  him  when  he 
walked  throagh  the  guard.  He  was  a  good-looking 
man,  of  about  five  feet  ten  inches  ;  his  hair  was  dark 
red,  and  his  eyes  black.  His  features  were  regular, 
his  visage  long,  much  sunburnt  and  freckled,  and  his 
countenance  thoughtful  and  melancholy.  He  mounted 
his  horse  and  rode  off  through  St  Ann's  Yards  and 


izecy  Google 


154  PBINCE  CHARLES  EDWARD. 

the  Diike's  Walk  to  his  anny.  There  was  no  crowd 
after  him — about  three  or  four  hundred  each  day.  By 
that  time  curiosity  had  been  satisfied. 

In  the  house  where  I  lived  they  were  all  Jacobites, 
and  I  heard  much  of  their  conversation.  AVhen  young 
Seller  and  I  retired  from  them  at  night,  he  agreed 
with  me  that  they  had  less  ground  for  being  so  san- 
guine and  upish  than  they  imagined.  The  court  at 
the  Abbey  was  dull  and  sombre — the  Prince  was 
melancholy  ;  he  seemed  to  have  no  confidence  in  any- 
body, not  even  in  the  ladies,  who  were  much  his 
friends ;  far  less  had  he  the  spirit  to  venture  to  the 
High  Church  of  Edinburgh  and  take  the  sacrament^ 
as  his  great  uncle  Charles  II.  had  done  the  Cove- 
nant, which  woidd  have  secured  him  the  low-country 
commons,  as  he  already  had  the  Highlanders  by  at- 
tachment. He  was  thought  to  have  loitered  too  long 
at  Edinburgh,  and,  without  doubt,  had  he  marched 
immediately  to  Newcastle,  he  might  have  distressed 
the  city  of  London  not  a  little.  But  besides  that  his 
army  wanted  clothing  and  necessaries,  the  victory  at 
Preston  put  an  end  to  his  authority.  He  had  not  a 
mind  fit  for  command  at  any  time,  far  less  to  rule  the 
Highland  chiefs  in  prosperity. 

I  returned  to  Prestonpans  on  Thursday,  and  as  I 
was  to  set  out  for  Newcastle  on  Monday  to  take  ship- 
ping for  Holland,  I  sent  to  Captain  Blake,  who  was 
recovering  well,  to  tell  him  that  if  he  bad  any  letters 
for  Berwick,  I  would  take  charge  of  them.  He  prayed 
me  to  call  on  him  immediately.      He  said  he  was 


oy  Google 


INCIDENTS.  155 

quite  well,  and  complained  of  nothing  but  the  pain  of 
a  little  cut  he  had  got  on  one  of  his  fingers.  He  said 
he  would  trouble  me  with  a  letter  to  a  friend  at 
Berwick,  and  that  it  would  be  ready  on  Saturday  at 
four  o'clock,  when  he  begged  I  would  call  on  him.  I 
went  at  the  hour,  and  found  him  dressed  and  looking 
well,  with  a  small  table  and  a  bottle  and  glasses  be- 
fore him.  "What!"  says  I ;  "Captain  Blake,  are  you 
allowed  to  drink  wine  1 "  "  Yes,"  said  he,  "  and  as  I 
expected  you,  I  postponed  ray  few  glasses  till  I  should 
drink  to  your  good  journey."  To  be  sure,  we  drank 
out  the  bottle  of  claret ;  and  when  I  sent  to  inquire 
for  him  on  Sunday,  he  said  he  had  slept  better  than 
ever.  I  never  saw  this  man  more ;  but  I  heard  he 
had  sold  out  of  the  army,  and  was  married.  In 
spring  1800,  when  the  King  was  very  ill,  and  in 
danger,  I  observed  in  the  papers  that  he  had  left  a 
written  message,  mentioning  the  wounds  he  had  re- 
ceived at  the  battle  of  Preston.  On  seeing  this,  1 
wrote  to  him  as  the  only  living  witness  who  could 
attest  the  truth  of  his  note  left  at  St  James's.  I  had 
a  letter  from  him  dated  the  1st  of  March  that  year, 
written  in  high  spirits,  and  inviting  me  to  Great 
George  Street,  Westminster,  where  he  hoped  we  would 
uncork  a  bottle  with  more  pleasure  than  we  had  done 
in  1745,  but  to  come  soon,  for  he  was  verging  on 
eighty-one.     He  died  this  spring,  1 802. 


oy  Google 


CHAPTER   IV. 

17«6-174e:  AOE.33-U. 

8CT8  OPP  POR  HOLLAND — A  COBPOEATIOS  DINNER  AT  NBWCASTU — 
ADVENTURES  AT  YARUOITTH — LEVDGN  AND  THE  STUDEKT8  THERE 

—  JOHN  OREOORY JOHN   WILKES — lU MATERIALITY    BAXTER 

CHARLES  T0WN8UEND — DR  AITEEN — RETURN    TO    BRITAIN — FEL- 
LOW-PASSENflEHB — VIOLETTI    THE  DANCER — TAKEN  TO   COURT — 

LONDON    eOCIETT THE    LYONS — LORD   HEATHPIELD — BKOLLBTT 

AND    JOHN    BLAIR StIPFEBS   AT    THE    QOLDEN    BALL — LONDON 

GETTINO  THE   NEWS    OP   THE    BATTLE    OP   CULLODEN WILLIAM 

GUTHRIE     AND     ANiJON's    VOTAOES — BYRON'B    NARRATIVE — THE 

THEATRF5   AND  THEATRICAL    CELEBRITIES — LITERARY   SOCIETY 

THOMSON — A  RHBTRONO BEC  KER. 

On  Monday  moraing,  the  9th  of  October,  old  style, 
my  father  and  I  set  out  for  Newcastle  on  horseback, 
where  we  arrived  on  Wednesday  to  dinner.  Having 
secured  my  passage  on  board  a  small  vessel  going  to 
Rotterdam,  that  was  to  sail  whenever  there  was  a 
convoy,  we  rode  to  Sunderland  to  visit  some  emigrants 
whom  we  understood  were  there,  and  found  old  George 
Buchan  and  his  brother-in-law,  Mr  William  Grant, 
afterwards  I^ord  Advocate,  and  Lord  Prestongrange. 
We  dined  with  them,  and  were  told  that  Lord  Drum- 
more  and  many  others  of  onr  friends  had  taken  up 
their  residence  at  Bishop  Auckland,  where  they  wished 


izecDy  Google 


NEWCASTLE  IN   1745.  157 

to  hare  been  had  there  been  room.  Neit  day  my 
father  and  the  servant  set  out  on  their  journey  home, 
and  I  having  been  acquainted  with  some  of  the  Com- 
mon Council  of  Newcastle,  was  invited  to  dine  with 
the  mayor  at  one  of  their  guild  dinners.  A  Mr 
Fenwick,  I  think,  was  mayor  that  year.  I  was  seated 
at  the  end  of  one  of  the  long  tables  in  the  same  room, 
next  Mr  John  Simpson,  afterwards  Alderman  Simpson, 
sheriff  of  Newcastle  for  that  year.  As  I  was  fresh  from 
Scotland,  I  had  to  answer  aU  the  queations  that  were 
put  to  me  concemiug  the  affairs  of  that  country,  and 
I  saw  my  intelligence  punctually  detailed  in  the 
Newcastle  Journal  nest  morning.  Of  that  company 
there  was  one  gentleman,  a  wine  merchant,  who  waa 
alive  in  the  year  1797  or  1798  ;  when  happening  to 
dine  with  the  mayor,  the  subject  was  talked  of,  and 
he  recollected  it  perfectly. 

At  the  inn  where  I  slept  I  met  with  my  companion 
Bob  Cunningham,  who  had  been  a  Volunteer  in  Edin- 
burgh, and  with  Francis  Garden,  who  had  been  taken 
prisoner  by  the  rebels,  as  narrated  in  Home's  History.* 
He  and  I  supped  together  one  of  the  nights.  He  was 
studying  law ;  but  his  father  being  an  officer,  and 
at  that  time  Lieutenant  of  Stirling  Castle,  he  had  a 
military  turn,  which  was  heightened  by  the  short 
campaign  he  had  made.     He  resented  the  bad  usage 

*  The  incident  is  mentioiiad  above,  p.  136.  IVuicu  Oaiden  VM  raued  to 
tbe  bench  in  I'M,  wheahe  took  the  title  of  Lord  Oardenttone:  heiruauthor 
of  tuijKellaniea  in  prose  and  vene,  and  travelling  memantndnma.  The  im- 
mediatel^T  following  Mmteiicea  might  seem  to  refer  to  him,  but  they  are 


,1.0,  Google 


158  SHIELDS   IN    1745. 

his  father's  nepliew,  Murray  of  Broughtoo,  the  Pi-e- 
tender's  Secretary,  had  given  him  during  the  day  he 
was  a  captive,  and  waa  determined  to  become  a  volun- 
teer in  some  regiment  till  the  rebellion  was  suppressed ; 
but  expressed  a  strong  abhorrence  at  the  subordina- 
tion in  the  army,  and  the  mortifications  to  which  it 
exposed  a  man.  I  argued  that  he  ought  either  to 
return  immediately  to  his  studies,  or  fix  on  the  army 
for  his  profession,  and  stated  the  difference  between 
modern  armies  and  those  of  Greece  and  Rome,  with 
which  his  imagination  was  fired,  where  a  man  could 
be  a  leading  citizen  and  a  great  general  at  the  same 
time.  He  debated  on  this  point  till  two  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  though  he  did  not  confess  he  was  convinced, 
he  went  into  the  army  immediately,  and  rose  till  he 
became  a  general  of  hoi-se  in  Ireland.  He  was,  at  the 
time  I  met  him,  very  handsome,  and  had  an  enlight- 
ened and  ardent  mind.  He  went  to  Durham  next 
morning,  and  I  never  saw  him  more. 

On  the  Tuesday  I  was  summoned  to  go  down  to 
Shields,  as  the  sloop  bad  fallen  down  there,  and  was  to 
sail  immediately  with  the  London  convoy.  I  went 
down  accordingly,  and  had  to  live  for  six  days  with 
the  rude  and  ignorant  masters  of  colliers.  There  was 
one  army  surgeon  of  the  name  of  Allan,  a  Stirling 
man,  who  had  taken  his  passage,  and  had  some  con- 
versation. At  last,  on  Monday  the  14th  of  October, 
1  went  on  board  the  "Blagdon"  of  Newcastle,  Tim 
Whinny,  master,  who  boasted  that  his  vessel  had 
ridden  out  the  great  stoim  of  January  29,  1739,  at 


oy  Google 


YAEMODTH   IN   1745.  15£l 

the  back  of  Inchkeith.  She  was  loaded  with  kits  of 
butter  and  glass  bottles.  I  was  the  only  passenger. 
There  was,  besides  the  master,  a  mate,  an  old  sailor, 
and  two  boys.  As  we  let  the  great  ships  go  out 
before  us,  it  was  night  almost  before  we  got  over  the 
bar. 

Next  day,  the  weather  being  calm  and  moderate, 
we  had  an  agreeable  sad  along  the  coast  of  Yorkshire; 
in  the  evening,  however,  the  gale  rose,  separated  the 
fleet  of  about  eighty  sail,  and  drove  us  off  shore. 
We  passed  a  dreary  night  with  sickness,  and  not 
without  fear,  for  the  idle  boys  had  mislaid  things,  and 
it  was  two  hours  before  the  hatches  could  be  closed. 
The  gale  abated  in  the  morning,  and  about  mid-day 
we  made  for  the  coast  again,  but  did  not  come  in 
with  the  land  till  two  o'clock,  when  we  descried  the 
Norfolk  coast,  and  saw  many  ships  making  for  Yar- 
mouth. About  ten  at  night  we  came  up  with  them, 
and  found  them  to  be  part  of  the  fleet  with  which  we 
had  sailed  from  Shields.  Next  day,  Friday  the  1 8th, 
we  came  into  Yarmouth  Roads,  when  the  master  and 
I  went  ashore  in  the  boat.  The  master  was  as  much 
a  stranger  there  as  I  was,  for  though  he  had  been 
often  in  the  roads,  he  had  never  gone  ashore.  This 
town  is  handsome,  and  lies  in  a  singular  situation. 
It  stands  on  a  fiat  plain,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
from  the  sea.  It  is  an  oblong  square,  about  a  mile  in 
length,  and  a  third  part  as  broad.  The  whole  length 
is  intersected  by  three  streets,  which  are  rather  too 
narrow.     That  nearest  is  well  built,  and  lands  on  the 


izecy  Google 


160  YARMOUTH  IN   1745. 

marketplace  to  the  north,  which  is  very  spacious,  and 
remarkably  well  provided  with  every  kind  of  vivrea 
for  the  pot  and  the  spit. 

The  market-women  are  clean  beyond  example,  and 
the  butchers  themselves  dressed  with  great  neatness 
indeed.  In  short,  there  was  nothing  to  offend  the 
eye  or  any  of  the  senses  in  Yarmouth  market.  Very 
genteel-looking  women  were  providing  for  their  fami- 
lies. But  the  quay,  which  is  on  the  west  side  of  the 
town,  and  lies  parallel  to  the  beach,  is  the  most  remark- 
able thing  about  the  town,  though  there  is  a  fine 
old  Gothic  church  in  the  marketplace,  with  a  Very 
lofty  steeple,  the  spire  of  which  is  crooked,  aid  like- 
wise a  fine  modern  chapel-of-ease  in  the  street  lead- 
ing to  it.  The  quay  is  a  mile  long,  and  is  formed  by 
a  river,  the  mouth  of  which,  above  a  mile  distant  at 
the  village  of  Gorelston,  forms  the  harbour.  The 
largest  colliers  can  deliver  their  goods  at  the  quay, 
and  the  street  behind  it  has  only  one  row  of  the 
handsomest  houses  in  the  town.  As  the  master  and 
I  knew  nobody,  we  went  into  the  house  of  a  Robin 
Sad.  at  the  sign  of  the  Three  Kings,  who,  standing  at 
his  own  door  near  the  south  end  of  the  quay,  had  such 
an  inviting  aspect  and  manner  that  I  could  not  resist 
him.  His  house  was  perhaps  not  second-best,  but  it 
was  cleanly,  and  I  staid  two  nights  with  him.  He  enter- 
tained me  much,  for  he  had  been  several  years  a  mate 
in  the  Mediterranean  in  his  youth,  and  was  vain  and 
boastful,  and  presumptuous  and  ignorant,  to  my  great 
delight. 


oy  Google 


YABMOUTH  IN    1745.  161 

In  the  evening  two  men  bad  come  into  the  house 
and  drank  a  pot  or  two  of  ale.  He  said  they  were 
custom-house  officers,  and  was  ill-pleased,  as  they  did 
not  use  to  frequent  his  house,  but  they  had  come  into 
the  common  room  on  hearing  of  my  being  in  the 
house ;  and  though  they  sat  at  a  distance  from  the  fire- 
place, where  the  landlord  and  I  were,  they  could  hear 
our  conversation.  Next  morning,  after  nine,  they 
came  again,  and  with  many  apologies,  addressing  them- 
selves to  me,  said  they  had  orders  from  the  Commis- 
sioners to  inquire  my  name  and  designation,  as  they 
understood  I  was  going  beyond  sea  to  Holland.  I  had 
no  scruple  in  writing  it  down  to  them.  They  returned 
in  half  an  hour,  and  told  me  that  they  were  ordered 
to  carry  me  before  the  Lord  Mayor.  I  went  accord- 
ingly down  to  Justice  Hall,  where  I  waited  a  little 
while  in  an  ante-chamber,  and  overheard  my  landlord 
Sad  under  examination.  He  was  very  high  and  resent- 
ful in  his  answers,  and  had  a  tone  of  contempt  for  men 
who,  he  said,  were  unfit  to  rule,  as  they  did  not  know 
the  value  of  any  coins  but  those  of  England.  He 
answered  with  a  still  more  saucy  pride,  when  they 
asked  him  what  expense  I  made,  and  in  the  end  told 
them  ezultingly  that  I  had  ordered  him  to  buy  the 
best  goose  iu  the  market  for  to-morrow's  dinner.  I  was 
called  in  and  examined.  The  Mayor  was  an  old  grey- 
headed man,  of  a  mild  address.  He  had  been  a  common 
fisher,  and  had  become  very  rich,  though  he  could  not 
write,  but  signed  his  name  with  a  stamp.  After  my 
examination,  under  which  I  had  nothing  to  conceal. 


oy  Google 


162  YABMODTH  IN   1745. 

they  told  me,  as  I  was  going  abroad,  they  were  obliged 
to  tender  me  the  oatha  or  detain  me.  I  objected  to 
that,  as  they  had  no  ground  of  suspicion,  and  offered 
to  ehow  them  my  diploma  aa  Master  of  Arts  of  the 
University  of  Edinburgh,  and  a  Latin  letter  from  the 
University  of  Glasgow  to  any  Foreign  University 
where  I  might  happen  to  go.  They  declined  looking 
at  them,  and  insisted  on  my  taking  the  oaths,  which 
accordingly  were  administered,  and  I  was  dismissed. 
I  did  not  know  that  the  habeas  corpus  was  not  then 
suspended,  and  that  if  they  had  detained  me  I  could 
have  recovered  large  expenses  from  them.  I  amused 
myself  in  town  till  the  master  came  on  shore,  when, 
after  dinner,  we  walked  down  to  Gorleston,  the  har- 
bour at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  where  we  heard  of 
three  vessels  which  were  to  sail  without  convoy,  on 
Monday,  with  the  ebb  tide. 

I  staid  this  night  with  landlord  Sad,  and  invited 
the  master  to  dine  with  us  next  day,  being  Sunday, 
when  we  were  to  have  qar  fine  goose  roasted.  I  went 
in  the  morning  to  their  fine  chapel,  which  was  paneled 
with  mahogany,  and  saw  a  very  populous  audience. 
The  service  and  the  sermon  were  but  so  so.  Tim 
Whinny  came  in  good  time,  and  we  were  on  board  by 
four  o'clock,  and  fell  down  opposite  the  harbour  of 
Gorleston.  As  the  three  colliers  which  were  to  venture 
over  to  Holland  without  convoy  were  bound  for  a 
different  port  from  Helvoet,  which  was  our  object,  our 
master  spent  all  the  morning  of  Monday  making 
inquiry  for  any  ship  that  was  going  where  we  were 


oy  Google 


BUTTEBDAM.  163 

lx>und,  and  ranged  the  coast  down  as  far  as  I/)westoff 
for  tills  purpose,  but  was  disappointed.  This  made  us  so 
late  of  sailing,  that  the  three  ships  which  took  through 
the  gat  or  opening  between  sand-banks,  were  almost 
out  of  sight  before  we  ventured  to  sail.  Tim's  caution 
was  increased  by  his  having  his  whole  property  on 
board,  which  he  often  mentioned.  At  last,  after  a 
solemn  council  on  the  quarter-deck,  where  I  gave  my 
voice  strongly  for  our  immediate  departure,  we  followed 
tlie  track  of  the  three  ships,  the  last  of  which  was  still 
in  sight ;  and  having  a  6ne  night,  with  a  fair  breeze  of 
wind,  we  came  within  sight  of  land  at  ten  o'clock 
next  day.  The  shore  is  so  flat,  and  the  country  so 
level,  that  one  sees  nothing  on  approaching  it  but 
tops  of  steeples  and  masts  of  ships.  Early  in  the 
afternoon  I  got  on  shore  at  Helvoet,  on  the  island 
of  Voom,  and  put  up  at  an  English  house,  where  one 
Fell  was  the  landlord. 

There  I  saw  the  first  specimen  of  Dutch  cleanli- 
ness, BO  little  to  be  expected  in  a  small  seaport.  As 
I  wished  to  be  as  soon  as  I  could  at  Rotterdam,  I 
quitted  my  friend  Tim  Whinny  to  come  up  at  liis 
leisure,  and  went  on  board  the  Rotterdam  schuyt  at 
nine  in  the  morning,  and  arrived  there  in  a  few  hours. 
The  beauty  of  this  town,  and  of  the  river  Maas  that 
flows  by  it  and  forms  its  harbour,  is  well  known. 
The  sight  of  the  Boompjes,  and  of  the  canals  that 
carry  shipping  through  the  whole  town,  surprised  aud 
pleased  me  much.  I  had  been  directed  to  put  up  at 
Caters,  an  English  house,  where  I  took  up  my  lodg- 


oy  Google 


161  ROTTERDAM. 

ings  accordingly,  and  adhered  to  it  in  the  two  or 
three  trips  1  made  afterwards  to  this  city,  and  found 
it  an  exceeding  good  house,  where  the  expense  was 
moderate,  and  everything  good.  In  the  afternoon  I 
inquired  for  Mr  Robert  Herriea,  on  whom  I  had  my 
credit,  and  found  his  house  on  the  -Scotch  Dyke,  after 
passing  in  the  doit-boat  over  the  canal  that  separates 
it  from  the  end  of  the  Boompjes. 

From  Mr  Henries  I  met  with  a  very  kind  reception. 
He  Tvas  a  handsome  young  man,  of  a  good  family  in 
Annandale,  who  had  not  succeeded  in  business  at 
Dnmfriea,  and  had  been  sent  over  by  my  uncle  Pro- 
vost George  Bell,  of  that  town,  as  their  agent  and 
factor — as  at  that  time  they  dealt  pretty  deep  in  the 
tobacco  trade.  He  had  immediately  assimOated  to 
the  manneiB  of  the  Dutch,  and  was  much  respected 
among  them.  He  lived  in  a  very  good  house,  with  a 
Mr  Robertson  and  his  wife  from  Aberdeen — very  sen- 
sible, good  sort  of  people.  They  took  very  much  to 
me,  and  insisted  on  my  dining  with  them  every  day. 
Next  door  to  them  lived  a  Mr  Livingston,  from  Aber- 
deen also,  who  was  thought  to  be  rich.  His  wife  was 
the  daughter  of  Mr  Kennedy,  one  of  the  ministers  of 
the  Scotch  Church.  She  was  a  very  handsome  and 
agreeable  woman ;  and  neither  of  the  ladies  having 
children,  they  had  little  care,  and  lived  a  very  sociable 
and  pleasant  life,  especially  my  landlady,  whose  at- 
tractions consisted  chiefly  in  good  sense  and  good 
temper.  Our  neighbour  being  young  and  gay  as  well  as 
handsome,  had  not  quite  so  much-  liberty.    Mr  Berries 


oy  Google 


ROTTERDAM.  165 

and  his  friends  advised  me  to  remain  some  days  with 
them,  because,  our  king's  birthday  having  happened 
lately,  the  British  students  were  to  have  a  grand  enter- 
taiDment,  and  it  was  better  for  me  to  escape  the  ex- 
pense that  might  be  incurred  by  going  there  too  soon. 
Besides,  I  bad  to  equip  myself  in  clothes,  and  with  a 
sword  and  other  necessaries,  with  which  I  could  be 
better  and  cheaper  supplied  at  Rotterdam  than  at 
Leyden.  I  took  their  advice,  and  they  were  so  oblig- 
ing as  to  have  new  company  for  me  every  day,  among 
whom  were  Mess.  Kennedy,  and  Ainslie  his  colleague  ; 
the  first  was  popular,  and  pompous,  and  political,  and 
an  Irishman.  The  second  was  a  plain,  sensible  Scotch- 
man, less  sought  after,  but  more  respectable  than  his 
colleague.  During  my  stay  at  Rotterdam  I  was  in- 
formed of  everj'thing,  and  saw  everything  that  was 
new  or  curious. 

Travelling  in  Holland  by  means  of  the  canals  is 
easy  and  commodious  ;  and  though  the  country  is  so 
flat  that  one  can  see  to  no  distance,  yet  the  banks  of 
the  canals,  especially  as  you  approach  the  cities,  are 
so  much  adorned  with  pleasure-houses  and  flower- 
gardens  as  to  furnish  a  constant  succession,  not  of  the 
grand  and  sublime  or  magnificent  works  of  nature, 
but  of  a  profusion  of  the  rich  and  gaudy  effects  of 
opulence  without  taste.  When  I  arrived  at  Leyden, 
whidi  was  in  a  few  hours,  I  found  my  lodgings  ready, 
having  had  a  correspondence  from  Rotterdam  with 
Thomas  Dickson,  M.D,,  afterwards  my  brother-in-law. 
They  were  in  the  house  of  a  Madame  Vandertasse, 


izecy  Google 


166  LEYDEN. 

on  the  Long  Bridge.  There  were  in  her  house  besides, 
Dr  Dickson,  Dr  John  Gregory,  Mr  Nicholaa  Monckly, 
and  a  Mr  Skirrat,  a  student  of  law.  Yandertasse's 
was  an  established  lodging-house,  her  father  and 
mother  haviug  carried  on  that  business,  so  that  we 
lived  very  well  there  at  a  moderate  rate — that  is, 
sixteen  stivers  for  dinner,  two  for  coffee,  six  for 
supper  and  for  breakfast.  She  was  a  lively  little 
Frenchwoman,  about  thirty-six,  had  been  tolerably 
well-looking,  and  was  plump  and  in  good  condition. 
As  she  had  only  one  maid-servant,  and  five  gentle- 
men to  provide  for,  she  led  an  active  and  laborious 
life ;  insomuch  that  she  had  but  little  time  for  her 
toilet,  except  in  the  article  of  the  coif,  which  no 
Frenchwoman  omits.  But  on  Sundays,  when  she 
had  leisure  to  dress  herself  for  the  French  Church, 
either  in  the  morning  or  evening,  then  who  but 
Mademoiselle  Yandertasse  !  She  spoke  English  per- 
fectly well,  as  the  guests  of  the  house  had  been  mostly 
British. 

As  I  had  come  last,  I  had  the  worst  bed-chamber. 
Besides  board,  we  paid  pretty  high  for  our  rooms,  and 
dearest  of  all  for  fuel,  which  was  chiefly  peat.  We 
-had  very  good  small  claret  at  a  shilling  a  bottle,  giv- 
ing her  the  benefit  of  our  exemption  from  town  duty 
for  sixty  stoups  of  wine  for  every  student.  Our  house 
was  in  high  repute  for  the  best  coffee,  so  that  our 
friends  were  pleased  when  they  were  invited  to  par- 
take with  us  of  that  delicious  beverage.  We  had  no 
company  to  dinner ;    bub  in  the  evenings   about  a 


oy  Google 


THE  BBITISH  STDDEHTS.  167 

dozen  of  us  met  at  one  another's  rooms  in  turn  three 
times  a-week,  and  drank  coffee,  and  smoked  tobacco, 
and  chatted  about  politics,  and  drank  claret,  and 
supped  on  bukkam  (Dutch  red -herrings),  and  eggs, 
and  salad,  and  never  sat  later  than  twelve  o'clock — 
at  Mr  Gowan's,  the  clergyman,  never  later  than  ten, 
unless  when  we  deceived  him  bj  makiog  such  a  noise 
when  the  hour  was  ringing  as  prevented  his  hear- 
ing it. 

Though  I  had  not  been  acquainted  'with  John 
Gregory  formerly,  which  was  owing  to  my  two 
winters'  residence  at  Glasgow  when  be  was  in  Edin- 
burgh, yet,  as  he  knew  most  of  my  friends  there,  we 
soon  became  intimate  together,  and  generally  passed 
two  hours  every  forenoon  in  walking.  His  friend 
Monckly  being  very  fat,  and  a  bad  walker,  could  not 
follow  us.  There  were  at  this  time  about  twenty- 
two  British  students  at  Leyden,  of  whom,  besides  the 
five  at  our  house  already  named,  were  the  Honourable 
Charles  Townshend,  afterwards  a  distinguished  states- 
man and  husband  to  Lady  Dalkeith,  the  mother  of 
the  Duke  of  Buccleuch  ;  Mr  James  Johnston,  junior, 
of  Westerhall ;  Dr  Anthony  Askew  ;  John  Campbell, 
junior,  of  Stonefield  ;  his  tutor  Mr  Morton,  afterwards 
a  professor  at  St  Andrews ;  John  Wilkes,  his  companion 
Mr  Bland,  and  their  tutor  Mr  Lyson  ;  Mr  Freeman 
from  Jamaica  ;  Mr  DoddeswcU,  afterwards  Chancellor 
of  the  Exchequer ;  Mr  Wetherell  from  the  West 
Indies ;  Dr  Charles  Congalton,  to  this  day  physician 
in  Edinburgh  ;  an  Irish  gentleman,  Keefe,  I  think,  in 


izecy  Google 


his  house  ;  Willie  Gordon,  afterwards  K.B.,  with  foiir 
or  five  more,  whose  namea  I  have  forgot,  and  who  did 
not  associate  with  my  friends. 

On  the  first  Sunday  evening  I  was  in  Leyden,  I 
walked  round  the  Cingle — a  fine  walk  on  the  outside 
of  the  Rhine,  which  formed  the  wet  ditch  of  the  town — 
with  John  Gregory,  who  introduced  me  to  the  British 
students  as  we  met  them,  not  without  giving  me  a 
short  character  of  them,  which  I  found  in  general  a 
very  just  outline.  When  we  came  to  John  Wilkes, 
whose  ugly  countenance  in  early  youth  was  very  strik- 
ing, I  asked  earnestly  who  he  was.  His  answer  was, 
that  he  was  the  son  of  a  London  distiller  or  brewer, 
who  wanted  to  be  a  fine  gentleman  and  man  of  taste, 
which  he  could  never  be,  for  God  and  nature  had 
been  against  him.  I  came  to  know  Wilkes  very  well 
afterwards,  and  found  him  to  be  a  sprightly  enter- 
taining fellow — too  much  bo  for  hia  years,  as  he  was 
but  eighteen  ;  for  even  then  he  showed  something  of 
daring  profligacy,  for  which  he  was  afterwards  noto- 
rious. Though  he  was  fond  of  learning,  and  passion- 
ately desirous  of  being  thought  something  extraor- 
dinary, he  was  unlucky  in  having  an  old  ignorant 
pedant  of  a  dissenting  parson  for  hia  tutor.  This 
man,  a  Mr  Leeson  or  Lyson,  had  been  singled  out  by 
the  father  as  the  best  tutor  in  theworld  for  hia  most 
promising  son,  because,  at  the  age  of  threescore,  after 
studying  controversy  for  more  than  thirty  years,  he 
told  bis  congregation  that  he  was  going  to  leave  them, 
and  would  tell  them  the  reason  next  Sunday ;  when. 


oy  Google 


THE  BRITISH  STUDENTS. 


being  fully  convened,  he  told  them  that,  with  much 
anxiety  and  care,  he  had  examined  the  Arian  contro- 
versy, and  was  now  convinced  that  the  creed  he  had 
read  to  them  as  his  creed  was  false,  and  that  he  had 
now  adopted  that  of  the  Allans,  and  was  to  bid  them 
iarewell.  The  people  were  shocked  with  this  creed, 
and  not  so  sorry  as  they  would  otherwise  have  been 
to  part  with  him,  for  he  was  a  good-natured  well- 
meaning  man.  His  chief  object  seemed  to  be  to  make 
Wilkes  an  Arian  also,  and  he  teased  him  so  much 
about  it  that  he  was  obliged  to  declare  that  he  did 
not  believe  the  Bible  at  all,  which  produced  a  quarrel 
between  them,  and  Wilkes,  for  refuge,  went  frequently 
to  Utrecht,  where  he  met  with  Immateriality  Baxter, 
as  he  was  called,  who  then  attended  Lord  Blantyre 
and  Mr  Hay  of  Drummellier,  as  he  had  formerly  done 
Lord  John  Gray. 

This  gentleman  was  more  to  Wilkes's  taste  than 
his  own  tutor  ;  for  though  he  was  a  profound  philo- 
sopher and  a  hard  student,  he  was  at  the  same  time 
a  man  of  the  world,  and  of  such  pleasing  conversa- 
tion as  attracted  the  young.  Baxter  was  so  much 
pleased  with  Wilkes  that  he  dedicated  one  of  his 
pieces  to  him.  He  died  in  1750,  which  fact  leads 
me  to  correct  an  error  in  the  account  of  Baxter's 
life,  in  which  he  is  much  praised  for  his  keeping  well 
with  Wilkes,  though  he  had  given  so  much  umbrage 
to  the  Scotch,  But  this  is  a  gross  mistake,  for  the 
people  of  that  nation  were  always  Wilkes's  favourites 
till  1763,  thirteen  years  after  Baxter's  death,  when  he 


izecy  Google 


IVO  LEi'DBN. 

became  a  violent  party-writer,  and  wished  to  raise  hia 
fame  and  fortune  on  the  ruin  of  Lord  Bute,* 

Wilkea  was  very  fond  of  shining  in  conversation 
very  prematurely,  for  at  that  time  he  had  but  little 
knowledge  except  what  he  derived  from  Baxter  in 
his  frequent  visits  to  Utrecht.  In  the  art  of  shining, 
however,  he  was  much  outdone  by  Charles  Town- 
shend,  who  waa  not  above  a  year  older,  and  had  still 
less  furniture  in  his  head ;  but  then  his  person  and 
manners  were  more  engaging.  He  had  more  wit  aod 
humour,  and  a  turn  for  mimicry ;  and,  above  all,  had 
the  talent  of  translating  other  men's  thoughts,  which 
they  had  produced  in  the  simple  style  of  conversation, 
into  the  most  charming  language,  which  not  only  took 
the  ear  but  elevated  the  thoughts.  No  person  I  ever 
knew  nearly  equalled  Charles  Townshend  in  this  talent 
but  Dr  Robertson,  who,  though  he  had  a  very  great 
fund  of  knowledge  and  thought  of  his  own,  was  yet 
80  passionately  fond  of  shining,  that  he  seized  what 
was  nearest  at  hand — the  conversation  of  his  friends 
of  that  morning  or  the  day  before — and  embellished 

*  The  frienddiip  here  tUnded  to  ia  inteiestiii^  as  affording  evidence  tli&t 
Wilkea  had  been  able  to  attach  to  himself  at  least  one  virtuous  and  en- 
li^tened  Mend.  Baxter  afterwards  vrote  to  him  thna:  "We  talked 
much  on  this,  you  may  remember,  in  the  oapnchin'a  garden  at  Spa.  I 
have  finished  the  Prima  Cura ;  it  is  in  tiie  dialogue  waj,  and  dedgn  to 
inscribe  it  to  my  dear  John  Wilkes,  whom,  nnder  a  borrowed  name,  I  have 
made  one  of  the  interlocutors.  If  you  are  against  this  whim  (which  a 
passionate  love  for  you  has  made  me  conceive),  I  will  drop  it " —  WUkeit 
CorreiponderKe,  i.  15.  Wilkea  doea  not  api>ear  to  have  been  against  this 
whim.  The  ' '  Appendix  to  the  First  Fart  of  the  Inqniry  into  the  Natote 
of  the  Uunun  Soul'  appeared  in  1750,  within  a  few  months  after  thia  letter 
was  written.  Its  author  did  not  live  to  see  it  printed,  but  it  contains  the 
dedication. — Ed. 


izecy  Google 


THE  BHITISH   SIUDENTS.  171 

lb  with  such  rich  language,  that  they  hardly  knew  it 
again  themselves,  insomuch  that  he  was  the  greatest 
plagiary  in  conversation  that  ever  I  knew.  It  is  to 
this,  probably,  that  his  biographer  alludes  (his  strong 
itch  for  shining)  when  he  confesses  ho  liked  his  con- 
versation best  when  he  had  not  an  audience.* 

Gregorys  chum,  Dr  Monckly,  had  this  talent  too, 
and  exercised  it  so  as  to  bring  on  him  the  highest 
ridicule.  He  was  in  reality  an  ignorant  vain  block- 
head, who  had  the  most  passionate  desire  of  shining, 
■which  Gregory  was  entirely  above.  His  usual  method 
was  to  get  Gregory  into  his  room,  either  before  or 
after  breakfast,  when  he  settled  with  him  what  were 
to  be  the  leading  topics  of  the  day,  especially  at  our 
coffee  parties  and  our  club  suppers,  for  we  soon  broke 
him  of  his  attempt  to  shine  at  dinner.  Having  thus 
settled  everything  with  Gregory,  and  heard  his  opin- 
ion, he  let  him  go  a- walking  with  me,  and  jotted  down 
the  topics  and  arguments  he  had  heard.  The  very 
prospect  of  the  glory  he  was  to  earn  in  the  evening 
made  him  contented  and  happy  all  day.  Gregory 
kept  his  secret  as  I  did,  who  was  generally  let  into  it 
in  our  walk,  and  prayed  not  to  contradict  the  fat 
man,  which  I  seldom  did  when  he  was  not  too  pro- 

*  In  allnnon  evidently  to  the  foUowing  passage  in  Dugald  Stewart's 
Mcoimt  of  the  life  and  writings  of  RobertBoo. — Ed.  "  In  the  oompaoj'  of 
ttraitgexa  he  increased  his  eieitioiu  to  amiue  and  infonn ;  and  the  splendid 
variety  of  his  conversation  was  conunonly  the  chief  circumstance  on  which 
they  dwelt  in  enumerabing  his  talents ;  and  yet  I  must  acknowledge,  for 
my  own  part,  that  much  as  I  always  admired  his  powere,  when  they  were 
thus  called  forth,  I  enjoyed  bis  society  less  than  when  I  saw  him  in  the 
einile  of  his  iatatnates,  or  in  the  boaom  of  his  family. " 


D,  Google 


172  LETDEN. 

voking.  Unfortunately,  one  night  Gregory  took  it  into 
hia  head  to  contradict  him  when  he  was  haranguing 
very  pompously  on  tragedy  or  comedy,  or  some  sub- 
ject of  criticism.  The  poor  man  looked  a3  if  he  had 
been  shot,  and  after  recovering  himself,  Baid  with 
a  ghastly  smile,  "  Surely  this  was  not  always  your 
opinion."  Gregory  persisted,  and  after  saying  that 
criticism  was  a  subject  on  which  he  thought  it  lawful 
to  change,  he  entirely  refuted  the  poor  undone  doctor : 
not  another  word  did  he  utter  the  whole  evening.  He 
had  his  coffee  in  hia  room  next  morning,  and  sent  for 
Gregory  before  we  left  the  parlour.  I  waited  for  an 
hour,  when  at  last  he  joined  me,  and  told  me  he  had 
been  rated  at  no  allowajiee  by  the  fat  man  ;  and  when 
he  defended  himself  by  saying  that  he  had  gone  far 
beyond  the  bounds  prescribed,  the  poor  soul  fell  into 
tears,  and  said  he  was  undone,  as  be  had  lost  the  only 
friend  he  had  in  the  world.  It  cost  Gregory  some 
time  to  comfort  him  and  to  exhort  him,  by  exacting 
from  him  some  deference  to  himself  at  our  future 
parties  (for  the  blockhead  till  then  had  never  so  much 
as  said  what  is  your  opinion  on  this  subject,  Dr  Gre- 
gory), A  new  settlement  was  made  between  them,  and 
we  went  on  very  well ;  for  when  some  of  the  rest  were 
debating  bond  fide  with  the  absurd  animal,  I,  who 
was  in  the  secret,  gave  him  line  and  encouragement 
till  he  had  got  far  beyond  hia  depth,  while  Gregory 
was  sitting  silent  in  a  comer,  and  never  interposed 
till  he  was  in  danger  of  being  drowned  in  the  mud. 
This  may  seem  a  cruel  amusement,  but  I  forgave 


oy  Google 


THE   BBITISH   STUDENTS.  173 

Gregor)',  for  there  was  no  living  with  Monckly  with- 
out it. 

"We  passed  our  time  in  general  very  agreeably,  and 
very  profitably  too  ;  for  the  conversations  at  our  even- 
ing meetings  of  young  men  of  good  knowledge,  intended 
for  different  professions,  could  not  fail  to  be  instruc- 
tive, much  more  so  than  the  lectures,  which,  except 
two,  that  of  civil  law  and  that  of  chemistry,  were  very 
duU.  I  asked  Gregory  why  he  did  not  attend  the 
lectures,"  which  he  answered  by  asking  in  his  turn 
why  I  did  not  attend  the  divinity  professors  (for 
there  were  no  less  than  four  of  them).  Having  heard 
all  they  could  say  in  a  much  better  form  at  home,  we 
went  but  rarely,  and  for  form's  sake  only,  to  hear  the 
Dutchmen.  At  this  time  we  were  in  great  anxiety 
about  the  Rebellion,  and  were  frequently  three  or  four 
weeks  without  getting  a  packet  from  England  ;  inso- 
much that  Gregory  and  I  agreed  to  make  a  trip  to 
Kotterdam  to  leam  if  they  had  heard  anything  by 
fishing-boats.  We  went  one  day  and  returned  the 
next,  without  learning  anything.  We  dined  with  my 
agreeable  friends  on  the  Scotch  Dyke,  Herries  aud 
Bobertson.  In  returning  in  the  schuyt,  I  said  to 
Gregory  that  he  would  he  laughed  at  for  having  gone 
60  far  and  having  brought  back  no  news,  but  if  he 
would  support  me  I  would  frame  a  gazette.  He 
promised,  and  I  immediately  wrote  a  few  paragraphs, 
which  I  said  I  had  copied  from  Allan  the  banker's 
private  letter  he  had  got  by  a  fishing-boat.  This  was 
to  impose  on  Dr  Askew,  for  Allan  was  his  banker.    I 


oy  Google 


took  care  also  to  make  Admiral  Townsheod  take  two 
sliips  of  the  line  at  Newfoundland,  for  he  was  Charles 
Townshend's  uncle,  and  so  on  with  the  rest  of  our 
friends.  On  our  arrival  they  all  afisembled  at  our 
lodging,  and  our  news  passed  current  for  all  that  day. 
At  night  we  disclosed  our  fabrication,  being  unable  to 
hold  out  any  longer.  On  another  occasion  I  went 
down  with  Dr  Askew,  who,  as  a  learned  man  of  twenty- 
eight,  had  come  over  to  Leyden  to  collate  manuscripts 
of  ^^schylus  for  a  new  edition.  His  father  had  given 
him  £10,000  in  the  stocks,  so  that  he  was  a  man  of 
importance.  Askew's  errand  at  this  time  was  to  cheat 
his  banker  Allan,  as  he  said  he  would  draw  on  him 
for  £100,  which  he  did  not  want,  because  Exchange 
was  at  that  time  against  Holland.  In  vain  did  I  try 
to  persuade  him  that  the  banker  would  take  care  not 
to  lose  by  him.  But  he  persisted,  such  being  the 
skill  in  business  of  this  eminent  Grecian.  He  had 
some  drollery,  but  neither  much  sense  nor  useful  learn- 
ing. He  was  much  alarmed  when  the  Highlanders 
got  as  far  as  Derby,  and  believed  that  London  would 
be  taken  and  the  bank  ruined.  I  endeavoured  in  vain 
to  raise  his  spirits ;  at  last  I  told  him  that  personally 
I  did  not  much  care,  for  I  had  nothing  to  lose,  and 
would  not  return  to  Britain  under  a  bad  Government 
You  are  the  very  man  I  want,  says  he,  for  I  have  X400 
or  £500  worth  of  books,  and  some  name  as  a  Greek 
scholar.  We'll  begin  boobselliag,  and  you  shall  be  my 
partner  and  auctioneer.  This  was  soon  settled,  and  as 
soon  forgot  when  the  rebels  marched  back  from  Derby. 


izecy  Google 


THE  BRITISH  STUDENTS.  175 

When  Gregory  and  I  were  alarmed  at  some  of  the 
expensive  suppers  some  of  our  friends  gave  from  the 
taverns,  we  went  to  Askew,  whose  turn  was  next,  and 
easily  persuaded  him  to  limit  his  suppers  to  eggs  and 
bukkam  and  salad,  which  he  accordingly  gave  us  next 
night,  which,  with  tobacco  of  40  stivers  a  lb.  and  very 
good  claret,  pleased  us  all.  After  this  no  more  fine 
suppers  were  presented,  and  Gowans,  the  old  minister 
of  the  Scottish  Church,  ventured  to  be  of  our  number, 
and  was  very  pleasant. 

I  went  twice  to  the  Hague,  which  was  then  a  very 
delightful  place.  Here  I  met  with  my  kinsman, 
Willie  Jardine,  now  Sir  William,  who  was  a  comet  in 
the  Prince  of  Orange's  Horse  Guards,  and  then  a  very 
handsome  genteel  fellow,  for  as  odd  as  he  has  turned 
out  since.  Though  I  had  no  introduction  to  anybody 
there,  and  no  acquaintance  but  the  two  students  who 
accompanied  me  the  £rst  time,  I  thought  it  a  delight- 
fid  place.  A  ball  that  was  given  about  this  time  by 
the  Imperial  Ambassador,  on  the  Empress's  birthday, 
was  fatal  to  one  of  our  students — a  very  genteel, 
agreeable  rake,  as  ever  I  saw,  from  the  West  Indies. 
At  a  preceding  dancing  assembly  he  had  been  taken 
out  by  a  Princess  of  Waldeck,  and  had  acquitted 
himself  so  weU  that  she  procured  him  an  invitation 
to  the  birthday  ball,  and  engaged  him  to  dance  with 
her.  He  had  run  himself  out  a  good  deal  before ;  and 
a  fine  suit  of  white  and  silver,  which  cost  £60,  com- 
pleted his  distress,  and  he  was  obliged  to  retire  with- 
ont  showing  it  to  us  more  than  once.     There  was 


izecy  Google 


176  LEYDEN. 

another  West  Indian  there,  a  Mr  Freeman,  a  man  of 
fortune,  sedate  and  sensible.  He  was  very  handsome 
and  well-made.  Having  been  three  years  in  Leyden, 
he  was  the  best  skater  there.  There  was  an  East 
India  captain  resident  in  that  city,  whom  the  Dutch 
set  up  as  a  rival  to  Freeman,  and  they  frequently 
appeared  on  the  Rhine  together.  The  Dutchman  was 
tall  and  jolly,  but  very  active  withal.  The  ladies, 
however,  gave  the  palm  to  Freeman,  who  was  so 
handsome,  and  having  a  figure  much  like  Garrick,  all 
his  motions  were  perfectly  genteel.  This  gentleman, 
after  we  left  Leyden,  made  the  tour  of  Italy,  Sicily, 
and  Greece,  with  Willie  Gordon  and  Doddeswell ;  the 
former  of  whom  told  me  long  afterwards  that  he  had 
died  soon  after  he  returned  to  Jamaica,  which  was 
Gordon's  own  native  country,  thougli  his  parents  were 
Scotch,  and  cousins  of  Gordon  of  Hawhead,  in  Aber- 
deenshire. He  was  too  young  and  too  dissipated  to 
attend  our  evening  meetings ;  neither  did  Charles  Con- 
galtoD,  who  was  one  of  the  best  young  men  I  have  ever 
known.  His  pretence  was  that  he  could  not  leave  his 
Irish  chum  of  the  name  of  Keefe  ;  but  the  truth  was, 
that  having  been  bred  a  Jacobite,  and  having  many 
friends  and  relations  in  the  Rebellion,  he  did  not  like 
to  keep  company  with  those  who  were  warm  friends 
of  Government.  Dickson  and  he  were  my  companions 
on  a  tour  to  Amsterdam,  where  we  staid  only  three 
days,  and  were  much  pleased  with  the  magnificence, 
wealth,  and  trade  of  that  city.  Dickson  was  a  very 
honest  fellow,  but  rather  dull,  and  a  hard  student.    As 


oy  Google 


THE  BRITISH  STUDENTS.  177 

I  commonly  eat  up  an  hour  after  the  rest  had  gone  to 
their  rooms,  chatting  or  reading  French  with  Made- 
moiselle, and  as  Dickson's  apartment  was  next  the 
parlour,  he  complained  much  of  the  noise  we  made, 
laughing  and  talking,  because  it  disturbed  him,  who 
was  a  midnight  student.  He  broke  in  upon  us  with 
impertinent  curiosity,  but  I  drove  him  to  his  bed,  and 
by  sitting  up  an  hour  longer  that  night,  and  making 
more  noise  than  usual,  we  reduced  him  to  patience  and 
close  quarters  ever  after,  and  we  made  less  noise.  I 
mentioned  somewhere  that  Mademoiselle  had  paid  for 
her  English,  which  was  true,  for  she  had  an  afiair  with 
a  Scotch  gentleman  ten  or  twelve  years  before,  and 
had  followed  him  to  Leith  on  pretence  of  a  promise, 
of  which,  however,  she  made  nothing  but  a  piece 
of  money. 

At  Chriatmas  time,  three  or  four  of  us  passed  three 
days  at  Rotterdam,  where  my  friends  were  very  agree- 
able to  my  companions.  Young  Kennedy,  whom  we 
had  known  at  Amsterdam,  was  visiting  his  father  at 
this  time,  as  well  as  young  Ainslie,  the  other  minister's 
son,  which  improved  our  parties.  Mrs  Kennedy,  the 
mother,  was  ill  of  a  consumption,  and  British  physicians 
being  in  great  credit  there,  Monckly,  who  was  called 
Doctor,  though  he  had  not  taken  his  degree,  being 
always  more  forward  than  anybody  in  showing  himself 
o£^  was  pitched  upon  by  Mr  Kennedy  to  visit  his  wife. 
Gregory,  who  was  really  a  physician,  and  had  acquired 
both  knowledge  and  skill  by  having  been  an  appren- 
tice in  his  brother's  shop  at  Aberdeen,  and  visited  the 


izecy  Google 


patients  with  him,  was  kept  in  the  background  ;  but 
he  was  anxiously  consulted  by  Monckly  twice  a-day, 
and  tanght  htm  his  lesson,  which  he  repeated  very 
exactly,  for  I  heard  him  two  or  three  times,  being  a 
familiar  in  the  house,  while  the  good  Doctor  was  uncon- 
scious that  I  knew  of  hia  secret  oracle.  For  all  this, 
Monckly  was  only  ridiculous  on  account  of  bis  childish 
vanity,  and  his  love  of  showing  himself  off.  He  was, 
in  reaUty,  a  very  good-natured  and  obliging  man,  of 
much  benevolence  as  well  as  courtesy.  He  practised 
afterwards  in  Iiondon  with  credit,  for  they  cured  him 
of  his  affectation  at  Batson's.  He  died  not  many 
years  after. 

At  this  time  five  or  six  of  us  made  an  agreeable 
journey  on  skates,  to  see  the  painted  glass  in  the 
church  at  Tergou.  It  was  distant  twelve  miles.  We 
left  Botterdam  at  ten  o'clock,  saw  the  church,  and 
dined,  and  returned  to  Rotterdam  between  five  and 
six  in  the  evening.  It  was  moonlight,  and  a  gentle 
breeze  on  our  back,  so  that  we  returned  in  an  hour 
and  a  quarter. 

Gregory,  though  a  far  abler  man  than  Monckly,  and 
not  less  a  man  of  learning  for  his  age  than  of  taste, 
in  the  most  important  qualities  was  not  superior  to 
Monckly,  When  he  was  afterwards  tried  by  the 
ardent  spirits  of  Edinburgh  and  the  prying  eyes  of 
rivalship,  he  did  not  escape  without  tbe  imputation 
of  being  cold,  selfish,  and  cunning.  His  pretensions 
to  be  more  religious  than  others  of  his  profession,  and 
his  constant  eulogies  on  the  female  sex  as  at  least 


oy  Google 


THE  BRITISH  STUDENTS.  179 

equal,  if  not  eaperior,  to  the  male,  were  supposed  to 
be  lures  of  reputation,  or  professional  arte  to  get  into 
business.  When  those  objections  were  made  to  him 
at  Edinburgh,  I  was  able  to  take  off  the  edge  from 
them,  by  assuring  people  that  his  notions  and  modes  of 
talking  were  not  newly  adopted  for  a  purpose,  for  that 
when  at  Leyden,  at  the  age  of  twenty-one  or  twenty- 
two,  he  was  equally  incessant  and  warm  on  those 
topics,  though  he  had  not  a  female  to  flatter,  nor  ever 
went  to  church  but  when  I  dragged  him  to  please 
old  Gowan.  Having  found  Aberdeen  too  narrow 
a  circle  for  him,  he  tried  London  for  a  twelvemonth 
without  success — for  being  ungainly  in  his  pei-son 
and  manner,  and  no  lucky  accident  having  befallen 
him,  he  could  not  make  his  way  suddeuly  in  a 
situation  where  external  graces  and  address  go  much 
further  than  profound  learning  or  professional  skilL 
Dr  Gregory,  however,  was  not  without  address,  for 
he  was  much  a  master  of  conversation  on  all  subjects, 
and  without  gross  flattery  obtained  even  more  than  a 
favourable  hearing  to  himself ;  for  never  contradicting 
you  at  firat,  but  rather  assenting  or  yielding,  as  it 
were,  to  your  knowledge  and  taste,  he  very  often 
brought  you  round  to  think  as  he  did,  and  to  con- 
sider him  a  superior  man.  In  all  my  dealings  with 
him — for  he  was  my  family  physician — I  found  him 
friendly,  affectionate,  and  generous. 

An  tmlucky  accident  happened  about  the  end  of 
January,  which  disturbed  the  harmony  of  our  society, 
and  introduced  uneasiness  and  suspicion  among  us. 


oy  Google 


At  an  evening  meeting,  where  1  happened  not  to  be, 
Charles  Townsbend,  who  had  a  great  deal  of  wit 
which  he  was  fond  to  show,  even  sometimes  at  the 
expense  of  his  friends,  though  in  reality  one  of  the 
best-natured  of  men,  took  it  in  his  head  to  make  a 
butt  of  James  Johnstone,  afterwards  Sir  James  of 
Westerhall.  Not  contented  with  the  smartness  of  his 
raillery,  lest  it  should  be  obscure,  he  frequently  ac- 
companied it  with  that  motion  of  the  tongue  in  the 
cheek  which  explains  and  aggravates  everything.  He 
continued  during  the  evening  to  make  game  of  James, 
who,  slow  of  apprehension  and  unsuspicious,  had  taken 
all  in  good  part.  Some  one  of  the  company,  however, 
who  had  felt  Charles's  smartness,  which  he  did  not 
choose  to  resent,  had  gone  in  the  morning  to  John- 
stone and  opened  his  eyes  on  Townsheud's  behaviour 
over-night. 

Johnstone,  though  not  apt  to  t^e  offence,  was 
prompt  enough  in  his  resentment  when  taken,  and 
immediately  resolved  to  put  Charles's  courage  to  the 
test.  I  was  sent  for  next  forenooa  by  twelve  o'clock 
to  Charles's  lodgings,  who  looked  pale  and  undone, 
more  than  I  had  ever  seen  him.  He  was  liable  at 
that  time  to  convulsion  fits,  which  seldom  failed  to 
attack  him  after  a  late  supper.  I  asked  him  what 
was  the  matter  with  him  ;  he  answered,  that  he  had 
been  late  up,  and  had  been  ill.  He  next  asked  me  if 
I  had  ever  observed  him  use  James  Johnstone  with 
ill-natured  raillery  or  sarcasm  in  company,  or  ridicule 
him  behind  his  back.     I  answered  him  that  I  had 


oy  Google 


THE   BRITISH   STUDENTS.  181 

never  perceived  anything  between  them  but  that 
playsome  kind  of  raillery  bo  frequent  among  good 
friends  and  companions,  and  that  when  Johnstone 
was  absent  I  had  never  heard  him  ridicule  him  but 
for  trifles,  in  spite  of  which  I  conceived  he  had  a 
respect  for  him.  Upon  this  he  showed  me  a  letter 
from  Johnstone,  taxing  him  with  having  often  treated 
him  with  contempt  in  company,  and  particularly  for 
his  behaviour  the  night  before,  which  having  been 
made  to  advert  to  by  a  friend  who  was  sharper- 
sighted  than  him,  had  brought  sundry  things  to  his 
recollection,  which,  though  he  did  not  mind  at  the 
time,  were  fully  explained  to  him  by  his  behaviour 
to  him  tiie  night  before.  The  letter  concluded  with 
a  challenge.  "And  what  answer  are  you  to  make 
to  this  i "  said  I.  "  Not  fight,  to  be  sure,"  said  he, 
"fori  have  no  quarrel  with  Johnstone,  who  is  the 
best-natured  man  in  the  world."  "  If  you  can  make 
it  up,  and  keep  it  secret,  it  may  do,  otherwise  you'll 
be  dishonoured  by  the  transaction."  I  added,  "  Find 
out  the  malicious  scoundrel  if  you  can  who  has  acted 
like  a  vile  informer,  and  take  vengeance  on  him."  He 
seemed  quite  irresolute,  and  I  left  him  with  this 
advice,  either  to  make  it  up,  or  put  it  over  as  soon 
as  possible.  He  made  it  up,  to  be  sure,  but  it  was  in 
a  manner  that  hurt  him,  for  Johnstone  and  he  went 
round  all  the  lodgings  in  Leyden,  and  inquired  of 
everybody  if  any  of  them  had  ever  heard  or  seen  him 
ridicule  Johnstone.  Everybody  said  no  to  this,  and 
he  and  Johnstone  became  the  greater  friends.    But  it 


izecy  Google 


182  DEPARTUEE  FHOM  HOLLAKD. 

did  him  more  harm  than  it  wotdd  or  ought  to  have 
done  at  hia  raw  age,  if  he  had  not  afterwards  betrayed 
want  of  firmness  of  character.  This  was  a  pity,  for 
he  had  unbounded  capacity  and  application,  and  was 
good-tempered  and  affectionate. 

This  accident  in  some  measure  broke  the  bond  of 
our  society,  but  it  was  of  little  importance  to  us,  who 
meant  to  leave  Leyden  very  soon.  Gregory  and  I 
had  agreed  to  go  to  London  together,  and  when 
Monckly  heard  of  this  resolution,  he  determined  to 
accompany  us.  His  monitor  had  advised  him  to  take 
his  degree  in  Leyden,  but  the  honest  man  did  not 
choose  to  stand  the  ezamination ;  and  he  knew  that 
by  paying  a  little  more  he  could  get  his  diploma  sent 
after  him.  Dickson  remained  to  take  his  degree,  as 
he  regarded  the  additional  guineas  much  more  than 
he  feared  the  examination.  Gregory,  with  a  degree 
of  malice  due  to  the  fat  man  for  his  vanity  and  pre- 
sumption, pressed  him  very  much  to  abide  the  trial, 
and  blazoned  to  him  the  inelorious  retreat  he  was 
about  to  make ;  but  it  would  not  do,  as  Gregory 
knew  perfectly  beforehand. 

About  the  end  of  February  or  the  beginning  of 
March  we  set  out  on  our  return  to  Britain ;  when, 
passing  two  days  very  agreeably  with  our  friends  at 
Rotterdam,  we  fell  down  to  Helvoet,  and  took  our 
passage  on  board  the  packet,  which  was  to  sail  for 
Harwich  next  morning.  On  the  journey  and  voyage 
Monckly  assumed  his  proper  station,  which  was  that 
of  treasurer  and  director;  and,  to  say  the  truth,  he  did 


oy  Google 


ARRIVAL  IN   ENGLAND.  183 

it  well ;  for  except  in  one  instance,  he  managed  our 
affairs  with  a  decent  economy,  no  less  than  with  the 
generosity  that  became  his  assumed  office.  The  ex- 
ception to  this  was  his  allowing  himself  to  fee  imposed 
upon  by  the  landlord  of  the  inn  at  Helvoet,  in  laying 
in  sea-stores  for  our  voyage,  for  he  said  he  had  known 
packets  on  the  sea  for  a  week  by  calms,  &c.  The 
director  elect,  therefore,  laid  in  a  cold  ham  and  a  couple 
of  fowls,  with  a  sirloin  of  beef,  nine  bottles  of  wine 
and  three  of  brandy,  none  of  all  which  we  were  able 
to  taste  except  the  brandy. 

We  sailed  from  Helvoet  at  eight  in  the  morning, 
and  having  a  fine  brisk  gale,  quite  fair,  we  arrived  on 
the  coast  of  England  by  eight  in  the  evening  ;  though, 
having  made  the  land  too  far  to  the  northward,  it  was 
near  twelve  before  we  got  down  to  Harwich.  We 
had  beds  in  the  cabin,  and  were  all  so  heartily  sea- 
sick that  we  were  hardly  able  to  lift  up  our  heads 
the  whole  day,  far  less  to  partake  of  any  of  our  sea- 
stores,  except  a  little  brandy  to  settle  our  stomachs. 

We  had  one  cabin  passenger,  who  was  afterwards 
much  celebrated.  When  we  were  on  the  quarterdeck 
in  the  morning,  we  observed  three  foreigners,  of  dif- 
ferent ages,  who  had  under  their  care  a  young  person 
of  about  sixteen,  very  handsome  indeed,  whom  we 
took  for  a  Hanoverian  baron  coming  to  Britain  to  pay 
his  court  at  St  James's.  The  gale  freshened  so  soon 
that  we  had  not  an  opportunity  of  conversing  with 
those  foreigners,  when  we  were  obliged  to  take  to  our 
beds  in  the  cabin.     The  young  person  was  the  only 


oy  Google 


184  TRAVELLING  COMPANIONS. 

one  of  the  strangers  who  had  a  berth  there,  because, 
as  we  Bupposed,  it  occasioned  an  additional  freight. 
My  bed  was  directly  opposite  to  that  of  the  stranger, 
but  we  were  so  sick  that  there  was  no  conversation 
among  us  till  the  young  foreigner  became  very  fright- 
ened in  spite  of  the  sickness,  and  called  out  to  me  in 
French,  if  we  were  not  in  danger.  The  voice  betrayed 
her  sex  at  once,  no  less  than  her  fears.  I  consoled 
her  as  well  as  I  could,  and  soon  brought  her  above 
the  fear  of  danger.  This  beautiful  person  was  Violetti 
the  dancer,  who  was  engaged  to  the  opera  iu  the  Hay- 
market  This  we  were  made  certain  of  by  the  man, 
who  called  himself  her  father,  waiting  on  us  next  day 
at  Harwich,  requesting  our  countenance  to  his  daugh- 
ter on  her  first  appearance,  and  on  her  benefit.  I 
accordingly  was  at  the  opera  the  first  night  she  ap- 
peared, where  she  was  the  first  dancer,  and  main- 
tained her  ground  tiU  Garrick  married  her. 

We  had  so  much  trouble  about  our  baggage  that 
we  did  not  get  from  Harwich  till  one  o'clock,  and  I 
was  obliged  to  leave  Leeson's  picture,  which  I  had 
undertaken  to  carry  to  London  for  John  Wilkes.  We 
passed  the  night  at  Colchester,  where  the  foreigners 
were  likely  to  be  roughly  treated,  as  the  servants  at 
the  inn  took  offence  at  the  young  woman  in  men's 
dothes,  as  one  room  was  only  bespoke  for  all  the  four. 
We  interposed,  however,  when  Monckly's  authority, 
backed  by  us,  prevented  their  being  insulted.  They 
travelled  in  a  separate  coach  from  us,  but  we  made 
the  young  lady  dine  with  us  next  day,  which  secured 


oy  Google 


FRIENDS   IK   LONDON. 


her  good  treatment.  We  were  so  late  in  getting  to 
London  that  we  remained  all  night  together  in  an  inn 
in  Friday  Street,  and  separated  next  day,  with  a  pro- 
mise of  seeing  one  another  often  ;  yet  so  great  is  the 
city  of  London,  and  so  busy  is  everybody  kept  there, 
that,  intimate  as  we  had  been,  it  was  tliree  weeks  or  a 
month  before  we  met  again.  We  had  not  yet  found 
out  the  British  Coffeehouse,  where  so  many  of  our 
countrymen  assembled  daily. 

I  got  a  coach,  and  went  to  New  Bond  Street  to 
my  cousin.  Captain  Lyon's,  who  had  been  married  for 
a  few  years  to  Lady  Catherine  Bridges,  a  daughter  of 
the  Marquess  of  Carnarvon,  and  grandchild  of  the 
Duke  of  Chandos.  Lyon's  mother  was  an  acquaint- 
ance of  the  Marchioness,  the  young  lady's  mother  of 
the  Dysart  family.  The  Marchioness  had  fallen  in 
love  with  Lyon,  who  was  one  of  the  handsomest  men 
in  London,  but  he  escaped  by  marrying  the  daughter, 
who,  though  not  handsome,  was  young  and  alluring, 
and  had  the  prospect  of  a  great  fortune,  as  she  had 
only  one  sister,  who  was  deformed.  Here  I  renewed 
my  acquaintance  with  my  aunt  Lyon,  who  was  stUI 
a  fine  woman.  Her  elder  sister,  Mrs  Patersou,  the 
widow  of  a  Captain  Paterson  of  the  Bannockburn 
family,  a  very  plain-looking  sensible  woman,  kept 
house  with  her,  while  the  son  and  his  family  lived  in 
the  next  house,  which  belonged  to  Mrs  Lyon.  Lady 
Catherine  had  by  this  time  two  girls,  three  and  four 
years  of  age,  as  beautiful  children  as  ever  were  seen. 
They  had  bespoke  for  me  a  small  lodging  in  Little 


,..c, Google 


186  SOCIETY    IN    LONDON. 

Maddon  Street,  within  sight  of  the  back  of  their 
house.  Lyon  was  a  cheerful  fine  fellow  as  ever  was 
born,  who  had  just  returned  with  his  troop  of  the 
Horse-Guards  from  Flanders,  where  he  and  they  had 
been  for  two  campaigns  under  the  Dulte  of  Cumber- 
land. With  them  and  their  friends  I  passed  part  of 
my  time ;  but  having  found  some  of  my  old  friends 
lounging  about  the  British  and  Forrest's  Cofleehouses, 
in  Cockspur  Street,  Charing  Cross — viz.  John  Blair, 
afterwards  a  prebendary  of  Westminster,  Robert 
Smith,  afterwards  distinguished  by  the  appellation  of 
the  Duke  of  Roxburgh's  Smith,  who  introduced  me  to 
Dr  Smollett,  with  whom  he  was  intimate,  and  Charles 
Congalton  arriving  in  a  few  weeks  from  Leyden,  who 
was  a  stranger  as  well  as  myself  in  London — I  was 
at  no  loss  how  to  pass  my  time  agreeably,  when  Lyon 
and  his  family  were  engaged  in  their  own  circle.* 

By  Lyon,  however,  I  was  introduced  to  some 
families  of  condition,  and  was  carried  to  court  of  an 
evening,  for  George  II.  at  that  time  had  evening  draw- 
ing-rooms, where  his  Majesty  and  Princess  Amelia, 
who  had  been  a  lovely  woman,  played  at  cards,  and  the 
courtiers  sauntered  for  an  hour  or  two.  This  was  a 
very  insipid  amusement.  I  went  with  Lyon  also  and 
his  lady  to  a  ridotta  at  the  Haymarket,  a  ball  where 
there  were  not  fewer  than  fifteen  hundred  people,  and 

*  Of  John  Blair,  the  chronotogigt,  BOme  notices  wiU  be  Eonnd  in  tiie  Hit- 
torn  'if  HincMeij  (of  which  he  was  vicar)  by  Nichols,  in  the  BixUi  Toluma  of 
the  Tnjwjraphia  BrUaimka.  Robert  Smith  is  probably  the  Bome  who  aoo- 
ceeded  Bentley  as  Master  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  He  was  very 
eminent  in  optica  and  mathematics,  but  Bcarcely  anything  is  uov  known  of 
him  beyond  a  scanty  notice  in  Hutton'a  MalhematkalJiid'iimary. — Ed. 


oy  Google 


THE  LYONS — HEATHFIELD.  187 

which  Bobert  Keith,  the  ambassador,  told  me,  in  the 
entry,  was  a  strong  proof  of  the  greatness  and  opu- 
lence of  London,  for  he  had  stood  in  the  entry,  he  said, 
and  had  seen  all  the  ladies  come  in,  and  was  certain 
that  not  one-half  of  them  were  of  the  Court  end  of  the 
town,  for  he  knew  every  one  of  them.  Lady  Cathe- 
rine Lyon,  whom  I  squired  that  night,  and  with  whom 
I  danced,  introduced  me  to  many  of  her  acquaintance, 
and  amoDg  the  rest  to  Lady  Dalkeith  and  her  sisters, 
the  daughters  of  John,  Duke  of  Argyle,  who,  she  said, 
were  her  cousins.  The  Countess  was  then  with  child 
of  Henry,  Duke  of  Buccleuch,  who  was  born  on  the 
14th  of  September  thereafter,  who  was  my  much- 
respected  patron  and  highly-honoured  friend. 

Captain  Lyon  introduced  me  to  his  friends,  the 
officers  of  the  Horse-Guards,  with  whom  I  lived  a  good 
deal.  The  troop  he  belonged  to,  which,  I  think,  was 
Lord  Tyrawley's,  was  one  of  the  two  which  had  been 
abroad  in  Flanders,  between  whom  and  those  at  home 
there  was  a  strong  emulation  who  should  entertain 
most  expensively  when  on  guard.  Their  parties  were 
generally  in  the  evening,  when  they  had  the  most 
expensive  suppers  that  could  be  got  from  a  tavern 
— amongst  other  things  champagne  and  ice-creams, 
both  which  were  new  to  me,  and  the  last  then  rare 
in  London.  I  had  many  very  agreeable  parties  with 
those  officers,  who  were  all  men  of  the  world,  and 
some  of  them  of  erudition  and  understanding.  One 
I  must  particularly  mention  was  Captain  Elliot,  after- 
wards Lord  Heath6eld,  the  celebrated  defender  of 


oy  Google 


Gibraltar.  A  parcel  of  us  happened  to  meet  in  the 
Park  in  a  fine  evening  in  April,  who,  on  asking  each 
other  how  they  were  engaged,  seven  or  eight  of  us 
agreed  to  sup  at  the  Cardigan  at  Charing  Cross,  among 
whom  Elliot  was  one.  Lyon  and  I  undertook  to  go 
directly  to  the  house  and  bsspeak  a  room,  and  were  soon 
joined  by  our  company  and  two  or  three  more  of  their 
fiiends,  whom  they  had  met  in  their  walk.  We  passed 
the  evening  very  pleasantly,  and  when  the  bill  was 
called  for,  a  Mr  Philips,  who  was  in  the  chair,  and 
who,  by  the  death  of  a  relation  that  morning,  had 
succeeded  to  an  estate  of  XIOOO  a-year,  wished  to  pay 
the  whole  reckoning,  which  he  said  was  a  tride.  This 
was  resisted.  He  then  said  he  would  play  odds  or 
evens  with  all  the  company  in  their  turns,  whether  he 
or  they  should  pay.  This  was  agreed  to,  and  he  con- 
trived to  lose  to  everybody  except  Captain  Elliot,  who 
said  he  never  played  for  hia  reckoning.  I  observed 
on  this  afterwards  to  Lyon  that  this  appeared  parti- 
cular, and  that  Elliot,  though  by  his  conversation  a 
very  sensible  man,  yet  did  not  yield  to  the  humour  of 
the  company,  which  was  to  gratify  Philips.  He  an- 
swered me,  that  though  Captain  Elliot  was  somewhat 
singular  and  austere  in  his  manners,  yet  he  was  a  very 
worthy  and  able  officer,  for  whom  he  had  great  esteem. 
This  trait  of  singularity  occurred  to  me  when  he  be- 
came so  distinguished  an  officer,  whom  I  should  rather 
have  noted  as  sour  and  untractable. 

John  Blair  had  passed  hia  trials  as  a.  preacher  in 
Scotland,  but  having  a  few  hundred  pounds  of  patri- 


oy  Google 


BLAIR — SMOLLETT.  189 

mony,  chose  to  pay  a  visit  to  London,  where  he  loit- 
ered till  he  spent  it  all.  After  some  time  he  thought 
of  completing  and  publishiog  his  Chronological  Tables, 
the  plan  of  which  had  been  given  him  by  Dr  Hugh 
Blair,  the  celebrated  preacher.  He  became  acquainted 
with  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  with  whom  he  was  soon  a 
favourite,  and  having  been  ordained  by  him,  was  pre- 
sented to  the  living  of  Burton  Cogles,  in  his  diocese. 
He  was  afterwards  teacher  of  mathematics  to  the 
Duke  of  York,  the  King's  brother,  and  was  by  bis 
interest  preferred  to  be  a  prebendary  of  Westminster. 
He  was  a  lively  agreeable  fellow,  and  one  of  the  most 
friendly  men  in  the  world.  Smith  had  been  abroad 
with  the  young  Laird  of  M'Leod  of  that  period,  and 
was  called  home  with  his  pupil  when  the  Bebellion 
began.  He  had  been  ill  rewarded,  ■  and  was  on  his 
shifts  in  London.  He  was  a  man  of  superior  under- 
standing, and  of  a  most  gentlemanly  address.  "With 
Smollett  he  was  very  intimate.  We  four,  with  one  or 
two  more,  frequently  resorted  to  a  small  tavern  in  the 
comer  of  Cockspur  Street  at  the  Golden  Ball,  where 
we  had  a  frugal  supper  and  a  little  punch,  as  the 
finances  of  none  of  the  company  were  in  very  good 
order.  But  we  had  rich  enough  converaation  on 
literary  subjects,  which  was  enlivened  by  Smollett's 
agreeable  stories,  which  he  told  with  peculiar  grace. 

Soon  after  our  acquaintance,  Smollett  showed  me 
his  tragedy  of  "James  I.  of  Scotland,"  which  he  never 
could  bring  on  the  stage.  For  this  the  managers  could 
not  be  blamed,  though  it  soured  him  against  them. 


izecy  Google 


190  SOCIETY   IN  LONDON. 

and  he  appealed  to  the  public  by  printiog  it;  but  the 
public  seemed  to  take  part  with  the  maD^ers. 

I  waa  in  the  coffeehouse  with  Smollett  when  the  news 
of  the  battle  of  CuUodCTi  arrived,  and  when  London  all 
over  waa  in  a  perfect  uproar  of  joy.  It  waa  then  that 
Jack  Stuart,  the  son  of  the  Provost,  behaved  in  the  man- 
ner I  before  mentioned.  About  9  o'clock  I  wished  to 
go  home  to  Lyon's,  in  New  Bond  Street,  as  I  had  pro- 
mised to  Bup  with  him  that  night,  it  being  the  anni- 
versary of  his  marriage  night,  or  the  birthday  of  one 
of  his  children.  I  asked  Smollett  if  he  was  ready  to 
go,  as  he  lived  at  Mayfair;  he  said  he  was,  and  would 
conduct  me.  The  mob  were  bo  riotous,  and  the 
squibs  so  numerous  and  incessant  that  W0  were  glad 
to  go  into  a  narrow  entry  to  put  our  wigs  in  our 
pockets,  and  to  take  our  swords  from  our  belts  and 
walk  with  them  in  our  hands,  as  everybody  then  wore 
swords ;  and,  after  cautioning  me  against  speaking  a 
word,  lest  the  mob  should  discover  my  country  and  be- 
come insolent,  "  for  John  Bull,"  says  he,  "  is  as  haughty 
and  valiant  to-night  as  he  was  abject  and  cowardly 
on  the  Black  Wednesday  when  the  Highlanders  were 
at  Derby."  After  we  got  to  the  head  of  the  Hay- 
market  through  incessant  fire,  the  Doctor  led  me  by 
narrow  lanes,  where  we  met  nobody  but  a  few  boys  at 
a  pitiful  bonfire,  who  very  civilly  asked  us  for  six- 
pence, which  I  gave  them.  I  saw  not  Smollett  again 
for  some  time  after,  when  he  showed  Smith  and  me 
the  mMiuscript  of  his  Tears  of  Scotland,  which  was 
published  not  long  after,  and  had  sucfa  a  run  of 


izecy  Google 


SMOLLETT — GUTHRIE.  191 

approbation.  Smollett,  though  a  Tory,  was  not  a 
Jacobite,  but  he  had  the  feelings  of  a  Scotch  gentle- 
mao  on  the  reported  cruelties  that  were  said  to  be 
exercised  after  the  battle  of  Culloden. 

My  cousin  Lyon  was  an  Englishman  bom,  though 
of  Scottish  parents,  and  an  officer  in  the  Guards,  and 
perfectly  loyal,  and  yet  even  he  did  not  seem  to  rejoice 
80  cordially  at  the  victory  as  I  expected.  "  What's  the 
matter  ?  "  says  I ;  "  has  your  Strathmore  blood  got  up, 
that  you  are  not  pleased  with  the  quelling  of  the  Re- 
bellion ?  "  "  God  knows,"  said  he,  "  I  heai-tily  rejoice 
that  it  is  quelled ;  but  I'm  sorry  that  it  has  been 
accomplished  by  the  Duke  of  C ,  for  if  he  was  be- 
fore the  most  insolent  of  all  commanders,  what  will 
be  be  now  "i"  I  afterwards  found  that  this  sentiment 
prevailed  more  than  I  had  imagined ;  and  yet,  though 
no  general,  he  had  certainly  more  parts  and  talents 
tjian  any  of  the  family. 

I  was  witness  to  a  scene  in  the  British  Coffeehouse, 
which  was  afterwards  explained  to  me.  Captain 
David  Cheap,  who  was  on  Anson's  voyage,  and  had 
been  wrecked  on  the  coast  of  Chili,  and  was  det-ained 
there  for  some  time  by  the  Spaniards,  had  arrived  in 
London,  and  frequented  this  coffeehouse.  Being  a  man 
of  sense  and  knowledge,  he  was  employed  by  Lord  An- 
son to  look  out  for  a  proper  person  to  write  his  voyage, 
the  chaplain,  whose  journal  furnished  the  chief  mate- 
rials, being  unequal  to  the  task.  Captain  Cheap  had  a 
predilection  for  his  countrymen,  and  having  heard  of 
Guthrie,  the  writer  of  the  Westminster  Journal,  Ac, 


oy  Google 


192  SOCIETY    IK  LONDON. 

he  had  come  down  to  the  coffeehouse  that  evening  to 
inquire  about  him,  and,  if  he  was  pleased  with  what 
he  heard,  would  have  him  introduced.  Not  long 
after  Cheap  had  sat  down  and  called  for  coffee,  Guthrie 
arrived,  dressed  in  laced  clothes,  and  talking  loud  to 
everybody,  and  soon  fell  a-wrangling  with  a  gentle- 
man about  tragedy  and  comedy  and  the  unities,  Ac, 
and  laid  down  the  law  of  the  drama  in  a  peremptory 
manner,  supporting  his  arguments  with  cursing  and 
swearing.  I  saw  he  [Cheap]  was  astonished,  when,  ris- 
ing and  going  to  the  bar,  he  asked  who  this  was,  and 
finding  it  was  Guthrie,  whom  he  had  come  down  to  in- 
quire about,  be  paid  bis  coffee  and  slunk  off  in  silence. 
I  knew  him  well  afterwards,  and  asked  him  one  day  if 
he  remembered  the  incident.  He  told  me  that  it  was 
true  that  he  came  there  with  the  design  of  talking 
with  Guthrie  on  the  subject  of  the  voyage,  but  was  so 
much  disgusted  with  his  vapouring  manner  that  he 
thought  no  more  of  him.* 

*  Of  WiUUm  Ontfarie,  whose  luune  ii  on  the  tdtl«-pageB  of  maoj'  voluminona 
works,  one  of  wbicli,  tbe  Geografhiad  Orammar,  had  great  celebrity  and  & 
Tost  circulation,  variuus  notices  vill  be  found  in  D'lsmeli's  Calamitia  qf 
AvlJmrs  and  Boewell'a  Johnton.  Hie  aoixnint  of  Anson's  voyage,  so  well 
esteemed  in  its  own  day,  and  so  well  worth  reading  in  the  preaenl^  both 
from  the  intereeting  character  of  the  erente  and  the  admirable  way  in  which 
Uiey  are  told,  professes  to  have  been  compiled  from  Anson's  own  papers  by 
Richard  Walt4!r,  surgeon  of  Uie  CentnrioD,  one  of  the  vessels  in  the  expedi- 
tion. It  is  believed,  however,  that  the  work  was  edited,  if  not  almost  re- 
written, by  Benjamin  Robins,  the  mathematician.  William  Davis,  in  his 
Olio,  err  Bibliographical  and  Literary  Aniedela  and  Mtmoranda,  says : 
"  Walters'  manuscript,  which  was  at  first  intended  to  have  been  printed, 
being  little  more  than  a  transcript  from  the  ship's  journals,  Mr  Robins  was 
recommended  as  a  proper  person  to  revise  it ;  and  it  was  then  determined 
that  the  whole  should  be  written  by  him,  the  transcripts  of  the  joumolB 
serving  as  materials  only ;  and  that,  wiHi  the  Introduction  and  many  diH- 


,1.0,  Google 


LONDON   IN   1746.  193 

I  met  Captain  Cheap  in  Scotland  two  years  after 
tbis,  when  he  came  to  visit  his  relations.  I  met  him 
often  at  hia  half-brother's,  George  Cheap,  Collector 
of  Customs,  at  Prestonpans,  and  in  summer  at  goat- 
whey  quarters,  where  I  lived  with  him  for  three 
weeks,  and  became  very  confidential  with  him.  He 
had  a  sound  and  sagacious  understanding  and  an 
intrepid  mind,  and  had  great  injustice  done  to  him 
in  Byron's  Narrative,  which  Major  Hamilton,  who 
was  one  of  the  unfortunate  people  in  the  Wager, 
told  me  wafi  in  many  things  false  or  exaggerated.* 
One  instance  I  remember,  which  is  this,  that  Cheap 
was  so  selfish  that  he  had  concealed  four  pounds  of  seal 
in  the  lining  of  his  coat,  to  abstract  from  the  com- 
pany for  his  own  use.  He,  no  doubt,  had  the  piece 
of  seal,  and  Captain  Hamilton  saw  him  secrete  it ; 
but  when  they  had  got  clear  of  a  caiaque,  who  plun- 
dered them  of  all  he  could,  the  captain,  producing  hia 
seal,  aaid  to  his  companions,  "  That  devil  wanted  to 
reduce  me  to  bis  own  terms  by  famine,  but  I  out- 
plotted  him ;    for  with  this  piece  of  seal  we  could 


a  in  the  body  of  the  book,  of  which  not  the  least  Imit  had  been 
given  by  Walter,  he  extended  Hie  account,  in  his  own  peculiar  style  and 
manner,  to  nearly  tvice  its  original  lize."  Dbvik  prints  a  letter  from  Lord 
Aniion,  tending  to  confinn  Mh  titateinent.~£D. 

■  Hw  book  here  referred  to,  written  by  the  poet's  grandfather,  and  cited 
in  Don  Juan  aa  "My  graodad'a  Narrative,"  waa  very  popular.  Its  title  ia 
"  The  Narrative  of  the  Honourable  John  Byron  (oomiofljider  in  a  late  aipcdi- 
tioa  round  the  woiid) ;  containing  an  account  of  the  great  diatreages  Eufieied 
by  himeelf  and  his  companiona  on  the  coast  of  Patagonia,  from  the  year 
1740  tin  their  arrival  in  England  in  1746;  with  a  description  of  St  Jagode 
Chili,  and  the  nuumere  and  ciutoma  of  the  inhabitants.  Also  a  tdation  ol 
the  lo«a  ot  the  Wager  Qum-of-war,  one  of  Lord  AnHon's  squadron : "  1766. — 


oy  Google 


104  LONDON  IN   1746. 

have  held  out  twenty-four  hoars  longer."  Another 
trait  of  his  character  Captain  Hamilton  told  me,  which 
was, — that  when  they  arrived  in  Chili,  to  the  number 
of  eleven,  who  had  adhered  to  Cheap,  and  who  were 
truly,  for  hunger  and  nakedness,  worse  than  the  low- 
est beggars,  and  were  delighted  with  the  arrival  of  a 
Spanish  officer  from  the  governor,  who  presented  Cheap 
with  a  petition,  which  he  said  he  behoved  to  signj 
otherwise  they  could  not  be  taken  under  the  protec- 
tion of  the  Spanish  governor ;  Cheap,  having  glanced 
this  paper  with  his  eye,  and  throwing  it  indignantly 
on  the  ground,  said  sternly  to  the  officer  that  he 
would  not  sign  such  a  paper,  for  the  officers  of  the 
King  of  England  could  die  of  hunger,  but  they  dis- 
dained to  beg.  Hamilton  and  Byron  and  all  the 
people  fell  into  despair,  for  they  believed  that  the 
captain  was  gone  mad,  and  that  they  were  all  undone. 
But  it  had  a  quite  contrary  effect,  for  the  officer  now 
treated  him  with  unbounded  respect,  and,  going  hastily 
to  the  governor,  returned  immediately  with  a  blank 
sheet  of  paper,  and  desired  Captain  Cheap  to  dictate 
or  write  his  request  in  his  own  way. 

Hamilton  added  that  Byron  and  he  being  then  very 
young,  about  sixteen  or  seventeen,  they  frequently 
thought  they  were  ruined  by  the  captain's  behaviour, 
which  was  often  mysterious,  and  always  arrogant  and 
high ;  but  that  yet  in  the  sequel  they  found  that  he 
had  always  acted  under  the  guidance  of  a  sagacious 
foresight.  This  was  marking  him  as  a  character  truly 
fit  for  command,  which  was  the  conclusion  I  drew 


izecy  Google 


LONDON  IN   1746.  195 

from  my  mtercourse  with  him  in  Scotland.  On  my 
inquiring  at  Hamilton  what  had  made  Byron  so  severe, 
he  said  he  believed  it  was  that  the  captain  one  day 
had  called  him  "  puppy"  when  he  waa  petulant,  and 
feeling  himself  in  the  wrong,  he  endeavoured  to  make 
np  with  Byron  by  greater  civility,  which  the  other 
rejecting,  Cheap  kept  him  at  a  greater  distance.  He 
entirely  cleared  Cheap  from  any  blame  for  shooting 
Cozens,  into  which  he  was  led  by  \mavoidable  cir- 
cumstances, and  which  completely  re-established  his 
authority. 

As  I  had  seen  the  Chevalier  Prince  Charles  frequently 
in  Scotland,  I  was  appealed  to  if  a  print  that  was 
selling  in  aU  the  shops  was  not  like  him.  My  answer 
was,  that  it  had  not  the  least  resemblance.  Having 
been  taken  one  night,  however,  to  a  meeting  of  the 
Royal  Society  by  Microscope  Baker,  there  was  intro- 
duced a  Hanoverian  baron,  whose  lik^iees  was  so 
strong  to  the  print  which  passed  for  the  young  Pre- 
tender, that  I  had  no  doubt  that,  he  being  a  stranger, 
the  printsellers  had  got  him  sketched  out,  that  they 
might  make  something  of  it  before  his  vera  effigies 
could  be  had.  Experiments  in  electricity  were  thai 
bat  new  in  England,  and  I  saw  them  well  exhibited 
at  Baker's,  whose  wife,  by  the  by,  was  a  daughter  of 
the  celebrated  Daniel  Defoa 

I  dined  frequently  with  a  club  of  officers,  mostly 
Scotch,  at  a  coffeehouse  at  Church  Court  in  the  Strtmd, 
where  Charles  Coogalton  lodged,  and  who  introduced 
me  to  the  club,  many  of  whom  were  old  acquaintances, 


izecy  Google 


196  LONDON  IN   1746. 

such  as  Captain  Heniy  Fletcher,  Boyd  Porterfield,  and 
sundry  more  who  had  been  spared  at  the  fatal  battle 
of  FouteDoy.  We  had  an  excellent  dinner  at  lOd. 
— I  thought  as  good  as  those  in  Holland  at  a  guilder. 
The  company,  however,  were  so  much  pleased  that 
they  voluntarily  raised  it  to  Is.  6d.,  and  they  were 
right ;  for  as  they  generally  went  to  the  play  at  six 
o'clock,  the  advance  of  the  ordinary  left' them  at 
liberty  to  forsake  the  bottle  early. 

The  theatres  were  not  very  attractive  this  season, 
as  Garrick  had  gone  over  to  Dublin ;  there  still  re- 
mained, however,  what  was  enough  for  a  straoger — 
Mrs  Pritchard,  and  Mrs  Clive,  and  Macklin,  who  were 
all  excellent  in  their  way.  But  I  had  seen  Hughes 
and  Mrs  Hamilton  in  Edinburgh,  and  whether  or  not 
it  mjglit  be  owing  to  the  force  of  first  impressions,  I 
then  thought  that  they  were  not  surpassed  by  those 
I  saw  in  London. 

Of  the  literary  people  I  met  with  at  this  time  in 
Ix>udon,  I  must  not  forget  Thomson  the  poet  and  Dr 
Armstrong.  Dickson  had  come  to  London  from  Ley- 
den  with  his  degree  of  M.D.,  and  had  been  introduced 
to  Armstrong,  who  was  his  countryman.  A  party 
was  formed  at  the  Ducie  Tavern  at  Temple  Bar,  where 
the  company  were  Armstrong,  Dickson,  and  Andrew 
Millar,  with  Alurdoch  his  &iend.^    Thomson  came  at 

*  Aa  to  Dickson,  see  further  on.  p.  206.  The  Bevereiid  Patrick  Murdoch 
was  the  author  of  Beveral  scientific  works,  sud  of  memoirH  of  M'Laoiin  the 
tnnthematician  and  Thomson  the  poet,  to  whom  he  ii  sud  to  have  sat  for 
the  portrait  of  the  "little,  fat,  round,  oily  man  of  Qod"  in  the  CtuOe  qf 
Indoleace,  who  "had  a  rogoisb  twinkle  in  bis  eye,  and  shnae  all  ghtteriug 
with  ungodly  dew,"^ — Bi>. 


D,  Google 


LONDON  IN  1746.  107 

last,  and  diBappointed  me  both  by  his  appearance  and 
coDverBation.  Armstrong  bore  him  down,  having  got 
into  his  sarcastical  vein  by  the  wine  he  had  drunk 
before  Thomson  joined  us. 

At  that  particular  time  strangers  were  excluded 
from  the  House  of  Commons,  and  I  had  not  then  a 
.strong  curiosity  for  that  kind  of  entertainment.  I 
saw  all  the  sights  as  usual  for  strangers  in  London, 
and  having  procured  a  small  pamphlet  which  de- 
scribed the  public  buildings  with  taste  and  dlscem- 
ment>  I  visited  them  with  that  in  my  hand.  On 
Sundays  I  went  with  Lyon  and  his  family  to  St 
George's  Church  in  Hanover  Square.  Sometimes  I 
went  to  St  James's  Church  to  hear  Dr  Seeker,  who 
was  the  rector  of  that  parish,  and  a  fine  preacher.  I 
was  twice  at  the  opera,  which  seemed  so  very  far 
from  real  life  and  so  unnatural  that  I  was  pleased 
with  nothing  but  the  danciug,  which  was  exquisite, 
especially  that  of  Yioletti. 


izecy  Google 


CHAPTER  V. 

1716-1748:  AQE,  24-26. 

BKtURN    TO   8C0TUND BNOLI3H    8<;ESERT  —  WINDSOR — OSFORD 

TRAVELUNO    ADVENTURES rRESENTED    TO     THE     CUUBCn     OP 

COCKBURHBPATH  —  SUBaEqUBSTLY    BBITLED  AT   INVERE8K HIS 

SETTLEMENT  TOERE  PROPHESIED  AND  FOBEOBDAISED ANECDOTES 

ANTHONY    COLLINS — SOCIAL   LIFE   IN  INVERESK  AMD   HlISBRIr- 

BURGU- — ENGLISH  NOTION    THAT    THE  SCOTS   HAVE   NO   HDMOUB 
— JOHN  HOHE — SKEICa  OF  THE  ABSIBTAMT  AT  INVEBESK. 

Vauxhall  funuBhed  early  in  May  a  fine  enteitain- 
ment,  but  I  was  now  urged  by  my  father  to  return 
home ;  and  accordingly  Charles  Congalton  and  I  left 
London  about  the  middle  of  May  on  horseback,  and, 
having  Windsor  and  Oxford  to  see,  we  took  the 
west  road,  and  were  delighted  with  the  beauty  of  the 
country.  At  Windsor,  which  charmed  us,  we  met 
with  some  old  acquaintances — Dr  Francis  Home  and 
Dr  Adam  Austin,  who  were  then  surgeons  of  dragoons, 
and  who,  when  afterwards  settled  at  Edinburgh  as 
physicians,  became  eminent  in  their  line.  At  Oxford 
we  knew  nobody  but  Dr  John  Smith,  M.D.,  who  was 
a  Glasgow  exhibitioner,  and  then  taught  mathematics 
with  success  in  Oxford.     He  was  a  good  kind  of  man. 


izecy  Google 


JOURNEY  TO  SCOTLAND.  199 

and  became  an  eminent  pj^titdooer.  He  went  about 
with  us,  and  showed  ua  all  the  colleges,  with  which 
we  were  really  aatonished.  We  took  the  road  by 
Warwick,  and  were  much  pleased  with  that  town  and 
Lord  Brooks'  castle.  When  we  came  to  lichfield, 
we  met,  as  we  expected,  with  John  Dickson  of  Kil- 
bucho,  M.P.,  who  accompanied  us  during  the  rest  of 
our  journey,  till  we  arrived  in  Scotland. 

As  three  make  a  better  travelling  party  than  two, 
society  was  improved  by  this  junction ;  for  though  Kil- 
bucho  was  a  singular  man,  he  knew  the  country,  which 
he  had  often  travelled ;  and  his  absurdities,  which  were 
innocent,  amused  us.  As  well  as  he  knew  the  country, 
however,  when  we  came  to  the  river  Esk,  and  to  the 
usual  place  of  passing  it — for  there  was  then  no  bridge 
opposite  Gretna  Green — although  he  had  insisted  on 
our  dismissing  the  guide  we  had  brought  from  some 
distance  to  show  us  the  road,  yet  nothing  could  per- 
suade him,  nor  even  his  servant,  to  venture  into  that 
ford  which  he  professed  he  knew  so  well  The  tide 
was  not  up,  but  the  river  was  a  little  swollen.  Con- 
galton  and  I  became  impatient  of  his  obstinate  cow- 
ardice, and,  thinking  we  observed  the  footstep  of  a 
horse  on  the  opposite  side  (what  we  thought  a  horse's 
footstep  turned  out  a  piece  of  sea-ware  which  the  tide 
had  left),  we  ventured  in  together  and  got  safe  through, 
while  the  gallant  knight  of  the  shire  for  the  county  of 
Peebles,  with  his  squire,  stood  on  the  bank  till  he  saw 
us  safe  throu^  This  disgusted  us  not  a  little,  but 
as  I  was  to  part  with  him  at  Gretna,  and  go  round  by 


izecy  Google 


200  JOUENET  TO  SCOTLAND. 

Aiman  and  Dumfries  to  visit  my  friends,  I  had  only 
half  an  hour  more  of  hia  company,  which  I  passed  in 
deriding  his  cowardice.  Congalton,  anxious  to  get 
soon  to  Edinburgh,  accompanied  him  by  the  Moffat 
road.  But  strange  to  tell  of  a  Scotch  laird,  when 
they  came  to  the  Crook  Inn,  within  a  few  miles  of 
Kilbucho,  which  lies  about  half  a  mile  off  the  road  as 
it  approaches  Broughton,  he  wished  Congalton  a  good 
evening  without  having  the  hospitality  to  ask  him  to 
lodge  a  night  with  him,  or  even  to  breakfast  as  he 
passed  next  morning.  I  was  happy  to  find  after- 
wards that  all  tlie  Tweeddale  lairds  were  not  like 
this  savage. 

I  passed  only  two  days  at  Dumfries  and  Tinwald, 
at  which  last  place  my  old  grandfather,  who  was  then 
seventy-two,  was  rejoiced  to  see  me,  and  not  a  little 
proud  to  find  that  his  arguments  had  prevailed,  and 
had  sufficient  force  to  prevent  my  deviating  into 
any  other  profession  than  the  clerical.  When  I  re- 
turned to  my  father's  hous^  I  found  all  the  family  in 
good  health  except  my  brother  William,  who  was  then 
in  his  sixteenth  year,  and  had  all  the  appearance  of 
going  into  a  decline.  My  favourite  sister  Catherine 
had  fallen  a  prey  to  the  same  disease  in  February. 
I  had  described  to  Gregory  when  at  Leyden  the  state 
of  her  health,  and  the  qualities  of  mind  and  temper 
that  had  attached  me  to  her  so  strongly.  He  said 
chat  I  would  never  see  her  again,  for  those  exquisite 
qualities  were  generally  attached  to  such  a  frail  tex- 
ture of  body  as  promised  but  short  duration.    William 


oy  Google 


PmST  SERUON.  201 

was  as  remarkable  in  one  sex  as  she  was  in  the  other; 
an  exceUent  capacity  for  languages  and  sciences,  a 
kind  and  generous  temper,  a  magnanimous  soul,  and 
that  superior  leading  mind  that  made  him  be  always 
looked  up  to  by  his  companions ;  with  a  beautiful 
countenance  and  a  seemingly  well-formed  body,  which 
were  not  proof  against  the  slow  but  certain  progress 
of  that  insidious  disease.  He  lived  to  November 
1747,  and  then,  to  my  infinite  regret,  gave  way  to 
fate. 

I  had  only  one  sermon  to  deliver  before  the  Presby- 
tery of  Haddington  to  become  a  preacher,  which  was 
over  in  June.  My  first  appearances  were  attended  to 
with  much  expectation ;  and  I  had  the  satisfaction  to 
find  that  the  first  sermon  I  ever  preached,  not  on 
trials,  which  was  on  the  fast  day  before  the  sacra- 
ment at  Tranent,  had  met  with  universal  approbation. 
The  genteel  people  of  Prestonpans  parish  were  all 
tiiere ;  and  one  young  lady,  to  whom  I  had  been  long 
attached,  not  having  been  able  to  conceal  her  admira- 
tion of  my  oratory,  I  inwardly  applauded  my  own 
resolution  of  adhering  to  the  promise  I  had  made  my 
family  to  persevere  in  the  clerical  profession. 

I  revisited  Dumfries  and  Tinwald  again  to  preach 
two  Sundays  for  my  grandfather,  who  gave  me  his 
warmest  approbation.  One  Mr  William  Stewart,  an 
old  clergyman,  who  heard  me  on  a  week-day  at  Dum- 
fries, gave  me  more  self-confidence,  for  he  was  a  good 
judge,  without  partiality.  I  returned  home,  and  con- 
tinued composing  a  sermon  now  and  then,  which  I 


oy  Google 


202  PROFESSIONAL  PB03PECT3. 

first  preached  for  my  iiatbei,  and  then  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood. 

Our  society  was  still  pretty  good ;  for  though  Hew 
Horn  was  no  more,  Mr  Keith  had  left;  us,  and  Cheap's 
eldest  son,  Alexander,  had  been  killed  at  the  battle  of 
Fontenoy, — Mr  "William  Grant,  then  Lord  Advocate, 
had  bought  Prestongrange,  and  resided  much  there : 
Lord  Drummore,  too,  was  still  in  the  parish,  and  with 
both  of  them  I  was  in  good  habits.  Hew  Bann&tine 
had  been  ordained  minister  of  Onniston,  who  was  a 
first-rate  man  for  sound  understanding  and  classical 
learning;  Robertson  was  at  Gladsmuir;  and  in  Janu- 
ary 1747  John  Home  was  settled  at  Athelstaneford ; 
so  that  I  had  neighbours  and  companions  of  the  first 
rank  in  point  of  mind  and  erudition. 

In  harvest  this  year  I  was  presented  by  John  Hay, 
Esq.  of  Spot,  to  the  church  of  Cockbumspath.  As 
my  father  and  grandfather  were  always  against  re- 
sisting Providence,  I  was  obliged  to  accept  of  it.  It 
was  an  olscure  distant  place,  without  amenity,  com- 
fort, or  society,  where  if  I  had  been  settled,  I  would 
have  more  probably  fallen  "nto  idleness  and  dissipa- 
tion than  a  course  of  study ;  for  preferment  is  so 
difficult  to  be  obtained  in  our  Church,  and  so  trifling 
when  you  have  obtained  it,  that  it  requires  great 
energy  of  mmd  not  to  fall  asleep  when  you  are  fixed 
in  a  country  charge.  From  this  I  was  relieved,  by 
great  good-luck.  There  was  a  Mr  Andrew  Gray, 
afterwards  minister  of  Abemethy,  who  was  a  very 
great  friend  of  my  father's.    He  had  been  preaching 


izecy  Google 


PBOFESaiONAL  PB03PECTS.  i203 

one  Sunday  in  the  b^iumiug  of  1747  for  Fred.  Car- 
michae],  miniBter  of  Inveresk,  and  stayed  with  him  all 
night :  &oni  him  he  had  drawn  the  secret  that  Presi- 
dent Forbes,  who  lived  in  his  pariah,  had  secured  for 
him  a  church  that  was  recently  vacant  in  Edinburgh. 
Gray,  who  was  very  friendly  and  ardent,  and  knew 
my  father's  connections,  urged  him  without  loss  of 
time  to  apply  foi  Inveresk.  By  this  time  I  had 
preached  thrice  at  Cockbumspath,  and  was  very  ac- 
ceptable to  the  people.  My  father  was  unwilling  to 
take  any  step  about  a  church  that  would  not  even  he 
vacant  for  a  year  to  come ;  but  Gray  was  very  urgent, 
and  backed  all  his  other  arguments  with  my  father 
with  the  idea  that  his  not  doing  his  utmost  would  be 
peevishly  rejecting  the  gift  of  Providence  when' within 
his  reach.  My  father  at  last  mounted  his  hors^  for 
that  he  would  have  done  had  the  distance  been  but 
half  a  mile,  and  away  he  went,  and  found  Lord  Drum- 
more  on  the  point  of  going  to  Edinburgh  for  the  week. 
My  fether  opened  his  budget,  which  he  received  most 
cordially,  and  told  him  there  was  great  probability  of 
success  for  that  he  was  well  enough  to  write  both  to 
the  Duke  of  Buccleuch  the  patron,  and  to  the  Duke 
of  Queensberry,  his  brother-in-law.  Besides  that. 
Provost  Bell  of  Dumfries  had  everything  to  say  with 
the  Duke  of  Queensberry.  In  a  few  posts  there  were 
favourable  answers  &om  both  the  dukes,  and  a  pro- 
mise of  Inveresk 

Lord  Drummore  was  a  true  friend  of  my  father, 
and  had  in  summer  1746  recommended  me  to  Lord 


oy  Google 


201  PROFESSIONAL  PKOSPKOTS. 

Stair  for  one  of  his  churches  that  was  about  to  be 
vacant  hj  the  translation  of  the  minister;  and  I 
preached  a  day  at  Kirkliston  before  his  lady  with 
that  view.  But  the  translation  did  not  take  place  at 
that  time.  Mr  Hay  had  presented  me  to  CockbumB- 
path,  and  on  that  I  would  have  been  settled.  The 
Crown,  soon  after  I  gave  it  up,  commenced  a  pro- 
secution against  Mr  Hay,  and  were  found  to  have 
the  right  Mr  John  Hay  of  Spot  was  a  very  good 
man,  though  not  of  remarkable  talents  :  he  died  un- 
married, and  the  estate  went  to  his  brother  Wil- 
liam. My  father  had  been  their  tutor  in  the  year 
1714-15,  and  they  retained  the  greatest  regard  for 
hi"i, 

Jn  the  preceding  winter  I  had  preached  three  times 
at  Cockbumspath,  and  was  so  acceptable  to  the  people 
that  I  should  have  an  unanimous  call,  which  was  on 
the  point  of  being  moderated  when  the  promise  of 
Inveresk  was  obtained.  My  father  wished  me  to  let 
my  settlement  go  on,  but  I  resisted  that,  as  I  thought 
it  was  tampering  with  people  to  enter  into  so  close  a 
relation  with  them  that  was  so  soon  to  be  dissolved. 
The  puzzle  was  how  to  get  off  from  the  Presbytery  of 
Dunbar,  who  were  desirous  of  having  me  among 
them  ;  but  I  soon  solved  the  difficulty  by  saying  to 
Lord  Dnimmore  and  my  iather  that  nothing  could 
be  so  easy;  for  as  I  had  accepted  of  the  presentation 
by  a  letter  of  acceptance,  I  had  nothing  to  do  but  to 
withdraw  that  acceptance ;  this  I  accordingly  did  in 
January  or  February  1747.    At  this  period  it  was 


oy  Google 


PROFESSIONAL  PROSPECTa.  203 

that  John  Home  was  settled  in  Atiielstaneford,  which 
he  obtained  by  the  interest  of  Alexander  Home, 
Esq.  of  Eccles,  afterwards  Solicitor-General,  with  Sir 
Francis  Kinloch,  who  was  his  uncle.  He  was  still 
aliye  as  well  as  his  lady,  but  his  son  David,  who  was 
the  year  before  married  to  Harriet  Cockbum,  the 
sister  of  Sir  Alexander,  was  li-ring  in  the  house  of 
Gilmerton,  which,  as  it  had  been  always  hospitable, 
was  rendered  more  agreeable  by  the  young  people ; 
for  the  husband  was  shrewd  and  sensible,  and  his 
wife  beautiful,  lively,  and  agreeable,  and  was  aspiring 
at  some  knowledge  and  taste  in  belles  lettres.  This 
house,  for  that  reason,  became  a  great  resort  for  John 
Home  and  his  friends  of  the  clergy. 

This  summer,  1747,  passed  as  usual  in  visiting 
Dumfriesshire,  where  I  had  many  friends  and  rela- 
tions ;  where,  in  addition  to  the  rest,  I  became  well 
acquainted  with  Mr  William  Cunningham,  at  that 
time  minister  of  Dunisdeer,  and  one  of  the  most 
accomplished  and  agreeable  of  our  order.  When  the 
Duchess  of  Queensberry  was  at  Drumlanrig,  where  she 
was  at  least  one  summer  after  he  was  minister,  she  soon 
discovered  his  superior  merit,  and  made  him  her  daily 
companion,  insomuch  that  the  servants  and  country 
people  called  him  her  Grace's  walking  -  staff.  My 
cousin,  William  Wight,  afterwards  professor  at  Glas- 
gow, was  a  great  favourite  of  this  gentleman,  and 
used  to  live  much  with  him  in  summer  during  the 
vacation  of  the  Coll^  of  Edinburgh,  and  was  veiy 
much  improved  by  his  instructive  conversation. 


izecy  Google 


206  FAMILY  POLITICS. 

My  sister  Margaret,  who  had  been  brought  ap  at 
Dumfnes  hj  her  aunt  Bell,  who  had  no  children,  was 
now  past  fifteen,  and  already  disclosed  all  that  beauty 
of  person,  sweetness  of  temper  and  disposition,  and 
that  superiority  of  talents  which  made  her  afterwards 
be  so  much  admired,  and  gave  her  a  sway  in  the 
politics  of  the  town  which  was  surprising  in  so 
young  a  female.  Her  uncle,  George  Bell,  was  the 
political  leader,  who  was  governed  by  his  wife, — who 
was  swayed  by  her  niece  and  Frank  Baton,  Surveyor 
of  the  Customs,  who  was  a  very  able  man,  and  who, 
with  my  sister,  were  the  secret  springs  of  all  the  pro- 
vost's conduct. 

Dr  Thomas  Dickson,  who  was  his  nephew,  by  his 
solicitation,  after  trying  London  for  nine  yeare,  was 
prevailed  on  by  his  uncle,  the  provost,  to  come  down 
to  Dumfries  in  1755,  to  try  his  fortune  as  a  practi- 
tioner of  physic  ;  but  Dr  Even  Gilchrist  was  too  well 
established,  and  the  field  too  narrow,  for  him  to 
do  anything ;  so  at  the  end  of  a  year  he  returned  to 
London  again,  where  he  did  better.  During  that 
year,  however,  he  did  what  was  not  very  agreeable  to 
me.  He  gained  my  sister's  affections,  and  a  promise 
of  marriage,  though  in  point  of  mind  there  was  a  very 
great  inequality ;  but  he  had  been  the  only  young 
man  in  the  town  whose  conversation  was  enlightened 
enough  for  her  superior  understanding,  and  she  had 
been  pestered  by  the  courtship  of  several  vulgar 
and  illiterate  blockheads,  to  be  clear  of  whom  she 
engaged  herself,  though  that  engagement  could  not 


oy  Google 


FAMILY  POUTICS.  207 

be  fulfilled  for  four  years  or  more,  when  their  uncle 
the  proYOSt  was  dead,  and  Dickson  in  better  circum- 
stances. 

I  bad,  for  three  weeks  this  summer,  been  at  the 
goat-whey  with  Mrs  Qieap'a  family,  at  a  place  called 
Duchery,  at  the  head  of  the  Forth,  where  I  met 
Captain  David  Cheap,  above  mentioned.  There  was 
also  the  magnet  which  drew  me  after  her,  with  unseen 
though  irresistible  power, — the  star  that  swayed  and 
guided  all  my  actions ;  and  there  I  hoped  that,  by 
acquiring  the  esteem  of  the  imcle,  I  had  the  better 
chance  of  obtaining  my  object.  In  the  first  I  suc- 
ceeded, but  in  the  last  I  finally  iailed,  though  I  did 
not  desist  &om  the  persistence  for  several  years  after. 
In  the  end  of  this  year  my  brother  William  died,  at 
the  age  of  seventeen,  who,  in  spite  of  his  long  bad 
heidth,  was  likely  to  have  acquired  as  much  learning 
and  science  as,  with  his  good  sense,  would  have  made 
him  a  distinguished  member  of  society.  He  was 
much  regretted  by  all  his  companions,  who  loved  him 
to  ezcess.  His  own  chief  regret  was,  that  he  was  not 
to  live  to  see  me  minister  of  Inveresk,  the  prospect  of 
which  settlement  so  near  my  father  had  given  him 
much  satisfaction. 

,  When  Mr  Frederick  Carmichael  was  translated  to 
Edinburgh,  and  the  time  drew  near  when  I  was  to  be 
presented  to  Inveresk,  there  arose  much  murmuring 
in  the  parish  against  me,  as  too  young,  too  full  of 
levity,  and  too  much  addicted  to  the  company  of  my 
superiors,  to  be  fit  for  so  important  a  charge,  together 


izecy  Google 


208  SETTLEMENT  AT  INVEEESK. 

with  many  doubts  about  my  having  the  grace  of  God, 
an  occult  quality  which  the  people  cannot  define,  but 
Burely  is  in  full  opposition  to  the  defects  they  saw  iu 
me.*  A  part  of  my  early  history  was  on  this  occasion 
of  more  efiect  than  can  be  conceived.  There  was  one 
Ann  Hall,  a  sempstress,  who  had  lived  close  by  the 
manse  of  Prestonpans  when  I  was  a  boy.  She  waa 
by  this  time  married  at  Dalkeith,  and  a  Seceder  of 
the  strictest  sect,  and  a  great  leader  among  her  own 
peopla  As  many  people  from  Inveresk  parish  fre- 
quented her  shop  at  Dalkeith  on  market-days,  the 
conversation  naturally  fell  on  the  subject  of  who  was 
to  be  their  minister.  By  this  time  I  had  been  pre- 
sented, but  they  said  it  would  be  uphill  work,  for  an 
opposition  was  rising  against  so  young  a  man,  to 
whom  they  had  many  faults,  and  that  they  expected 
to  be  able  to  prevent  the  settlement.  "  Your  opposi- 
tion will  be  altogether  in  vain,"  says  Mrs  Ann,  "  for  I 
know  that  it  is  foreordained  that  he  shall  be  your 
minister.  He  foretold  it  himself  when  he  was  but  six 
years  of  age  ;  and  you  know  that '  out  of  the  mouths 
of  babes  and  sucklings,' "  &c.  The  case  was,  that  soon 
after  I  had  read  the  Bible  to  the  old  wives  in  the 
churchyard,  as  1  mentioned  (p.  4),  I  waa  diverting 
myself  on  Mrs  Ann's  stairhead,  as  was  often  the  case. 
She  came  to  the  door,  and,  stroking  my  bead  and 
caressing  me,  she  called  me  a  fine  boy,  and  hoped  to 

*Infais  "RecoUectiona,"lieaddatathiicaUlogiieo{objectioiu — "I danced 
frequently  in  a  uuumerproliibited  by  the  laws  of  tlie  Church  {  that  I  wore 
mj  bat  agee  ;  and  had  been  seen  gaJIopino  through  the  Liolis  oae  day  be- 
tweea  one  Mid  two  o'clock." 


oy  Google 


SETTLEMEST   AT  IMVERESK.  209 

live  to  flee  me  my  father's  saccessor.  "  No,  no,"  says 
I  (I  suppose,  alarmed  at  the  thoughts  of  my  father 
dying  so  soon),  "  111  never  be  minister  of  that  church ; 
but  yonder's  my  church,"  pointing  to  the  steeple  of 
Invereak,  which  was  d^tinctly  seen  from  the  stair- 
head. She  held  up  her  hands  with  wonder,  and  stored 
it  up  in  her  heart ;  and  telling  this  simple  story 
twenty  times  every  market-day  to  Musselburgh  people 
for  several  months,  it  made  such  an  impression  that 
the  opposition  died  away.  The  reign  of  enthusiasm 
was  so  recent,  that  such  anecdotes  still  made  an 
impression  on  the  populace. 

After  all  the  forms  were  gone  through,  and  about 
a  year  had  elapsed  after  the  translation  of  Mr  Frede- 
rick Carmichael  to  Edinburgh,  I  was  ordained  minister 
of  Inveresk,  on  the  2d  of  August,  O.S.,  1748,  by  Mr 
Bobert  Paton,  minister  of  Lasswade  (as  honest  and 
gentlemanly  a  person  as  any  of  his  cloth),  with  the 
almost  universal  goodwill  of  the  parish.  The  only 
person  of  consideration  who  was  not  present  at  the 
ordination  was  Sir  James  Dalrymple  of  Newhailea, 
who  had  taken  umbrage  at  his  being  refused  the  pre- 
sentation, when  he  had  applied  for  it  to  Gersham 
Carmichael,  the  brother  of  Frederick.  He  and  his 
family,  however,  attended  the  church  on  the  first 
Sunday  after  the  ordination,  when  he  came  round  and 
welcomed  me  to  the  parish,  and  invited  me  to  dine 
with  him  next  day,  which  I  did,  and  continued  ever 
after  in  perfect  friendship  with  him  till  his  death  in 
1751. 


oy  Google 


210  PERSONAL  SKETCHES. 

Sir  James  Dabymple  was  the  son  of  Sir  David,  who 
had  been  King's  Advocate  from  1709  to  1720,  and  was 
the  youngest,  and,  as  was  said,  the  ablest,  of  all  the 
sons  of  the  first  Lord  Stair.  He  had  loaded  himself 
with  debt  in  the  South  Sea,  but  his  son  Sir  James 
was  Auditor  of  the  Exchequer,  which  enabled  him  to 
keep  up  the  rank  tif  his  family.  He  was  hospitable  and 
gentlemanly,  and  very  charitable.  He  died  in  1751  of 
a  lingering  disorder  (an  anasarca),  and  wished  me  to  be 
often  with  him  when  he  was  ill;  and  though  he  never 
wished  me  to  pray  with  him  when  we  were  left  alone, 
always  gave  the  conversation  a  serious  turn,  and 
talked  like  a  man  who  knew  he  was  dying.  His  lady 
(Lady  Christian  Hamilton,  a  sister  of  the  celebrated 
]jord  Binning,  who  died  before  him)  had  warned  me 
against  speaking  to  him  about  death,  "for  Jamie,"  she 
said,  "was  timid;"  sol  allowed  him  always  to  lead  the 
conversation.  One  day  we  were  talking  of  the  deist- 
ical  controversy,  and  of  the  progress  of  deism,  when 
he  told  me  that  he  knew  Collins,  the  author  of  one  of 
the  shrewdest  books  against  revealed  religion.  He 
said  he  was  one  of  the  best  men  he  ever  had  known, 
and  practised  every  Christian  virtue  without  believing 
in  the  Gospel ;  and  added,  that  though  he  had  swam 
ashore  on  a  plank — for  he  was  sure  he  must  be  in 
heaven — yet  it  was  not  for  other  people  to  throw  them- 
selves into  the  sea  at  a  venture.  This  proved  him  to 
be  a  sincere  though  liberal-minded  Christian.  I  was 
sorry  for  his  death,  for  he  was  respected  in  the  parish, 
and  had  treated  me  with  much  kindness. 


oy  Google 


PEESONAL  SKETCHES.  i>U 

There  was  a  Mr  James  Graham,  advocate,  living 
here  at  this  time,  a  man  of  distioguished  parts  aud 
great  business.  lie  was  raised  to  the  bench  in  1749, 
and  died  in  1751.  He  had  one  daughter,  Mrs  Baron 
Mure.  He  was  an  open  friendly  man,  and  gave  me 
every  sort  of  countenance  both  as  his  minister  and 
friend,  and  was  a  man  of  great  public  spirit.  He  was 
liable  in  a  great  degree  to  a  nervous  disorder,  which 
oppressed  him  with  low  spirits :  he  knew  when  he 
was  going  to  fall  ill,  and  as  it  sometimes  confined  him 
for  three  months,  he  sent  back  his  fees  to  the  agents, 
who  all  of  them  waited  till  he  recovered,  and  applied 
to  him  again.  He  was  Dougalstone's  brother,  and  a 
very  powerful  barrister.* 

Lord  Elchies,  a  senior  Judge,  lived  at  Carberry,  in 
the  parish,  and  was  in  all  respects  a  most  regular  and 
exemplary  parishioner.f  His  lady,  who  was  a  sister 
of  Sir  Robert  Dickson's,  was  dead,  aud  his  family  con- 
sisted of  three  sons  and  three  or  four  daughters,  un- 
married, for  some  of  the  elder  daughters  were  married. 
He  came  every  Sunday  with  all  his  family  to  church, 
and  remained  to  the  afternoon  service.  As  he  lived  in 
the  House  of  Carberry,  he  had  the  aisle  in  the  church 
which  belonged  to  that  estate,  where  there  was  a  very 
good  room,  where  he  retired  to  a  cold  collation,  and 


*  DongaMon  wu  the  aame  o£  the  family  estate,  inherited  by  the  older 
brother.    The  Judge  took  the  title  of  Lord  Eosdale. — Ed. 

t  Patrick  Gruit,  Lord  Elchies,  well  known  to  lawyers  by  hii  CoUectioii  of 
Reports  of  the  Dedsions  of  the  Court  of  SeiaioD  from  1733  to  1754,  arranged 
in  alphabetical  order,  according  to  the  matter  of  the  legal  princilile  involved 
ID  each  case.     8e«  Tytltr'9  Life  qf  Kamv,  I  30.— Ed. 


izecDy  Google 


212  PERSONAL  SKETCHES. 

took  Sir  Robert  Dickson  and  me  always  with  him 
when  T  did  not  preach  in  the  afternoon.  He  was  an 
eminent  Judge,  and  had  great  knowledge  of  the  law  ; 
but  though  he  was  held  to  be  a  severe  character,  I 
found  him  a  man  agreeable  and  good  -  tempered  in 
Bociety.  He  attended  as  an  elder  at  the  time  that  the 
sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  was  administered, 
and  followed  one  praetice,  in  which  he  was  8iD2;ular. 
It  is  the  custom  for  elders  to  serve  tables  in  sets 
and  by  turns,  that  all  may  serve  and  none  be  fatigued. 
When  it  was  his  turn  to  retire  to  his  seat,  he  entered 
it,  as  it  was  close  by  the  communion-table,  but  never 
sat  down  till  the  elements  were  removed,  which  could 
not  be  less  than  an  hour  and  a-half.  I  mentioned 
this  singularity  to  him  one  day,  wishing  to  have  it 
explained,  when  he  said  that  he  thought  it  irreverent 
for  any  one  who  ministered  at  the  table  to  sit  down 
while  the  sacred  symbols  were  present.  He  removed 
to  the  House  of  Inch,  nearer  Edinburgh  {when  an 
owner  came  to  live  at  Carberry,  about  the  year  1 752), 
and  died  of  a  fever  in  1754,  being  one  of  nine  Judges 
who  died  in  the  course  of  two  years,  or  a  little  more. 
His  eldest  son  was  Mr  Baron  Grant;  his  second, 
Robert,  captain  of  a  fifty  -  gun  ship,  died  young ; 
Andrew,  the  third,  survived  his  brothers,  and  died,  as 
the  Baron  did,  in  Granada. 

Sir  Robert  Dickson  of  Carbeny,  Bart.,  was  great- 
grandson  of  Dr  David  Dickson,  a  celebrated  professor 
of  divinity  in  Edinburgh,  who  was  one  of  the  com- 
mittee who  attended  the  Scotch  army  in  England,  in 


oy  Google 


PEESONAL  SKETCHES. 


Charles  I.'s  time,  aod  got  his  share  of  the  sum  that 
was  paid  for  delivering  the  King  to  the  English  army. 
His  having  acquired  an  estate  in  tliose  days  does  not 
imply  that  he  had  acqnired  much  money,  for  laud  was 
very  cheap  in  those  days.  There  was  annexed  to  the 
estate  the  lordship  of  Inveresk,  now  in  the  Duke  of 
Buccleucb,  with  the  patronage  of  the  parish. 

This  Sir  Robex-t,  being  a  weak  vain  man,  had  got 
through  his  whole  fortune.  The  estate  was  sold,  and 
he  now  lived  in  a  house  in  Inveresk,  opposite  to  Mr 
Colt's,  called  Kosebank,  built  near  a  hundred  years 
before  by  Sir  Thomas  Young,  Knight,  Sir  Robert 
Dickson's  lady  was  a  daughter  of  Douglas  of  Dornoch, 
ft  worthy  and  patient  woman,  who  thought  it  her 
duty  not  only  to  bear,  but  palliate  the  weaknesses 
and  faults  of  her  husband.  They  had  one  son,  Robert, 
who  was  in  the  same  classes  at  the  College  with  me, 
and  was  very  promising.  He  went  young  to  the  East 
Indies  to  try  to  mend  their  broken  fortunes,  and  died 
in  a  few  years.  There  were  three  or  four  daughters. 
Sir  Robert  had  obtained  an  office  in  the  Customs  or 
Excise  of  about  £130,  on  which,  by  the  good  manage- 
ment of  his  wife  and  daughters,  he  in  those  days  lived 
very  decently,  and  was  respected  by  the  common 
people,  as  he  had  been  once  at  the  head  of  the  parish. 
He  loved  twopenny  and  low  company,  which  contri- 
buted to  his  popularity,  together  with  his  being  mild 
and  silent  even  in  his  cups. 

Colin  Campbell,  Esq.,  who  had  been  Collector  at 
Prestonpans,    and   was  promoted  to  the    Board    of 


izecy  Google 


2H  PEHSONAL  SKETCHES. 

Customs  in  1738,  lived  now  at  Pinkie  House,  and 
had  several  sons  and  daughters,  my  early  com- 
panions. 

There  lived  at  that  time,  in  the  corner  of  Pinkie 
House,  by  himself,  Archibald  Eobertson,  commonly 
called  the  Gospel,  uncle  to  the  celebrated  Dr  Robertson 
— a  very  singular  character,  who  made  great  part  of 
our  amusement  at  Pinkie  House,  as  he  came  through 
a  passage  from  his  own  apartment  every  night  to 
supper,  and  dined  there  likewise,  as  often  as  he  pleased, 
for  which  he  paid  them  a  cart  of  coals  in  tlie  week,  as 
ho  took  charge  of  Pinkie  coal,  which  his  brotlier-in- 
law,  William  Adam,  architect,  and  he,  had  a  lease  of 
He  was  a  rigid  Presbyterian,  and  a  severe  old  bachelor, 
whose  humours  diverted  ua  much.  He  was  at  first 
very  fond  of  me,  because  he  said  I  had  common- 
sense,  but  he  doubted  I  had  but  little  of  the  grace  of 
God  in  me  ;  and  when  Dr  George  Kay,  one  of  his 
great  friends,  posed  him  on  that  notion,  he  could  not 
explain  what  he  meant,  but  answered  that  I  was  too 
good  company  to  have  any  deep  tincture  of  religion. 
Kay  then  asked  if  he  thought  he  had  any  grace,  as  he 
had  seen  him  much  amused  and  pleased  when  he 
sang,  which  was  more  than  I  could  do.  He  replied, 
that  his  singing,  though  so  excellent,  did  not  much 
raise  him  in  his  opinion. 

There  was  likewise  living  at  Inveresk,  John  Murray, 
Esq.,  Clerk  of  Session,  of  the  Ochtertyre  family,  who, 
having  been  a  rake  and  spendthrift,  had  married 
Lucky  Thorn,   a  celebrated    tavern-keeper,  to  clear 


izecy  Google 


PEKSONAL  SKETCHES.  215 

£4000  of  debt  that  he  had  contracted  to  her.*  She 
was  dead,  but  there  waa  a  fine  girl  of  a  daughter,  who 
kept  house  for  her  father.  There  was  very  good 
company,  especially  of  the  Jacobite  party,  came  about 
the  house,  where  I  was  very  often. 

There  was  likewise  Mr  Oliver  Colt,  who  resided  in 
the  family  house  in  Inveresk,  who,  in  two  or  three 
years  afterwards,  by  the  death  of  an  uncle  and  brother, 
had  come  to  a  large  fortune.  He  was  descended  of 
those  clergymen  of  the  parish,  the  first  of  whom  waa 
ordained  in  1609,  whose  father,  I  have  heard,  was  a 
professor  at  St  Andrews. 

Oliver  was  a  man  of  mean  appearance  and  habits, 
and  had  passed  much  of  his  time  with  the  magistrates 
and  bui^hers  of  Musselburgh,  and,  having  humour, 
was  a  great  master  of  their  vulgar  wit.  When  he 
grew  rich,  he  waa  deserted  by  his  old  friends,  and 
had  not  manners  to  draw  better  company  about  him, 
insomuch  that,  having  been  confined  for  a  good  while 
to  his  house  by  illness,  though  not  keeping  his  room, 
when  an  old  lady,  a  Mrs  Carse,  went  in  to  ask  for 
him,  he  complained  bitterly  that  it  was  the  forty -third 
day  that  he  had  been  confined,  and  no  neighbour  had 
ever  come  near  him.  He  married  afterwards  a  lady 
of  quality,  and  had  enough  of  company.  His  son 
Robert,  who  died  in  1798,  was  one  of  the  best  and 
worthiest  men  that  ever  the  parish  bred  in  my  time, 
and  I  was  much  afflicted  with  his  early  death. 


izecy  Google 


21Q  PERSONAL  SKETCHES. 

The  msgistrates  and  town-council  were  at  this  time 
less  respectable  than  they  had  been ;  for  the  Whigs, 
in  1745,  had  turned  out  the  Jacobites,  who  were, 
more  gentlemanlike  than  their  successors,  and  were 
overlooked  by  Government,  as  Musselburgh  was  only 
a  burgh  of  regality,  dependent  on  the  Duke  of 
Buccleuch.  The  new  magistrates  were  of  very  low 
manners  and  habits,  but  good  Whigs  and  Presby- 
terians. All  of  the  burghers,  except  two  of  the  old 
magistrates.  Smart  and  Vernon,  still  preserved  the 
old  custom  at  their  family  feasts  of  making  the  com- 
pany pay  for  their  drink.  There  were  few  or  no  shops 
in  the  town,  and  but  one  in  each  of  the  streets  of 
Musselburgh  and  Fisherrow,  where  even  a  pound  of 
sugar  could  be  bought,  and  that  always  one  penny 
per  pound  dearer  than  at  Edinburgh ;  so  that  they  had 
very  little  sale  at  a  time  when  a  woman  would  have 
run  to  Edinburgh  with  her  basket,  and  brought  half  a 
hundredweight  for  a  groat,  which  did  not  rise  to 
above  sixpence  till  after  the  year  1 760. 

There  were  no  lodging-houses  at  this  time  in  the 
town,  and  as  it  was  a  dragoon  quarter,  where  generally 
two  troops  lay,  the  officers  were  obliged  to  accept 
their  billets  in  burghers'  houses.  The  only  lodging  I 
remember  was  in  a  by-street,  between  Musselburgh 
and  Newbigging,  where  the  late  General  George  Ward 
and  his  chum  lodged  for  a  year,  and  where  a  corporal 
and  his  wife  would  not  think  themselves  well  accom- 
modated now.  As  in  those  days  the  dragoons  gene- 
rally stayed  two  years  in  Scotland,  and  did  not  always 


izecy  Google 


PERSONAL  SKETCHES.  217 

change  quarters  at  the  end  of  a  year,  I  became  inti- 
mate with  Ward,  then  a  lieutenant,  a  sensible  man 
and  a  good  scholar,  and  pleasant  company,  though  he 
stuttered. 

I  have  not  yet  mentioned  the  two  most  able  inhabi- 
tants here  at  this  time,  who  were  Alexander  "Wood, 
surgeon,  and  Commissioner  Cardonnel.  Sandie  Wood 
was  very  young,  not  above  twenty-one  or  twenty-two ; 
but  there  being  an  opening  here  by  means  of  the 
illness  of  the  senior  practitioner,  Wood  was  invited 
out  by  a  few  of  the  principal  people,  and  got  immed- 
iately into  some  business.  His  father,  an  opulent 
farmer  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Edinburgh,  had  bound 
him  an  apprentice  to  his  brother,  a  surgeon,  weU 
employed  hy  people  of  inferior  rank,  and  surgeon 
to  the  poorhouse,  then  recently  erected.  Sandie 
Wood  was  a  handsome  stout  ftllow,  with  fine  black 
eyes,  and  altogether  of  an  agreeable  and  engaging 
appearance.  He  was  perfectly  illiterate  in  every- 
thing that  did  not  belong  to  his  own  profession,  in 
which  even  he  was  by  no  means  a  great  student. 
Some  scrapes  he  got  into  with  women  drove  him 
from  this  place  in  two  or  three  years  for  his  good. 
One  gentlewoman  he  got  with  child,  and  did  not 
marry.  When  he  had  got  over  this  difficulty,  another 
fell  with  child  to  bim,  whom  he  married.  She  died 
of  her  child  ;  and  Sanders  was  soon  aft«r  called  to  a 
berth  in  Edinburgh,  on  the  death  of  his  uncle. 

Sanders  supplied  his  want  of  learning  with  good 
sense,  and  a  mind  as  decisive  as  his  eye  was  quick. 


oy  Google 


218  PEKSONAL  SKETCHES. 

He  knew  the  symptoms  of  diseases  with  a  glance,  and 
having  do  superfluous  talk  about  politics  or  news — for 
books  very  few  of  the  profession  knew  anything  about 
— he  wasted  no  time  in  idle  talk,  like  many  of  his 
brethren,  but  passed  on  through  steep  and  narrow 
lanes,  and  upright  stairs  of  six  or  seven  stories  high, 
by  which  means  he  got  soon  into  good  business,  and 
at  last,  his  hands  being  as  good  as  bis  eyes,  on  the 
death  of  George  Lauder  he  became  the  greatest  and 
most  Bueeesaful  operator  for  the  stone,  and  for  all 
other  difficult  cases.  His  manners  were  careless  and 
unpolished,  and  his  roughness  often  offended  ;  but  it 
was  soon  discovered  that,  in  spite  of  his  usual 
demeanour,  he  was  remarkably  tender-hearted,  and 
never  slighted  any  case  where  there  was  the  least 
danger,  I  found  him  always  a  very  honest,  friendly, 
and  kind  physician.  He  is  doing  business  yet  in  his 
seventy-fourth  year,  and  although  his  faculties  are 
impaired,  and  his  operations  long  over,  he  gives  satis- 
faction to  his  patients.  He  has  always  been  convivial, 
belongs  to  many  clubs,  and  sings  a  good  song. 

The  other  person  was  Mansfelt  Cardonnel,  Esq., 
Commissioner  of  the  Customs.  His  father,  Adam  de 
Cardonnel  (for  they  were  French  Protestants  by  de- 
scent), had  been  secretary  to  the  Duke  of  Schomberg, 
who  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  the  Boyne,  at  the  age 
of  eighty.  He  had  been  affronted  the  day  before  by 
King  William  not  having  intrusted  him  as  usual  with 
his  plan  of  the  battle,  as  Adam  de  Cardonnel  told 
his  son.    Another  brother,  James,  was  secretary  to 


oy  Google 


PEHSONAL  SKETCHES.  210 

the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  and  had  made  a  large  for- 
tune. His  daughter  and  heiress  was  Lady  Talbot, 
mother  of  Lord  Dynevor.  My  friend's  mother 
was  a  natural  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Mon- 
mouth ;  and  as  he  was  by  some  other  line  related  to 
Waller  the  poet,  he  used  to  boast  of  his  being  de- 
scended from  the  Usurper  as  well  as  the  royal  line. 
He  was  not  a  man  of  much  depth  or  genius,  but  ho 
had  a  right  sound  understanding,  and  was  a  man  of 
great  honour  and  integrity,  and  the  most  agreeable 
companion  that  ever  was.  He  excelled  in  story- 
telling, like  his  great-grandfather,  Charles  II.,  but 
he  seldom  or  ever  repeated  them,  and  indeed  had 
such  a  collection  as  served  to  season  every  conversa- 
tion. He  was  very  foud  of  my  companions,  particu- 
larly of  John  Home,  who  was  very  often  with  me. 
On  a  very  limited  income  he  lived  very  hospitably  ; 
he  had  many  children,  but  only  one  son,  a  doctor, 
remained.  The  son  is  now  Adam  de  Cardonnel  Law- 
son  of  Chirton,  close  by  Sheilla,  a  fine  estate  that  was 
left  Iiim  by  a  Mr  Hilton  Lawson,  a  cousin  of  his 
mother's,  whose  name  was  Hilton,  of  the  Hilton 
Castle  family,  near  Sunderland.* 
There  was  another  gentleman,  whom  I  must  men- 

*  There  is  an  "Adam  de  Cardooael"  known  as  the  author  of  a  work  on 
tlie  Scottish  Carnage,  and  of  Piduretqut  Antiiju'itita  of  Scotland,  contaming 
etchings  of  muoy  of  the  mined  ecclesiastical  and  baronifil  buildings  of  Scot- 
land. The  editor  hna  often  ondeaTourod,  without  success,  to  fiod  out  who 
it  was  that  took  so  much  interest  in  these  architectural  relics,  and  made  so 
meritorious  on  effort  to  represent  them  iu  Us  sketches.  From  his  peculiar 
Dome  there  can  be  little  dnubt  that  he  was  a  member  of  the  familj  referred 
to  by  the  author.~£D. 


oy  Google 


220  TEBSONAL   SKETCUE3. 

tion,  who  then  lived  at  Lorretto,  a  Mr  Hew  Forbes,  a 
Principal  Clerk  of  Session.  He  waa  a  nephew  of  the 
celebrated  President  Duncan  Forbes,  and  had,  at  the 
request  of  his  uncle,  purchased  Lorretto  from  John 
Steel,  a  minion  of  the  President's,  who  had  been  a 
singer  in  the  concert,  but  had  lost  his  voice,  and  was 
patronised  by  his  lordship,  and.  had  for  some  years 
kept  a  celebrated  tavern  in  that  house.  Hew  Forbes 
was  the  second  of  three  brothers,  whom  I  have  seen 
together,  and,  to  my  taste,  had  more  wit  aud  was 
more  agreeable  than  either  of  them.  Arthur,  the 
eldest,  laird  of  Pittencrieff  and  a  colonel  in  the  Dutch 
service,  was  a  man  of  infinite  humour,  which  consisted 
much  in  his  instantaneous  and  lively  invention  of 
fictions  and  tales  to  illustrate  or  ridicule  the  conver- 
Bation  that  was  going  on  ;  and  as  his  tales  were  in- 
offensi^-e,  though  totally  void  of  truth,  they  afforded 
great  amusement  to  every  company.  The  third  bro- 
ther, John,  was  the  gentleman  who  retrieved  our 
affairs  in  North  America,  after  Braddock's  defeat.  He 
was  an  accomplished,  agreeable  gentleman,  but  there 
appeared  to  me  to  be  more  effort  and  less  nalfvet^  in 
his  conversation  than  in  that  of  Hew,  whose  humour 
woa  genuine  and  natural. 

With  80  many  resident  families  of  distinction,  my 
situation  was  envied  as  superior  to  most  clergj'men 
for  good  company  and  agreeable  society ;  and  bo  it 
was  at  that  period  preferable  to  what  it  has  often 
been  since,  when  the  number  of  genteel  families  was 
doubled  or  tripled,  as  they  have  long  been.      But 


izecy  Google 


PERSONAL  SKETCHES.  221 

though  I  lived  very  well  with  the  upper  families,  and 
coidd  occasionally  consort  with  the  burgesses,  some 
of  whom,  though  unpolished,  were  sensible  people ; 
yet  my  chief  society  was  with  John  Home,  and  Ro- 
bertson, and  Bannatine,  and  George  Logan,  who  were 
clerg}'men  about  my  own  age,  and  very  accomplished. 
In  the  month  of  October  this  year  I  had  a  very 
agreeable  jaunt  to  Dumfriesshire  to  attend  the  marriage 
of  my  cousin,  Jean  Wight,  with  John  Hamilton,  the 
minister  of  Boltou.  She  was  very  handsome,  sprightly, 
and  agreeable — about  twenty ;  he  a  sensible,  knowing 
man.  .  .  .*  John  Home  was  his  "  best  man ; "  I  was 
the  lady's  attendant  of  the  same  occupation,  according 
to  the  fashion  of  the  times.  We  set  out  together  on 
horseback,  but  so  contrived  it  that  we  had  very  little 
of  the  bridegroom ;  for  being  in  a  greater  haste  to 
get  to  his  journey's  end  than  we  were,  he  was  always 
at  the  baiting-place  an  hour  before  us,  where,  after  our 
meal,  we  lingered  as  long  after  he  had  departed.  Our 
grandfather  Bobison  wished  to  solemnise  this  £rst 
marriage  of  any  of  his  grandchildren  at  his  own 
house  at  Tinwald,  which,  though  an  ordinary  manse, 
had  thirty  people  to  sleep  in  it  for  two  or  three  nights. 
John  Home  and  I  had  been  one  day  in  Dumfries  with 
the  bridegroom,  where  we  met  with  George  Banna- 
tine,  our  friend  Hew's  brother,  at  that  time  minister 

*  The  rest  of  hia  character  U  scored  out,  so  aa  to  be  totaJl;  illegible ; 
and  in  the  handwriting  in  which  the  origiDal  MS.  is  altered  throughoat,  the 
lenteDce  itandB,  "  He  waa  not  len  thtui  thirty-fire ;  and  thon^  a  sensible, 
knowing  man,  was  in  oUier  reiipecta  seemingly  unsuitable  for  a  young  and 


D,  Google 


222  SCOTCH    HUMOUK, 

of  Craigie.  As  he  was  an  old  schoolfellow  of  Hamil- 
ton's, we  easily  induced  him  to  ask  him  to  the  mar- 
riage ;  and  George,  having  a  great  deal  of  Falstaffian 
humour,  helped  much  to  enliven  the  company.  Home 
and  he  and  I,  with  Willie  Wight,  the  bride's  brother, 
then  a  fine  lad  of  eighteen,  had  to  ride  four  miles  into 
Dumfries  to  our  lodgings  at  Provost  Bell's,  another 
uncle  of  mine,  after  supper,  where  Bannatine's  vein  of 
humour  kept  us  in  perpetual  laughter. 

I  shall  take  this  opportunity  of  correcting  a  mistake 
into  which  the  English  authoi-s  have  fallen,  in  which 
they  are  supported  by  many  of  the  Scotch  writers, 
particularly  by  those  of  the  Mirror, — which  is,  that  the 
people  of  Scotland  have  no  humour.  That  this  is  a 
gross  mistake,  could  be  proved  by  innumerable  songs, 
ballads,  and  stories  that  are  prevalent  in  the  south  of 
Scotland,  and  by  every  person  old  enough  to  remem- 
ber the  times  when  the  Scottish  dialect  was  spoken  in 
purity  in  the  low  country,  and  who  have  been  at  all 
conversant  with  the  common  people.  Since  we  began 
to  affect  speaking  a  foreign  language,  which  the  English 
dialect  is  to  us,  humour,  it  must  be  confessed,  is  less 
apparent  in  conversation.  The  ground  of  this  preten- 
sion in  the  English  to  the  monopoly  of  humour  is  their 
confounding  two  characters  together  that  are  quite 
different — the  humorist  and  the  man  of  humour. 
The  humorist  prevails  more  in  England  than  in  any 
country,  because  liberty  has  long  been  universal  there, 
and  wealth  very  general,  which  I  hold  to  be  the  father 
and  mother  of  the  humorist.    This  mistake  has  been 


oy  Google 


JOHK  HOME.  223 

confinned  by  the  abject  humour  of  the  Scotch,  who, 
till  of  late  years,  allowed  John  Bull,  out  of  flattery, 
to  possess  every  quality  to  which  he  pretended. 

John  Home  was  an  admirable  companion,  and  most 
acceptable  to  all  strangers  who  were  not  offended 
with  the  le^dties  of  a  young  clergyman,  for  he  waa 
very  handsome  and  had  a  flne  person,  about  5  feet 
10^  inches,  and  an  agreeable  catching  address;  he 
had  not  much  wit,  and  still  less  humour,  but  he  had 
BO  much  sprightliness  and  vivacity,  and  such  an  ex- 
pression of  benevolence  in  his  manner,  and  such  an 
unceasing  flattery  of  those  he  liked  (and  he  never 
kept  company  with  anybody  else) — the  kind  commen- 
dations of  a  lover,  not  the  adulation  of  a  sycophant — 
that  he  was  truly  irresistible,  and  his  entry  to  a  com- 
pany was  like  opening  a  window  and  letting  the  sun 
into  a  dark  room. 

After  passing  eight  days  at  Dumfries,  with  such  a 
variety  of  amusement  as  would  fill  half  a  volume  of  a 
novel,  we  returned  with  our  young  couple  home  to 
East  Lothian,  aud  passed  two  or  three  days  with  them 
at  their  residence. 

There  was  an  assistant  preacher  at  luveresk  when  I 
waa  ordained,  whose  name  was  George  Anderson,  the 
sou  of  a  clergyman  in  Fife,  and,  by  his  mother,  grand- 
son of  a  Professor  Campbell  of  Edinburgh,  who  made 
a  figure  in  the  divinity  chair  towards  the  end  of  the 
seventeenth  century.  His  aunt  was  the  mother  of  Dr 
John  Gregory  of  Edinburgh ;  but  he  had  not  partaken 
of  the  smallest  spark  of  genius  from  either  of  tie 


izecy  Google 


224  THE  MINISTERS  ASSISTANT. 

families.  He  waa  good-natured  and  laborious  in  the 
pariah,  however,  and  likely  to  fall  into  the  snare  of 
such  kind  of  people,  by  partaking  of  their  morning 
hospitality — viz.  a  dram,  very  usual  in  those  days. 
He  waa  reckoned  an  excellent  preacher  by  the  com- 
mon people,  because  he  got  a  sermon  faithfully  by 
heart  {hia  father's,  I  suppoae),  and  delivered  it  with  a 
loudness  and  impetuosity  surpasaiug  any  schoolboy, 
without  making  a  halt  or  stop  from  beginning  to 
end.  This  galloping  sort  of  preaching  pleased  the 
lairds  as  well  as  the  people,  for  Sir  David  Kinloch  was 
much  taken  with  him,  and  he  would  have  been  popu- 
lar in  all  respects  had  not  his  conversation  and  con- 
duct betrayed  his  folly.  With  a  very  small  income, 
he  ventured  [to  marry]  a  Iiandsome  sempstress,  Peggy 
Derqnier,  the  daughter  of  a  Swiss  ensign,  who  had 
got  into  the  British  army.  They  had  children,  and  a 
very  slender  subsistence,  not  above  £40  per  annum, 
BO  that  I  was  obliged  to  look  about  for  some  better 
berth  for  them.  At  last,  in  1751,  a  place  cast  up  in 
South  Carolina,  to  which  he  and  his  family  were  with 
difficulty  sent  out,  as  a  sum  of  money  had  to  be  bor- 
rowed to  fit  out  him  and  his  wife  and  two  children 
for  the  voyage,  I  was  one  of  his  securities  for  the 
money,  and  lost  nothing  but  the  interest  of  £50  for 
two  years.  His  wife  was  mettlesome,  and  paid  up 
the  money  the  year  after  he  died,  which  was  not 
above  two  years  ;  for  poor  George,  being  a  guzzling 
fellow,  could  not  remain  long  enough  from  Charles- 
town,  near  which  his  meeting-house  was,  till  he  re- 


oy  Google 


THE  MINI8TEBS  ASSISTANT.  225 

covered  his  strength  after  a  severe  fever :  the  rum- 
punch  got  the  better  of  him,  and  he  relapsed  and 
died.  His  widow,  being  still  handaome  and  broody, 
married  well  next  time,  and  got  her  chUdreu  well 
provided  for. 

In  a  ludicrous  poem  which  John  Home  wrote  on 
the  march  of  his  Volunteers  to  the  battle  of  Falkirk, 
he  gives  Anderson  his  character  under  the  nickname 
of  Lungs — for  the  wags  called  him  Carlyle's  Lungs 
on  account  of  hia  loud  preaching — of  which  I  remem- 
ber one  line, — 

"  And  if  yon  did  not  be»t  bim,  Lxmgi  was  pleaaed." 

Like  other  gluttons,  Lunga  was  a  coward,  and  the 
first  man  at  Leith  after  the  battle — for  he  was  a 
Volunteer  in  the  company  of  which  Home  was  a  lieu- 
tenant— and  showed  hia  activity  chiefly  in  providing 
the  company  with  victuals  and  drink,  in  begging  of 
which  he  had  no  shame. 


izecy  Google 


CHAPTER  VI. 

17*8-1753:  AGE,  23-81. 


EOCLEBUSTIOAL  HATTERS — THE  AFFAIR  OP  QEOROB  LOOA» — SKETOHBa 
OF  THB  CLERGY — WEBSTER — WALLACE — CONTEMPORARY  HISTORY 
OP  THE  CnnRCH — TEE  "MODERATEB"  AND  THE  "  WILD"  PABTT 
— THE  PATRONAGE  QUESTION— R I  DING  COMMITTEES — BEVOLUTIOfi 
nr  CHDBCH  POLITY,  AND  CARLYLe'S  BHARE  in  it — BKBTCHEB  OF 
LEADERS  IN  THE  ASSEMBLY — LORD  IgLAY,  MARCHMONT,  SIB  GIL- 
BERT  ELLIOT — PRINCIPAL  TULLIDELPH.* 

In  winter  1748  I  remained  much  at  home  in  my 
own  pariah,  performing  my  duties,  and  becoming 
acquainted  with  my  flock.  The  Cheaps  took  a  house 
in  Edinburgh  this  winter  to  entertain  Captain  Cheap, 
who,  being  a  man  past  fifty,  and  a  good  deal  worn 
out,  his  very  sensible  niece  thought  he  would  never 
many,  and  therefore  brought  her  young  female  com- 
panions about  to  amuse  him.  Among  the  rest  she 
had  much  with  her  the  Widow  Brown,  Anny  Clerk 
that  was,  whose  husband.  Major  Brown  [was  killed 
at  the  battle  of  Falkirkf].  She  was  a  handsome, 
lively  coquette  as  ever  was,  being  of  a  gay  temper 

*  For  further  information  on  the  ecclesiastical  afiiurs  of  the  time  discnssed 
in  thij  chapter,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Annali  of  the  Gaterai  Ateanily  q^ 
the  CAurcft  qf  ScodaTid  /ram  1739  la  1766,  known  aa  "Morren's  Annals," 
and  to  The  ChiinA  Hutory  qf  Scotland,  by  the  B«v.  John  Cunningham, 
minister  of  Crieft;  1859. 

t  Left  blank  by  Carlyle,  and  tilled  tip  in  aaolher  huul. 


izecy  Google 


ECOLESLASTIOAL  AFFAIRS.  227 

and  a  slight  understanding.  My  sagacious  friend  had 
taken  her  measures  ill  indeed,  for,  as  she  told  me 
afterwards,  she  never  dreamt  that  her  grave  respect- 
able uncle  would  be  catched  with  a  woman  of  Mrs 
Brown's  description.  But  he  was  so  captivated  at 
the  very  first  glance  that  he  very  soon  proposed  mai> 
riage ;  and  having  executed  his  design,  and  taken  the 
House  of  Preston  for  next  summer,  they  came  and 
lived  there  for  several  months,  where  I  saw  them  fre- 
■quently,  and  was  asked  to  marry  a  niece  of  hers  with 
a  gentleman  at  Dunbar,  which  I  accordingly  did. 
They  went  to  Bath  and  London,  where  his  niece  joined 
him  in  1749. 

It  was  in  the  General  Assembly  of  this  year  that 
some  zealous  west-country  clergymen  formed  the  plan 
of  applying  to  Parliament  for  a  general  augmentation 
of  stipends,  by  raising  the  minimum  from  800  merks 
to  10  chalders  of  grain,  or  its  value  in  money.  The 
clergy  having  shown  great  loyalty  and  zeal  during 
the  Bebellion  in  1 745,  which  was  acknowledged  by 
Government,  they  presumed  that  they  would  obtain 
favour  on  this  occasion ;  but  they  had  not  consulted 
the  landed  interest,  nor  even  taken  the  leaders  among 
the  Whigs  along  with  them,  which  was  the  cause  of 
their  miscarriaga  The  committee  appointed  by  this 
Assembly  to  prepare  the  form  of  their  application, 
brought  it  into  next  Assembly,  and  by  a  very  great 
majority  agreed  to  send  commissioners  to  London  the 
session  thereafter  to  prosecute  their  claim,  which, 
when  it  failed,  raised  some  ill-humour,  for  they  had 


oy  Google 


228  ECCLESIASTICAL  AFFAIEa. 

been  very  sanguine.  Dr  Patrick  Cuming,  who  was 
then  the  leader  of  the  Moderate  party,  lent  his  whole 
aid  to  this  scheme,  and  was  one  of  the  commissioner. 
This  gave  him  still  a  greater  lead  among  the  clergy. 
The  same  thing  happened  to  Lord  Drummore,  the 
judge,  who  espoused  their  cause  warmly.  On  the 
other  hand.  Principal  Wishart  and  his  brother  George 
followed  Dundas  of  Amiston,  the  first  President  of 
that  name,  and  lost  their  popularity.  Of  the  two 
brothers  William  and  George  Wishart,  sons  of  Princi- 
pal Wishart,  William  the  eldest,  and  Principal  of  the 
University  of  Edinburgh,  was  the  most  learned  and 
ingenuous,  but  he  had  been  for  seventeen  years  a 
dissenting  minister  in  London,  and  returned  with 
dissenting  principles.  He  had  said  some  things  rashly 
while  the  augmentation  scheme  was  going  on,  which 
betrayed  contempt  of  the  clergy  ;  and  as  he  was  ricli, 
and  had  the  expectation  of  still  more — being  the  heir 
of  his  two  uncles.  Admiral  and  General  Wisharts,  of 
Queen  Anne's  reign — his  sayings  gave  still  greater 
offence.  George,  the  younger  brother,  was  mildei-  and 
more  temperate,  and  was  a  more  acceptable  preacher 
than  his  brother,  though  inferior  to  him  in  genius; 
but  his  understanding  was  sound,  and  his  benevolence 
unbounded,  so  that  he  had  many  friends.  When  his 
brother,  who  misled  him  about  ecclesiastical  affairs, 
died  in  1754,  he  came  back  to  the  Moderate  party,  and 
was  much  respected  among  us. 

About  this  period  it  was  that  John  Home  and  I, 
being  left  alone  with  Dr  Patrick  Cuming  after  a. 


izecy  Google 


ECCLESIASTICAL   AFFATBS.  229 

synod  supper,  he  pressed  us  to  stay  with  him  a  little 
longer,  and  during  an  hour  or  two's  conversation, 
being  desirous  to  please  us,  who,  he  thought,  would  be 
of  some  consequence  in  church  courts,  he  threw  out 
all  his  lures  to  gain  us  to  be  his  implicit  followers; 
but  he  failed  in  his  purpose,  having  gone  too  far  in 
his  animosity  to  George  Wishart — for  we  gave  up  the 
Principal.  We  said  to  each  other  when  we  parted  that 
we  would  support  him  when  he  acted  right,  but  would 
never  be  intimate  with  him  as  a  friend. 

It  was  the  custom  at  this  time  for  the  patrons  of 
parishes,  when  they  had  litigations  about  settlements, 
which  sometimes  lasted  for  years,  to  open  public- 
houses  to  entertain  the  members  of  Assembly,  which 
was  a  very  gross  and  offensive  abuse.  The  Duke  of 
Douglas  had  a  cause  of  this  kind,  which  lasted  for 
three  Assemblies,  on  which  occasion  it  was  that  his 
commissioner.  White  of  Stockbridge,  opened  a  daily 
table  for  a  score  of  people,  which  vied  with  the  Lord 
Commissioner's  for  dinners,  and  surpassed  it  far  in 
wine.  White,  who  was  a  low  man,  was  delighted 
with  the  respect  which  these  dinners  procured  him. 
After  the  case  was  finished,  Stockbridge  kept  up  his 
table  while  he  lived,  for  the  honour  of  the  family, 
where  I  have  often  dined,  after  his  Grace's  suit  was 
at  an  end.  There  was  another  of  the  same  kind  that 
lasted  longer,  the  case  of  St  Ninian's,  of  which  Sir  Hew 
Faterson  was  patron. 

John  Home,  and  Robertson,  and  Logan,  and  I, 
entered  into  a  resolution  to  dice  with  none  of  them 


oy  Google 


230  PERSONAL  SKETCHES. 

while  their  suits  were  in  dependence.  This  resolution 
we  kept  inviolably  when  we  were  memberB,  and  we 
were  followed  by  many  of  our  friends.  Dr  Patrick 
Cuming  did  not  like  this  resolution  of  ours,  as  it 
showed  us  to  be  a  little  untractable ;  but  it  added  to 
our  importance ;  and  after  that  no  man,  not  even 
Lord  Drummore,  to  whom  I  was  so  much  obliged, 
and  who  was  a  keen  party  man,  ever  soUcited  my  vote 
in  any  judicial  case. 

The  Lord  President  Dundas,  who  led  the  opposition 
to  the  scheme  of  augmentation,  was  accounted  the 
first  lawyer  this  country  ever  had  bred.  He  was  a 
man  of  a  high  and  ardent  mind,  a  most  persuasive 
speaker,  and  to  me,  who  met  him  but  seldom  in 
private,  one  of  the  ablest  men  I  had  ever  seen.  He 
declined  soon  after  this,  and  was  for  two  or  three 
years  laid  aside  from  business  before  his  death. 

Hew,  Earl  of  Marchmont,  appeared  in  this  Assem- 
bly, who  had  been  very  ignorautly  extolled  by  Pope, 
whose  hemistichs  stamped  characters  in  those  days.* 

In  winter  1749  it  was  that  John  Home  went  to 
London  with  his  tragedy  of  Agis,  to  try  to   bring 

* "  Lo,  th'  Sgorlia  grot, 

THien  noblr  pennlve  8t  Jolm  sat  and  Utought, 
Whore  Siitlah  ilghi  trom  dying  Wyndhun  itals. 
And  ths  bri^t  fluuawu  aliotUiroiighlluchDiODt'sBauL' 

The  paaa^e  citod  farther  on  (p.  162)  is  ftoiti  the  iaverted  chatuclen  io  the 


And  UtUgtoa  ■  ilark  doigslng  knnve." 
About  Lord  Folworth,  afterwards  Earl  of  Marchoioiit^  and  other  memben 
of  his  Enmily,  abundant  information  will  be  found  in  "A  Selection  bom  the 
PapetB  of  tbe  Earh  of  Uarchmont,"  3  vols.,  1831.— £d. 


oy  Google 


PERSONAL  SKETCHES.  231 

it  on  the  stage,  in  which  he  failed ;  which  was  the 
cause  of  his  turning  his  thoughts  on  the  tragedy  of 
Douglas  after  his  return.  He  had  a  recommenda- 
tion to  Mr  Lyttleton,  afterwards  Lord  Lyttleton, 
whom  he  could  not  so  much  as  prevail  with  to  read 
his  tragedy ;  and  his  brother,  afterwards  a  bishop, 
would  not  so  much  as  look  at  it,  as  he  said  he  had 
tamed  his  thoughts  to  natural  history.  Home  was 
enraged,  hut  not  discouraged.  I  had  given  him  a 
letter  to  Smollett,  with  whom  he  contracted  a  sincere 
Mendship,  and  he  consoled  himself  for  the  neglect  he 
met  with  by  the  warm  approbation  of  the  Doctor,  and 
of  John  Hair  and  his  friend  Barrow,  an  English  physi- 
cian, who  had  escaped  with  him  from  the  Castle  of 
Doune,  and  who  made  him  acquainted  with  Collins 
the  poot,  with  whom  he  grew  very  intimate.  He 
extended  not  his  acquaintance  much  further  at  this 
time,  except  to  a  Governor  Melville,  a  native  of  Dun- 
bar, of  whom  he  was  fond ;  and  passed  a  good  deal  of 
time  with  Captain  Cheap's  family,  which  was  then  in 
London. 

I  bad  several  letters  &om  him  at  that  time  which 
displayed  the  character  he  always  maintained,  which 
was  a  thorough  contempt  of  his  non-approvers,  and  a 
blind  admiration  of  those  who  approved  of  his  works, 
and  gave  him  a  good  reception,  whom  he  attached 
still  more  to  him  by  the  most  caressing  manners,  and 
the  sincere  and  fervent  flattery  of  a  lover.  In  all  the 
periods  of  his  long  life  his  opinions  of  men  and  things 
were  merely  prejudices. 


izecy  Google 


232  PERSONAL  SKETCHES. 

It  waa  in  the  year  1750, 1  tliiuk,  that  he  gave  his 
manse  (for  he  boarded  himself  in  a  house  in  the  vil- 
lage) to  Mr  Hepburn  of  Keith,  and  his  family — a 
gentleman  of  pmtine  faith  and  romantic  valour,  who 
had  been  in  both  the  EebelUons,  in  1 715  and  '45;  and 
had  there  been  a  third,  as  waa  projected  at  this  time, 
would  have  joined  it  also.  Add  to  this,  that  Mr  Hep- 
burn was  an  accomplished  gentleman,  and  of  a  simple 
and  winning  elocution,  who  said  nothing  in  vain. 
His  wife,  and  his  daughters  by  a  former  lady,  resem- 
bled him  in  his  simplicity  of  mind,  but  propagated 
his  doctrines  with  more  openness  and  ardour,  and  a 
higher  admiration  of  implicit  loyalty  and  romantic 
heroism.  It  was  the  seductive  conversation  of  this 
family  that  gradually  softened  and  cooled  Mr  Home's 
aversion  to  the  Pretender  and  to  Jacobites  (for  he  had 
been  a  very  warm  Whig  in  the  time  of  the  Rebellion), 
and  prepared  him  for  the  life  he  afterwards  led. 

Mr  Home,  in  his  History  of  ike  Rebellion,  has 
praised  this  gentleman  for  an  act  of  gallant  behaviour 
in  becoming  Gentleman -Usher  to  Prince  Charles,  by 
ushering  him  into  the  Abbey  with  hia  sword  drawn. 
This  has  been  on  false  information  ;  for  his  son.  Colo- 
nel Kiccard  Hupbum,  denied  to  me  the  possibility  of 
it,  hia  father  being  a  person  of  invincible  modesty, 
and  void  of  all  ostentation.  The  Colonel  added,  that 
it  was  his  father's  fortune  to  be  praised  for  qualities  he 
did  not  possess — for  learning  for  instance,  of  which  he 
had  no  great  tincture,  but  in  mathematics — while  his 
prime  quality  was  omitted,  which  was  the  most  equal 


oy  Google 


HOMES   "DOUGLAS.  233 

and  placid  temper  with  which  ever  mortal  was  en- 
dowed; for  in  his  whole  life  he  was  never  once  out  of 
temper,  nor  did  ever  a  muscle  of  his  face  alter  od  any 
occurrence.  One  instance  he  told  of  a  serving-boy  hav- 
ing raised  much  diaturbance  one  day  in  the  kitchen  or 
hall.  When  his  father  rose  to  see  what  was  the  matter, 
he  found  the  boy  had  wantonly  run  a  spit  through 
the  cat,  which  lay  sprawling.  He  said  not  a  word, 
but  took  the  boy  by  the  shoulder,  led  him  out  of  the 
house  door,  and  locked  it  after  him,  and  returned 
in  silence  to  play  out  his  game  of  chess  with  his 


It  was  from  his  having  heard  Mrs  Janet  Denoon, 
Mr  Hepburn's  sister-in-law,  slug  the  old  ballad  of 
*'GU  Morrice,"  that  he  [Home]  first  took  his  idea 
of  the  tragedy  of  Douglas,  which,  five  years  after- 
wards, he  carried  to  London,  for  he  was  but  an  idle 
composer,  to  offer  it  for  the  stage,  bat  with  the  same 
bad  success  as  formerly.  The  length  of  time  he  took, 
however,  tended  to  bring  it  to  perfection  ;  for  want 
of  success,  added  to  his  natural  openness,  made  him 
communicate  his  compositions  to  his  friends,  whereof 
there  were  some  of  the  soundest  judgment,  and  of 
the  most  exquisite  taste.  Of  the  first  sort  there  were 
Drs  Blair  and  Bobertson,  and  !Mr  Hew  Bannatine; 
and  of  the  second,  Patrick  Lord  Elibank,  the  Hepburn 
family,  and  some  young  ladies  with  whom  he  and  I 
had  become  intimate — viz..  Miss  Hepburn  of  Monk- 
riggs.  Lord  MUton's  niece ;  Miss  Eliza  Fletcher,  after- 
wards Mrs  Wedderburo,  his  youngest  daughter  ;  and 


oy  Google 


23-1  THE  CENSUEED  SERMON. 

Miss  Campbell  of  Carrick,  at  that  time  their  great 
friend.  As  Home  himself  Tvrote  a  hand  that  was 
hardly  legible,  and  at  that  time  could  ill  afford  to 
hire  an  amanuensis,  I  copied  Douglas  several  times 
over  for  him — which,  by  means  of  the  corrections  of 
all  the  friends  I  have  mentioned,  and  the  fine  and 
decisive  criticisms  of  the  late  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  had 
attained  to  the  perfection  with'  which  it  was  acted ; 
for  at  this  time  Home  was  tractable,  and  listened  to 
our  remarks. 

It  was  at  this  period  that  George  Logan,  the  son  of 
a  minister  in  Edinburgh  of  note,  was  presented  to 
the  church  of  Ormiston,  vacant  by  the  translation  of 
Mr  Hew  Bannatine  to  Dirletou.  Logan  was  a  man 
of  parts  and  genius,  and  of  a  particular  turn  to 
mathematical  and  metaphysical  studies,  but  he  was 
of  an  indolent  and  dilatory  disposition.  When  he 
passed  trials  before  the  Presbytery  of  Dalkeith,  he 
met  with  unexpected  opposition.  When  he  came  to 
the  last  of  his  discourses,  which  was  the  popular 
sermon,  from  Heb.  ii.  10  was  appointed  to  him.  He 
came  home  with  me,  and  inquiring  if  my  popular 
sermon,  when  I  was  licensed  by  the  Presbytery  of 
Haddington,  waa  not  on  the  same  text,  which  was 
the  case,  he  pressed  me  to  lend  it  to  him,  as  it  would 
save  him  much  trouble,  to  which  I  with  reluctance 
consented.  He  copied  it  almost  verbatim,  and  deli- 
vered it  at  our  next  meeting.*      Being  averse  to 

'  Popuiar  Sermon.  The  sermoD  preached  to  the  peopin  of  the  pariah  by 
•  lireoentee,  as  dutiagiuHbed  from  the  other  triaU  of  hia  Stnesa,  which  tako 


,1.0,  Google 


THE  CENSURED  SEBMOK.  S35 

LogaD,  many  of  them  thou^t  there  was  heresy  in  it, 
and  insisted  on  an  inquiry,  and  that  a  copy  should  he 
deposited  with  the  Clerk.  This  inquiry  went  on  for 
several  meetings,  till  at  last  Logan,  being  impatient, 
as  he  had  a  young  lady  engaged  to  marry  him,  took 
the  first  opportunity  of  appealing  to  the  Synod. 
After  several  consultations  with  our  ablest  divines, 
who  were  Drs  Wisbart  and  Wallace,  with  Professor 
Goldie,  and  Messrs  Dalgleish  of  Linlithgow,  Nassmith 
of  Dalmeny,  and  Stedman  of  Haddington,  it  was 
^reed  that  Logan's  sermon  was  perfectly  orthodox, 
and  that  the  Presbytery  in  their  zeal  had  run  into 
heretical  opinions,  insomuch  that  those  Mends  were 
clear  in  their  judgment  that  the  panel  should  bo 
assoilzied  and  the  Presbytery  taken  to  task.  But  tho 
motive  I  have  already  mentioned  induced  young 
Logan  to  be  desirous  of  making  matters  up  without 
irritating  the  Presbytery,  and  therefore  it  was  agreed 
that  he  should  make  a  slight  apology  to  the  Presby- 
tery, and  that  they  shoiild  be  ordained  to  proceed  in 
the  settlement.  Yet,  in  spite  of  this  sacrifice  to  peace, 
the  zealots  of  the  Presbytery  still  endeavoured  to 
delay  the  settlement  by  embarrassing  him  on  what  is 
called  the  extempore  trials ;  but  as  he  was  an  ablo 
and  a  learned  young  mnn,  he  bafiQed  them  all  in  aa 


plitce  in  the  presence  of  the  FreBbftery.  The  Logan  here  m 
(he  poet  1  Mid  it  iti  perhaps  itill  mora  ncue—nry  to  diatiiiguidi  him  irasa  a 
oontempoEary,  Oeorge  Logan,  alao  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  ScotJaod. 
and  eminent  in  his  day  for  a  long  and  bitter  political  controveny  with  Rud- 
diman  the  grtuntnarian.  The  affair  of  the  cenaured  sermon  is  mentioned  in 
Mackeoiio's  aocount  of  Home,  p.  12.— Ed. 


izecy  Google 


236  TEG  CENSUBBD  SERMON. 

examination  of  three  hours,  four  or  five  times  longer 
than  usual,  when  he  answered  all  their  questions,  and 
refuted  all  their  cavils  in  such  a  masterly  manner,  as 
turned  the  chase  in  the  opinion  of  the  bystanders,  and 
made  the  Presbytery  appear  to  be  heretical,  instead 
of  the  person  accused. 

Among  the  accusers  of  Logan,  the  most  violent 
were  Plenderleath  of  Dalkeith,  Primrose  at  Crichton, 
Smith  at  Cranston,  Watson  at  Newbottle,  and  Walker 
at  Temple.  The  first  had  been  a  minion  of  Dr  George 
Wishart's,  and  set  out  as  one  of  the  most  moral  preach- 
ers at  the  very  top  of  the  Moderate  interest^  giving 
offence  by  his  quotations  from  Shaftesbury ;  but  being 
very  weak,  both  in  body  and  mind,  he  thought  to 
compensate  for  his  disability  by  affecting  a  change  of 
sentiment,  and  coming  over  to  the  popular  side,  both 
in  his  sermons  and  his  votes  in  the  courts.  He  was 
truly  but  a  poor  soul,  and  might  have  been  pardoned, 
but  for  his  hypocrisy.  Primrose  was  a  shallow  pedant, 
who  was  puffed  up  by  the  flatter}'  of  his  brethren  to 
think  himself  an  eminent  scholar  because  he  was 
pretty  well  acquainted  with  the  system,  and  a  person 
of  a  high  independent  mind  because  he  was  rich  and 
could  speak  impertinently  to  his  heritors,  and  build  a 
manse  of  an  uncommon  size  and  pay  for  the  overplus. 
He  had  a  fluent  elocution  in  the  dialect  of  Moray- 
shire, embellished  with  English  of  his  own  invention ; 
but  with  all  this  he  had  no  common  sense.  Smith 
was  a  sly  northern,  seemingly  very  temperate,  but  a 
great  counsellor  of  his  neighbour  and    countryman 


oy  Google 


DR  BEATTIE.  237 

PrimroBe.  Wateon  was  a  dark  inquisitor,  of  Bome 
parts.  Walker  was  a  rank  enthusiast,  with  nothing 
but  heat  without  light.  John  Bonar  at  Cockpen, 
though  of  the  High  party,  was  a  man  of  sense — an 
excellent  preacher ;  he  was  temperate  in  his  opposi- 
tion. KobiQ  Faton,  though  gentlemanly,  was  feeble 
in  church  courts.  His  father  was  just  dead,  so  that  I 
had  no  zealous  supporter  but  Rab  Simson  and  David 
Gilclirist  at  Newton.  On  those  inferior  characters  I 
need  not  dwell. 

Logan  was  settled  at  Ormistou  and  married,  not 
three  years  after  which  he  died  of  a  high  brain  fever. 
John  Home  and  I  felt  our  loss.  A  strong  proof  of 
our  opinion  of  his  ability  was,  that  a  very  short  time 
before  his  death  we  had  prevailed  with  him  to  make 
David  Hume's  philosophical  works  his  particular  study, 
and  to  refute  the  dangerous  parts  of  them — a  task  for 
which  we  thought  him  fully  equal.  This  was  sixteen  or 
eighteen  years  before  Beattie  thought  of  it.  Dr  Wight 
and  I  saw  him  [Beattie]  frequently  at  Aberdeen  in  1765 
or  1 766,  when  he  opened  his  design  to  us,  from  which 
we  endeavoured  to  dissuade  him,  having  then  a  settled 
opinion  that  such  metaphysical  essays  and  treatises — 
as  they  were  seldom  read,  certainly  never  understood, 
but  by  the  few  whose  minds  were  nearly  on  a  level 
with  the  author — had  best  be  left  without  the  celebrity 
of  an  answer.  It  was  on  occasion  of  this  trial  of  Logan 
that  we  first  took  umbrage  at  Bobert  Dundas,  junior, 
of  Amiston,  then  Solicitor-General,  who  could  easily 
have  drawn  off  the  Presbytery  of  Dalkeith  from  their 


izecy  Google 


DK  WEBSTER. 


illiberal  pursuit,  atid  was  applied  to  for  that  purpose 
by  some  &iends,  who  were  refused.  His  father,  the 
President,  was  by  this  time  laid  aside. 

It  was  in  the  year  1751  or  1752,  I  think,  that  a 
few  of  US  of  the  Moderate  party  were,  for  two  or  three 
days  united  in  a  case  that  came  before  the  Synod  of 
Lothian  in  May,  with  Dr  Alexander  Webster,  the 
leader  of  the  high-flying  party.  "Webster,  with  a  few 
more  of  his  brethren,  whereof  Drs  Jardine  and  Wal- 
lace were  two,  had  objected  to  Mr  John  Johnstone,  a 
new  chaplain  of  the  Castle,  being  admitted  to  a  seat 
in  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh.  They  were  defeated 
in  the  Presbytery  by  a  great  majority,  on  which  they 
appealed  to  the  Synod,  when  a  few  of  us,  taking  part 
with  the  minority,  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing 
Webster  very  closely. 

Our  conclusions  on  this  acquaintance  were  {and  we 
never  altered  them),  that  though  he  was  a  clever  fel- 
low, an  excellent  and  ready  speaker,  fertile  in  expe- 
dients, and  prompt  in  execution,  yet  he  bad  by  no 
means  a  leading  or  decisive  mind,  and  consequently 
was  un6t  to  be  the  head  of  a  party.  He  had  no 
scruplea ;  for,  with  a  Httle  temporary  heating,  he 
seemed  to  be  entirely  without  principle.  There  was 
at  this  time  a  Mr  John  Hepburn,  minister  in  the  Old 
Grey  friars,  who,  though  he  never  appeared  to  take 
any  share  in  ecclesiastical  affairs  but  by  his  vote,  was 
in  secret  Webster's  counsellor  and  director,  so  that 
while  he  lived,  Webster  did  well  as  the  ostensible  head 
of  his  party.    Mr  Hepburn  was  grandfather  of  the 


izecy  Google 


DR  WEBSTER.  239 

present  Earl  of  Hyadford,  and  the  son  of  a  celebrated 
mountaineer  in  GaDoway,  the  Rev.  Mr  John  Hepburn, 
in  Queen  Anne's  time.*  But  when  he  [Hepburn]  died 
not  long  after,  he  [Webster]  fell  into  the  hands  of  Dr 
Jardine,  who  managed  him  with  great  dexterity,  for 
he  allowed  him  to  adhere  to  bis  party,  but  restrained 
him  &om  going  too  far.  As  Jardine  was  son-in-law 
to  Provost  Dmmmond,  with  whom  Webster  wished 
to  be  well,  Jardine,  who  had  much  sagacity,  with 
great  versatility  of  genius,  and  a  talent  for  the  man- 
agement of  men,  had  not  such  a  difficult  task  as  one 
would  have  imagined.  Webster  had  published  a 
satirical  sermon  against  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  for  which 
he  had  been  taken  to  task  in  the  General  Assembly 
by  the  Earl  of  Islay,  by  this  time  Duke  of  Ai^le,  and 
of  great  political  power  in  Scotland.  Webster,  in 
case  of  accidents,  wished  to  have  a  friendly  mediator 
between  him  and  the  Duke.  This  is  the  true  key  to 
all  his  poUtical  disingenuity. 

Webster  had  justly  obtained  much  respect  amongst 
the  clei^,  and  all  ranks,  indeed,  for  having  estab- 
lished the  Widows'  Fund ;  for  though  Dr  Wallace,  who 
was  an  able  mathematician,  had  made  the  calcula- 
tions, Webster  had  the  merit  of  carrying  the  scheme 
into  execution.  Having  married  a  lady  of  fashion, 
who  had  a  fortune  of  £4000  (an  estate  in  those  days), 
he  kept  better  company  than  most  of  the  clergy.    His 

*  The  terat  " mountaineer"  is  a  metonymy  for  »ii»m»ii  or  Coveuuiter. 
Daniel  Carmiohael  of  Manldalej,  whose  «on  Andrew  becune  axth  Eari  of 
Hyndford,  married  to  1742  Emilia,  daughter  of  the  Kor.  John  Hqibnni.— 

Wood"*  Pf erase,  i  759. -Ed. 


izecy  Google 


240  DR  WEBSTER. 

appearance  of  great  strictnees  in  religion,  to  which  he 
was  bred  under  his  father,  who  was  a  very  popular  min- 
ister of  the  Tolbooth  Church,  not  acting  in  restraint  of 
his  convivial  humour,  he  was  held  to  be  excellent  com- 
pany, even  by  those  of  dissolute  manners ;  while,  being 
a  five-bottle  man,  he  could  lay  them  all  under  the  table. 
This  had  [brought]  on  him  the  nickname  of  Dr  Bonum 
Magnum  in  the  time  of  faction  ;  but  never  being  in- 
decently the  worse  of  liquor,  and  a  love  of  claret  to 
any  degree  not  being  reckoned  in  those  days  a  sin  in 
Scotland,  all  his  excesses  wei-e  pardoned* 

When  it  was  discovered  that  Jardine  led  him,  his 
party  became  jealous ;  aud  it  was  no  wonder,  for  be 
used  to  undermine  them  by  bis  speeches,  and  vote 
with  them  to  save  appearances.  But  the  truly  up- 
right and  honourable  men  among  them,  such  as  Drs 
Erskine  and  Hunter,  &c.,  could  not  think  of  part- 
ing with  his  abilities,  which,  both  in  the  pulpit  and 
the  Assembly,  gave  some  lustre  to  their  party.  He 
could  pass  at  once  from  the  most  unbounded  jol- 
lity to  the  most  fervent  devotion ;  yet  I  believe 
that  his  hypocrisy  was  no  more  than  habit  grounded 
merely  on  temper,  and  that  his  aptness  to  pray  was 

•  Dr  Alexander  Weleter  and  Dr  Robert  Wallace  were  both  men  of  much 

celebrity  in  their  day  as  clergymen  of  the  Church  of  Scotland.  Of  Webster's 
very  peculiar  charscteriBtica  there  is  perhape  a  fuller  account  in  this  vorh 
than  anywhere  else.  Wallace,  who  was  a  nuui  of  leas  notable  peculiarities, 
wrot«  several  books,  the  most  remarkable  of  which  is  A  Dimertatttm  on  Oit 
Namberii  of  Manimd  ia  Andait  and  Modem  Timet,  which,  along  with 
Home's  Essay  on  the  populousness  of  ancient  nations,  conttibuted  Bone 
ideas  subsequently  brought  to  bear  on  the  great  discussion  on  population 
inaognnitad  by  Malthua. — Bd. 


,1.0,  Google 


DR  WEBSTEB.  iil 

as  easy  and  natural  to  him  as  to  drink  a  convivial 
glass,  llis  familiar  saying,  however,  that  it  was  }as 
lot  to  drink  with  gentlemen  and  to  vote  with  fools, 
made  too  full  a  discovery  of  the  laxity  of  his  mind. 
Indeed,  he  lived  too  long  to  preserve  any  respect; 
for  in  his  latter  years  his  sole  object  seemed  to  be 
where  to  find  means  of  inebriety,  which  he  at  last 
too  often  effected,  for  his  constitution  having  lost 
its  vigour,  he  was  sent  home  almost  every  evening 
like  other  drunkards  who  could  not  boast  of  strength. 
Besides  the  £4000  he  got  with  his  lady,  he  spent 
£6000  more,  which  was  left  him  by  Miss  Hunter,  one 
of  his  pious  disciples,  which  legacy  did  not  raise  his 
character.  In  aid  of  bis  fortune,  when  it  was  nearly 
drained,  he  was  appointed  Collector  of  the  Widows' 
Fund  when  a  Mr  Stewart  died,  who  was  the  first,  and 
likewise  obtained  one  of  the  deaneries  from  the  Crown. 
When  the  New  Town  of  Edinburgh  came  to  be  planned 
out,  he  was  employed  by  the  magistrates,  which  grati- 
fied his  two  strongest  desires — his  love  of  business 
and  of  conviviality,  in  both  of  which  he  excelled. 
The  business  was  all  done  in  the  tavern,  where  there 
was  a  daily  dinner,  which  cost  the  town  in  the  course 
of  the  year  £500,  the  whole  of  an  additional  revenue 
which  had  been  discovered  a  little  while  before  by 
Buchan,  the  Town's  Chamberlain.  He  bad  done  many 
private  and  pubhc  injuries  to  me  in  spite  of  the  sup- 
port I  and  my  friends  had  given  him  in  his  cause 
before  the  Synod  in  May  1752,  for  which  I  did  not 
spare  him  when  I  had  an  opportunity,  by  treating 
Q 


oy  Google 


him  with  that  rough  raillery  which  the  fashion  of 
the  tjmes  authorised,  which  he  bore  with  inimitable 
patience ;  and  when  I  rose  into  some  consideration,  he 
rather  courted  than  shunned  my  company,  with  the 
perfect  knowledge  of  what  I  thought  of  him. 

As  John  Home  and  I  had  made  speeches  in  bis 
support  at  tbe  Synod,  he  thought  he  could  do  no  leas 
than  invite  us  to  dinner  on  the  day  after :  we  went 
accordingly,  and  were  well  enough  received  by  him, 
while  his  lady  treated  us  not  only  with  neglect,  but 
even  with  rudencBS ;  while  she  caressed  with  the 
utmost  kindness  Adams  of  Falkirk,  the  very  person 
who,  by  disobeying  the  Assembly  and  escaping  un- 
hurt in  1751,  drew  the  thunder  of  the  Church  on 
Gilleapie  the  following  year. 

Another  instance  of  Webster's  hostility  to  me  hap- 
pened some  time  afterwards.  His  colleague,  Mr 
William  Gusthart,  who  was  a  very  old  man,  and 
lived  for  many  aummera  in  my  parish,  and  at  last  the 
whole  year  round,  engaged  me  to  preach  for  him  in 
the  Tolbooth  Church  one  Sunday  afternoon.  I  was 
averse  to  this  service,  as  I  knew  I  would  not  be 
acceptable  in  that  congregation.  But  being  urged  by 
the  old  man  and  his  family,  I  agreed,  and  went  to 
town,  and  preached  to  a  very  thin  audience.  I  was 
afterwards  certainly  informed  that  Webster  had  sent 
round  to  many  of  his  principal  families,  warning  them 
that  I  was  to  do  duty  for  his  colleague,  and  hoping 
that  they  would  not  give  countenance  to  a  person 
who  had  attended  the  theatre.    This,  I  think,  was  in 


izecy  Google 


DE  WEB3TEE. 


1759,  two  years  after  I  had  foiled  the  High  party  in 
the  General  Asaembly.  This  I  considered  as  most 
malicioas ;  and  with  this  I  frequently  taxed  him  in 
very  plain  terms  indeed.  There  were  a  few  of  us 
who,  besides  the  levity  of  youth  and  the  natural  free- 
dom of  onr  manners,  had  an  express  design  to  throw 
contempt  on  that  vile  species  of  hypocrisy  which 
magnified  an  indecorum  into  a  crime,  and  gave  an 
air  of  false  sanctimony  and  Jesuitism  to  the  greatest 
part  of  the  clergy,  and  was  thereby  pernicious  to 
rational  religion.  In  this  plan  we  succeeded,  for  in 
the  midst  of  our  freedom  having  preserved  respect  and 
obtained  a  leading  in  the  Church,  we  freed  the  clergy 
from  many  unreasonable  and  hypocritical  restraints. 

I  have  dwelt  longer  on  Dr  Webster  than  on  any 
other  person,  because  such  characters  are  extremely 
pernicious,  as  they  hold  up  an  example  to  unprin- 
cipled youth  how  far  they  may  play  fast  and  loose 
with  professed  principles  without  being  entirely  un- 
done ;  and  how  &r  they  may  proceed  in  dissipation 
of  manner  without  entirely  forfeiting  the  public  good 
opinion.  But  let  the  young  clergy  observe,  that  very 
few  indeed  are  capable  of  exhibiting  for  their  protec- 
tion such  useful  talents,  or  of  displaying  such  agree- 
able manners  as  Dr  Webster  did  in  compensation  for 
his  faults. 

In  1751  the  schoolmaster  of  Musselburgh  died,  a 
Mr  Monro,  who  had  only  seven  scholars  and  one 
boarder,  he  and  his  wife  had  become  so  unpopular. 
Ab  the  magistrates  of  Musselburgh  came  in  place  of 


izecy  Google 


244  BEVOLUTION    IN   CHURCH  POLITY. 

the  heritors  as  patrons  of  the  school,  by  a  transaction 
with  them  about  the  mortclotha,  the  emoluments  of 
which  the  heritors  gave  up  on  the  town's  agreeing  to 
pay  the  salary,  I  took  the  opportunity  that  this  gave 
me  as  joint  patron  to  persuade  them,  as  their  school 
had  fallen  so  low,  to  fill  it  up  by  a  comparative  trial 
before  a  committee  of  Presbytery,  with  Sir  David 
Dalrymple  and  Dr  Blair  as  assessors,  when  a  Mr  Jeffry, 
&om  the  Merse,  showed  so  much  superiority  that  he 
was  unanimously  elected.  He  soon  raised  the  school 
to  some  eminence,  and  got  about  twenty-five  or  thirty 
boarders  the  second  year.  When  he  died,  eight  or  ten 
years  afterwards,  his  daughters,  by  my  advice,  took 
up  the  first  female  boarding-school  that  ever  was  there, 
which  has  been  kept  up  with  success  ever  since  ;  and 
such  has  been  the  encouragement  that  two  others  have 
been  weU  supported  also.  On  JeflBy's  death,  John  Mur- 
ray succeeded  him,  who  did  well  also.  When  he  grew 
old,  I  got  him  to  resign  on  a  pension,  and  had  John 
Taylor  to  succeed  him,  who  has  surpassed  them  all, 
having  got  as  far  as  seventy  boarders,  his  wife  being 
the  best  qualified  of  any  person  I  ever  knew  in  her 
station. 

It  was  in  this  year,  1751,  the  foundation  was  laid 
for  the  restoration  of  the  discipline  of  the  Church  the 
next  year,  in  which  Dr  Robertson,  John  Home,  and  I 
had  such  an  active  hand.  Mr  Adams,  at  Falkirk,  had 
disobeyed  a  sentence  of  the  General  Assembly,  ap- 
pointing the  Presbytery  of  Linlithgow  to  settle  Mr 
Watson,  minister  of  the  pariah  of  Torphichen,  to  which 


izecy  Google 


EEVOLUnON   IN   CHURCH   POLITy.  245 

he  had  been  presented,  and  for  which,  after  trial,  he 
was  found  fully  qualified.  Mr  Adams  had  been  ap- 
pointed nominatim  by  the  Act  of  Assembly  to  preside 
at  this  ordination.  This  was  the  second  year  this 
Presbytery  had  disobeyed,  because  there  was  an  oppo- 
sition in  the  parish.  This  had  happened  before,  and 
the  plea  of  conscience  had  always  brought  ofi"  the  dis- 
obedient. The  Assembly  had  fallen  on  a  wretched 
expedient  to  settle  presentees  who  were  in  this  state. 
They  appointed  a  committee  of  their  number,  who  had 
no  scruple  to  obey  the  sentence  of  the  Supreme  Court, 
to  go  to  the  parish  on  a  certain  day  and  ordain  the 
presentee.  This  had  been  done  in  several  instances 
with  the  very  worst  effect ;  for  the  presbyteries  hav- 
ing preserved  their  own  popularity  by  their  resistance, 
they  had  no  interest  in  reconciling  the  minds  of  the 
people  to  their  new  pastor  ;  and  accordingly,  for  most 
part,  cherished  their  prejudices,  and  left  the  unfor- 
tunate young  man  to  fight  his  way  without  help  in  the 
best  manner  he  could.  This  was  a  great  abuse,  and 
was  likely  to  destroy  the  subordination  of  church 
courts,  which  of  old  had  been  the  great  boast  of  our 
Presbyterian  form  of  government,  and  had  been  very 
complete  and  perfect  in  early  times.  The  departure 
from  that  strictness  of  discipline,  and  the  adoption  of 
expedients  in  judicial  cases,  was  of  very  recent  growth, 
and  was  chiefly  owing  to  the  struggle  against  patron- 
ages after  their  restoration  inthelOthof  Queen  Anne; 
so  that  the  Assembly  had  only  to  recur  to  her  first 
principles  and  practice  to  restore  her  lost  authority. 


izecy  Google 


246  REVOLUTION  IJT  CHUECH  POUTY. 

So  far  was  it  from  being  true  that  Dr  Robertson  was 
the  inventor  of  this  system,  as  was  afterwards  believed, 
and  as  tbe  strain  of  Dugald  Stewart's  lAft  ofRolieHson 
has  a  tendency  to  support. 

The  rise  of  the  attempt  to  revive  the  ancient  discip- 
line in  this  Assembly  was  as  follows ; — Some  friends 
and  companions  having  been  well  informed  that  a 
great  majority  of  the  General  Assembly  1751  were 
certainly  to  let  Mr  Adams  of  Falkirk,  the  disobedient 
brother,  escape  with  a  very  slight  censure,  a  select 
company  of  fifteen  were  called  together  in  a  tavern,  a 
night  or  two  before  the  case  was  to  be  debated  in  the 
Assembly,  to  consult  what  was  to  be  done.  There  met 
accordingly  in  the  tavern  the  Right  Honourable  the 
Lord  Provost  Drummond ;  the  Honourable  William 
Master  of  Ross ;  Mr  Gilbert  Elliot,  junior  of  Minto ; 
Mr  Andrew  Priugle,  advocate ;  Messrs  Jardine,  Blair, 
Robertson,  John  Home,  Adam  Dickson  of  Duns^ 
George  Logan  of  Ormiston,  Alexander  Carlyle  of 
luTeresk,  and  aa  many  more  as  made  fifteen,  two  of 
whom — viz.  Logan  and  Carlyle — were  not  members  of 
Assembly.  The  business  was  talked  over,  and  having 
the  advice  of  those  two  able  lawyers,  Messrs  Elliot 
and  Pringle,  we  were  confirmed  in  our  opinion  that  it 
was  necessary  to  use  every  means  in  our  power  to 
restore  the  authority  of  the  Church,  otherwise  her 
government  would  be  degraded,  and  eTer3'thing  de- 
pending on  her  authority  would  fall  into  confusion; 
and  though  success  was  not  expected  at  this  Assembly, 
as  we  knew  that  the  judges,  and  many  other  respect- 


oy  Google 


REVOLUTION   IN  CHUBCH  POLITT.  247 

able  elders,  besides  the  opposite  party  of  the  clergy, 
were  resolved  to  let  Mr  Adama  and  the  disobedient 
Presbytery  of  LinUthgow  escape  with  a  very  slight 
censure  (an  admonition  only),  yet  we  believed  that, 
by  keeping  the  object  in  view,  good  sense  would  pre- 
vail at  last,  and  order  be  restored.  We  did  not  pro- 
pose deposition,  but  only  suspension  for  six  months, 
which,  we  thought,  was  meeting  the  opposite  party 
half-way.  John  Home  agreed  to  make  the  motion, 
and  Robertson  to  second  him.  Neither  of  them  had- 
ever  spoken  in  the  Assembly  till  then,  and  it  was  till 
that  period  unusual  for  young  men  to  begin  a  debate. 
They  plucked  up  spirit,  however,  and  performed  their 
promise,  and  were  ably  supported  by  Messrs  Pringle 
and  Elliot,  and  one  or  two  more  of  those  who  had 
engaged  with  them.  When  they  came  to  vote, 
however,  two  of  the  eighteen  lost  heart,  and  could 
not  vote  in  opposition  to  all  the  great  men  in  the 
Assembly.  Those  two  were  Messrs  John  Jardine  and 
Hew  Blair,  who  soon  repented  of  their  cowardice, 
and  joined  heartily  in  the  dissent  from  a  sentence 
of  the  Commission  in  March  1752,  which  brought  on 
the  deposition  of  Gillespie,  and  re-established  the 
authority  of  the  Church.  Adam  Dickson  of  Duns^ 
who  had  been  ill  treated  by  John  Home's  friends  in 
that  Presbytery  when  he  was  presentee  to  that  parish, 
was  the  first  who  voted  on  our  side.  Home  made  a 
spirited  oration,  though  not  a  business  speech,  which 
talent  he  never  attained.  Kobertson  followed  him, 
and  not  only  gained  the  attention  of  the  Assembly, 


izecy  Google 


2-t8  REVOLUTION  IN  OHUKCH  POLITY. 

but  drew  the  praise  of  the  best  judges,  particularly  of 
the  Lord  President  Dundas,  who  I  overheard  say  that 
Kobertson  was  an  admirable  speaier,  and  would  soon 
become  a  leader  in  the  church  courts. 

Although  the  associated  members  lost  the  question 
by  a  very  great  majority,  yet  the  speeches  made  on 
that  occasion  had  thoroughly  convinced  many  of  the 
senior  members,  who,  though  they  persisted  in  their 
purpose  of  screening  Adams,  yet  laid  to  heart  what 
they  heard,  and  were  prepared  to  follow  a  very  dif- 
ferent course  with  the  next  offender.  Adams'  own 
speech,  and  those  of  his  apologists,  had  an  equal  effect 
with  those  on  the  other  side  in  bringing  about  this 
revolution  on  the  minds  of  sensible  men,  for  the  plea 
of  conscience  was  their  only  ground,  which  the  more 
it  was  urged  appeared  the  more  absurd  when  applied 
to  the  conduct  of  subordinate  judicatories  in  an 
Established  Church. 

This  occasional  union  of  some  of  the  young  cleigy- 
men  with  the  young  lawyers  and  other  elders  of  rank 
had  another  happy  effect,  for  it  made  them  well  ac- 
quainted with  each  other.  Besides  casual  meetings, 
they  had  two  nights  set  apart  during  every  Assembly, 
when  Messrs  Ross,  Elliot,  and  Pringle,  with  additional 
young  elders  as  they  came  up,  supped  together,  and 
conferred  about  the  business  with  their  friends  of  the 
Assembly  1752,  and  whoever  they  thought  were  fit 
associates.  Thus  was  anticipated  what  took  place  on 
a  lai^er  scale,  a  few  years  afterwards,  by  the  institu- 
tion of  the  Select  Society.    Till  this  period  the  clergy 


izecy  Google 


EEVOLOTION  IN  CHUltCH  POLITY.  249 

of  Scotland,  from  the  Revolution  downwards,  bad  in 
general  been  little  thought  of,  and  seldom  admitted 
into  liberal  society,  one  cause  of  which  was,  that  in 
those  days  a  clergyman  was  thought  profane  who 
afiected  the  manners  of  gentlemen,  or  was  much  seen 
in  their  company.  The  sudden  call  for  young  men 
to  fill  up  vacancies  at  the  Revolution,  obliged  the 
Church  to  take  their  entrants  from  the  lower  ranks, 
who  had  but  a  mean  education.  It  must  be  observed, 
too,  that  when  Presbytery  was  re-established  in  Scot- 
land at  the  Revolution,  after  the  reign  of  Episcopacy 
for  twenty-nine  years,  more  than  two-thirds  of  the 
people  of  the  country,  and  most  part  of  the  gentry, 
were  Episcopals ;  the  restoration  of  Presbytery  by  King 
William  being  chiefly  owing  to  the  Duke  of  Argyle, 
Marchmont,  Stair,  and  other  leading  nobles  who  had 
suffered  under  Charles  and  James,  and  who  had  pro- 
moted the  Revolution  with  aU  their  interest  and  power. 
As  it  was  about  this  period  that  the  General 
Assembly  became  a  theatre  for  young  lawyers  to 
display  their  eloquence  and  exercise  their  talents,  I 
shall  mention  the  impression  which  some  of  them 
made  on  me  in  my  early  days.  The  Lord  President 
Amiston — the  father  of  a  second  President  of  the  same 
name,  Robert  Dundas,  and  of  Lord  Viscount  MelvUle, 
by  different  wives — had  been  King's  Advocate  in  the 
year  1720,  which  he  had  lost  in  1725,  by  hia  opposi- 
tion to  Sir  Robert  Walpole  and  Lord  Islay.  He  was 
one  of  the  ablest  lawyers  this  country  ever  produced, 
and  a  man  of  a  high  independent  spirit.    His  appear- 


izecy  Google 


250  ECCLESIASTICAL  LEADEBS. 

ance  was  against  him,  for  be  was  ill-looking,  with  a 
large  nose  and  small  ferret  eyes,  round  shoulders,  a 
harsh  croaking  voic^  and  altogether  unprepossessing ; 
yet  by  the  time  he  had  uttered  three  sentences,  he 
raised  attention,  and  went  on  with  a  tonent  of  good 
sense  and  clear  reasoning  that  made  one  totally  forget 
the  first  impression.  At  this  Assepibly  he  did  not 
speak,  and  soon  after  fell  into  a  debility  of  mind  and 
body,  which  continued  to  1754,  when  he  died.  I 
never  happened  to  be  in  company  with  this  Lord 
President  but  once,  which  was  at  a  meeting  of  Pres- 
bytery for  dividing  the  church  of  Newbottle,  The 
Presbjrtery  and  the  heritors  who  attended  were  quite 
puzzled  how  to  proceed  in  the  business,  and  Amiston, 
who  was  an  heritor,  was  late  in  coming.  But  he  had 
no  sooner  appeared  than  he  undid  sH  that  we  had  been 
trying  to  do,  and  having  put  the  meeting  on  a  right 
plan,  extricated  and  settled  the  business  in  a  short  time. 
To  the  superiority  of  hia  mind  he  added  experience  in 
that  sort  of  business.  There  was  a  dinner  provided 
for  us  in  the  Marquis  [of  Lothian's]  house,  where 
Sandy  M'Millan,  W.S.,  presided  in  the  absence  of  the 
Marquis,  when  I  was  quite  delighted  with  the  Presi- 
dent's brilliant  parts  and  fine  convivial  spirit.  I  was 
earnestly  invited  to  go  to  him  at  Amiston,  where  I 
should  probably  have  been  very  often,  had  not  this 
happened  a  very  short  while,  not  above  a  month  or 
two,  before  he  fell  into  debility  of  mind,  and  was  shut 
up.  Hew  Dalrymple,  Lord  Drummore,  who  was  much 
inferior  to  him  in  talents,  was  a  very  popular  speaker. 


izecy  Google 


ECCLESIASTICAL  LEADERS.  251 

though  neither  an  orator  nor  an  acute  reasoner.  He 
was  the  lay  leader  of  the  Moderate  party  ;  and  Amis- 
ton  was  inclined  to  favour  the  other  side,  though  he 
could  not  follow  them  in  their  settled  opposition  to 
the  law  of  patronage.  Drummore  devoted  himself 
during  the  Assembly  to  the  company  of  the  clergy, 
and  had  always  two  or  three  elders  who  followed  him 
to  the  tavern,  such  as  Sir  James  Colquhoun,  Colin 
Campbell  Commissioner  of  Customs,  &c.  Drummore's 
speaking  was  not  distinguished  for  anything  but  ease 
and  popularity,  and  he  was  so  deservedly  a  favourite 
with  the  clergy,  that,  taking  up  the  common-sense  of 
the  business,  or  judging  from  what  he  heard  in  con- 
versation the  day  before,  when  dining  with  the  clergy 
of  his  own  side,  he  usually  made  a  speech  in  every 
cause,  which  generally  seemed  to  sway  the  Assembly, 
though  there  was  not  much  argument.  He  used  to 
nod  to  Amiston  with  an  air  of  triumph  (for  they 
were  relations,  and  very  good  friends),  as  much  as  to 
say,  "  Take  you  that,  Robin." 

I  heard  Lord  Islay  once  speak  in  the  Assembly, 
which  was  to  correct  the  petulance  of  Alexander 
Webster,  which  he  did  with  dignity  and  force,  but 
was  in  the  wrong  to  commit  himself  with  a  light 
horseman  who  had  nothing  to  lose.  I  heard  Lord 
Marchmont  likewise  speak  on  the  motion  for  an  aug- 
mentation, which  he  did  with  much  elegance  and  a 
flowery  elocution,  but  entirely  without  sense  or  pro- 
priety', insomuch  that  he  by  his  speech  forfeited  the 
good  opinion  of  the  clergy,  who  had  been  prepossessed 


izecy  Google 


252  ECCLESIASTICAL   LEADERfl. 

in  his  favour  by  Pope's  panegyrical  line  "  Polwarth  is 
a  slave."  Pope,  according  to  his  manner,  intended 
this  as  a  panegyric  on  his  patriotism  and  independ- 
ence ;  but  this  was  the  voice  of  party,  for  Marchmont 
was  in  reality  as  much  a  slave  of  the  Court  as  any 
man  of  his  time. 

Mr  Gilbert  Elliot  showed  himself  in  the  Assembly 
equaJ  to  the  station  to  which  he  afterwards  attained 
as  a  statesmfui,  when  Sir  Gilbert,  by  }iis  superior 
manner  of  speaking.  But  Andrew  Pringle,  Solicitor- 
General,  and  afterwards  Lord  Aylmer,  excelled  all  the 
laymen  of  that  period  for  genuine  argument  and  elo- 
quence ;  and  when  on  the  bench,  he  dehvered  his 
opinion  with  more  dignjty,  clearness,  and  preciaion 
than  any  judge  I  ever  heard  either  in  Scotland  or 
England.  It  was  a  great  loss  to  this  country  that  he 
did  not  live  to  fill  the  President's  chair,  and  indeed 
had  not  health  to  go  through  the  labour  of  it,  othei> 
wise  it  was  believed  that  he  would  have  set  an  ex- 
ample of  elegance  and  dignity  in  our  law  proceedings 
that  could  not  easily  have  been  forgotten.  In  those 
reacts  the  bench  has  been  very  unlucky,  for  however 
great  lawyers  or  impartial  judges  the  succeeding 
Presidents  may  have  been,  in  the  qualities  I  have 
mentioned  they  have  all  been  inferior  even  to  the 
first  President  Amiston,  who  could  not  be  called  an 
elegant  speaker,  with  all  his  other  great  qualities.  In 
those  days  there  were  very  few  good  speakers  among 
the  clergy,  as  no  young  men  almost  ever  ventured  to 
apeak  but  when  at  the  bar  till  after  1 752.    The  custom 


oy  Google 


ECCLESIASnCAL   LEADERS.  253 

iuvariably  was  for  the  Moderator  to  call  for  the  opin- 
ion  of  two  or  three  of  the  old  mea  at  the  green  table 
who  were  nearest  him,  and  after  them  one  or  two  of  the 
judges,  or  the  King's  Advocate  and  Solicitor,  who  were 
generally  all  of  a  side,  and  were  Tery  seldom  opposed 
or  answered  but  by  James  Lindsay  and  one  or  two  of 
his  followers.  With  respect  to  Lindsay,  I  have  to  add 
that  he  was  a  £ne  brisk  gentlemanlike  man,  who  had 
a  good  manner  of  speaking,  but,  being  very  unlearned, 
could  only  pursue  a  single  track.  He  set  out  on  the 
popular  Bide  in  opposition  to  patronage,  but  many  of 
bis  private  friends  being  on  the  other  side,  and  Church 
preferment  tunning  chiefly  in  that  direction,  he  came 
for  two  or  three  years  over  to  them  ;  but  on  Drysdale'a 
getting  the  deanery  during  the  Marquis  of  EockiDg- 
bam's  adminJBtration,  he  took  pet  and  returned  to  his 
old  party.  The  ground  of  his  patriotism  was  thus 
unveiled,  and  he  was  no  longer  of  any  consequence, 
though  he  thought  he  could  sway  the  burgh  of  Loch- 
maben,  where  he  was  minister  at  that  time.  He  was 
a  very  pleasant  companion,  but  jealous  and  difficult, 
and  too  severe  a  rallier. 

The  clerg]nnan  of  this  period  who  far  outshone 
the  rest  in  eloquence  was  Principal  Tullidelph  of  St 
Andrews.  He  had  faUen  into  bad  health  or  low  spirits 
before  my  time,  and  seldom  appeared  in  the  Assembly ; 
but  when  he  did,  he  far  excelled  every  other  speaker. 
I  am  not  certain  if  even  Lord  Chatham  in  his  glory 
had  more  dignity  of  manner  or  more  command  of  his 
audience  than  he  had.     I  am  certain  he  had  not  so 


oy  Google 


254  ECCLESIASTICAL  LEADEB8. 

much  argument,  nor  Bucb  a  conyincing  force  of  rea- 
soning. Tullidelph  was  tall  and  thin  like  Pitt,  with 
a  manly  and  interesting  aspect ;  and  rising  slowly,  and 
beginning  in  a  very  low  tone,  he  soon  swelled  into  an 
irresistible  torrent  of  eloquence,  and,  in  my  opinion, 
was  the  most  powerful  speaker  ever  I  beard.  And 
yet  this  great  man  was  overcome  and  humbled  by  the 
buffoonery  of  a  man  much  his  inferior  in  everything 
bub  learning.  This  was  John  Chalmers,  minister  of 
Elie.*  Tullidelph  soon  gained  the  leading  of  his  uni- 
versity, the  Presbytery  of  Sfc  Andrews,  and  the  Synod 
of  Fife ;  but  being  of  a  haughty  and  overbearing 
disposition  (like  Chatham),  he  soon  disgusted  bis 
colleagues  both  in  the  University  and  Presbytray,  of 
which  the  younger  brethren  made  a  cabal  against  him, 
in  which  Chalmers  was  the  principal  agent  Though 
he  was  far  behind  Tullidelph  in  eloquence,  he  was 
superior  to  him  in  some  things,  especiaUy  in  ancient 
learning.  But  his  chief  mode  of  attack  was  by  a 
species  of  buffoonery,  which  totally  unhinged  the  Prin- 
cipal, who  was  very  proud,  and  indignant  of  opposi- 
tion. Chalmers  watched  his  arguments,  and  by  turning 
them  all  into  ridicule,  and  showing  that  they  proved 
the  very  reverse  of  what  he  intended,  he  put  Tullidelph 
in  such  a  rage  as  totally  disabled  him,  and  made  him 
in  a  short  time  absent  himself  both  from  Presbytery 
and  Synod.  He  at  last  became  hypochondriac,  sat  up 
all  night  writing  a  dull  commentary  on  the  Gospels, 
and  lay  in  bed  all  day. 

*  The  graud-imcle  t^  Dt  niomu  Qudmert.    See  Hadka's  Mentoir*,  L  2 


oy  Google 


ECCUS8USTICAL  LBADEB8.  255 

After  this  period,  however,  when  the  young  clergy 
distinguished  themselves — and  particularly  after  the 
Assembly  1753,  when,  Alexander  Webster  being  Mo- 
derator, he  on  the  very  first  question  dropped  the  old 
mode  of  calling  upon  the  senior  members — the  young 
clergy  began  to  feel  their  own  importance  in  debate, 
and  have  ever  since  continued  to  distinguish  them- 
selves, and  have  swayed  the  decision  of  the  Assembly;  - 
so  that  the  supreme  ecclesiastical  court  has  long  been  a 
school  of  eloquence  for  the  clergy,  as  well  aa  a  theatre 
for  the  lawyers  to  display  their  talents. 

It  was  in  the  Assembly  1752  that  the  authority  of 
the  Church  was  restored  by  the  deposition  of  Gillespie. 
Robertson  and  John  Home,  having  been  dissenters, 
with  some  others,  from  a  sentence  of  the  Commiaaion 
in  March  that  year  in  the  affair  of  the  settlement  of 
Inverkeithin^  similar  to  that  of  Torphichen  in  1751, 
had  entered  a  complaint  against  the  Commission,  which 
gave  them  an  opportunity  of  appearing  and  pleading 
at  the  bar  of  the  Assembly,  which  they  did  with  spirit 
and  eloquence.  The  minds  of  the  leaders  of  the  As- 
sembly having  been  now  totally  changed,  a  vigorous 
measure  was  adopted  by  a  great  majority.  The  Presby- 
tery of  Dunfermline  were  brought  before  the  Assembly, 
and  peremptorily  ordered  to  admit  the  candidate  three 
days  after,  and  report  to  the  Assembly  on  the  follow- 
ing Friday.  They  disobeyed,  and  Mr  Gillespie  was 
de^sed.  I  was  for  the  first  time  a  member,  with  my 
friend  and  co-presbyter  George  Logan.  It  was  thought 
proper  that,  on  the  first  day's  debate,  the  speaking 


izecy  Google 


256  ECCLESIASTICAL  LEADEBS. 

Bhould  be  left  to  the  senior  clergy  and  the  lay  mem- 
bera.  But  when,  at  a  general  meeting  of  the  party 
after  Gillespie  waa  deposed,  it  was  moved  that  it 
would  be  proper  to  propose  nezt  day  that  the  Aa- 
aembly  should  proceed  to  depose  one  or  two  more  of 
the  oflfending  brethren,  Mr  Alexander  Gordon  of  Kin- 
tore,  and  George  Logan  and  I,  were  pointed  out  as 
proper  persons  to  make  and  second  the  motion.  I 
accordingly  began,  and  was  seconded  by  Gordon  in 
very  vigorous  speeches,  which  occasioned  a  great  alarm 
on  the  other  side,  as  if  we  were  determined  to  get  rid 
of  the  whole  Presbytery ;  but  this  waa  only  in  terrorem, 
for  by  concert  one  of  our  senior  brethren,  with  much 
commendation  of  the  two  young  men,  calmly  pro- 
posed that  the  Assembly  for  this  time  should  rest 
contented  with  what  they  had  done,  and  wait  the 
effects  of  the  example  that  had  been  set.  After  some 
debate  this  was  carried.  Logan  not  having  done  his 
part,  I  asked  him  why  he  had  been  silent ;  he  an- 
swered that  Gordon  and  I  had  spoken  in  such  a  supe- 
rior manner  that  he  thought  he  would  appear  inferior, 
and  had  not  the  courage  to  rise.  As  it  was  the  fixst 
time  I  had  ever  opened  my  mouth  in  the  Assembly — 
for  I  waa  not  a  member  till  that  year — I  was  encou- 
raged to  go  on  by  that  reply  from  my  friend.  At 
the  same  time,  I  must  observe'  that  many  a  time,  aa 
in  this  case,  the  better  man  is  dazzled  and  sOenced 
for  life,  perhaps,  by.  the  more  forward  temper  and 
brilliant  appearances  of  his  companions.  My  admira- 
tion of  Bobertson  and  Hume,  with  whom  I  waa  daily 


oy  Google 


ECCLESIASTICAL  LBADEES.  257 

versant  at  that  time,  and  who  communicated  their 
writingB  to  me,  made.me  imagine  that  I  was  incapable 
of  -writing  anything  but  sermons,  insomuch  that  till 
the  year  1751  I  wrote  nothing  else  except  some  juve- 
nile poems.  Dr  Patrick  Cuming  was  at  this  time  at 
the  head  of  the  Moderate  interest ;  and  had  his  temper 
been  equal  to  his  talents,  might  have  kept  it  long ; 
for  he  had  both  learning  and  sagacity,  and  very 
agreeable  conversation,  with  a  constitution  able  to 
bear  the  conviviality  of  the  times. 


oy  Google 


CHAPTER  VII. 

1763-1760:  AGE,  51-S*. 

HKETCHEa   OF  BOCIKTT LORD   HILTOX — LADI   HEBVEV BHOLLFIT'S 

VISIT CULLBN's  HIHICRIES — NOTIOEB  AKD  ANECDOTES  OF  DAVID 

BVUZ,  ADAH  SUITE,  ADAH   FERQUSON,  DR  ROBERTSON,  SR  BLAIR, 

JOHN  HOUB — FOUNDATION  OF  THE  fiELECT  BOCIBTV COMFLPTIOH 

OF  THE  TRAGEDT   OF    "DOUGLAS" — ADVEKTUBE8  OF  ITS  AUTHOR 

AM>  BIS  FBIXNDa  IN  COHVETING  IT  TO   LONDON ADHIRAL  BTNG 

— THE  CARRIBBS'    INN, 

It  was  this  year  [l753]  that  the  Ist  Eegiment  of  dra- 
goons lay  at  Musselburgh,  with  some  of  the  oflScers  of 
which  I  was  very  intimate,  particularly  with  Charles 
Lyon,  the  Burgeon,  who  was  a  very  sensible,  handsome, 
and  agreeable  young  man.  He  afterwards  became  an 
officer,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  a  lieutenant-general. 
He  was  at  York  when  Captain  Burton  and  Wind 
fought  a  duel,  in  which  the  first  was  run  through 
the  lungs,  and  recovered.  Lyon  wrote  to  me  twice 
a-week,  as  I  bad  a  great  regard  for  Burton,  and  bad 
foretold  the  duel.  Ho  was  afterwards  well  known  by 
the  name  of  General  Philipson.  The  celebrated  Major 
Johnstone,  so  much  admired  for  his  beauty  and  for 
bis  many  duels,  was  of  this  regiment,  and  one  of  the 
best-natured  men  in  the  intercourse  of  friends  that 


izecy  Google 


PEBSONAL  SKETCHBS.  £69 

over  I  met  with,  Greorge  IL  had  put  a  cross  at  his 
name  on  his  behaving  very  insolently  at  one  of  the 
theatres  to  a  country  gentleman,  and  afterwards 
wounding  him  in  a  duel.  In  George  III.'s  time  John 
Home  got  the  star  taken  off,  and  he  was  promoted. 
He  was  of  the  family  of  Hilton,  which  is  descended 
from  that  of  Westerhall ;  and  Hew  Banuatine  had 
been  ius  travelling  tutor  when  abroad. 

The  parish  of  Inveresk  this  year  lost  a  very  agree- 
able membet;  for  the  estate  of  Carberry  being  sold  to 
a  Mr  Fullerton,  who  came  to  live  at  it.  Lord  Elchies 
l^t  the  place  and  went  to  Inch,  where  he  died  soon 
after.  His  place  was  in  some  respects  filled  by  his 
son,  Mr  John  Grant,  afterwards  Baron  Grant,  who 
bought  Castle  Steads.  Mr  Grant  was  a  worthy  good 
man,  of  considerable  parts,  but  of  a  weak,  whimsical 
mind.  He  was  at  this  time  chief  commissioner  for  the 
Duke  of  Buccleuch,  and  much  improved  the  family 
gallery  in  the  church,  where  he  attended  regularly. 
He  married  Miss  Fletcher,  the  eldest  daughter  of  Lord 
Milton,  who  received  the  marriage  company  at  Car- 
berry.  I  was  frequently  asked  to  dine  while  she  stayed 
there,  and  by  that  means  became  well  acquainted  with 
the  Fletchers,  whom  I  had  not  visited  before,  for  their 
bouse  was  not  in  my  parish,  and  I  was  not  forward 
in  pushing  myself  into  acquaintance  elsewhere  with* 
out  some  proper  introduction.  From  this  period  I 
became  intimate  with  that  family,  of  which  Lord 
Milton  himself  and  his  youngest  daughter  Betty,  after^ 
wards  Mrs  Wedderbum  of  Gosford,  were  my  much- 


izecy  Google 


260  PERSONAL   SKETCHES. 

valued  friends.  Lord  Milton  was  nephew  of  the  famous 
patriot,  Andrew  Fletcher  of  Saltoiin,  and  the  successor 
to  his  estate.  He  had  been  Lord  Justice-Clerk  and 
political  manager  of  this  country  under  Loi-d  Islay  ; 
and  now  that  his  lordship  had  been  Duke  of  Aigyle 
since  1744,  when  his  brother  John  died,  their  influ- 
ence was  completely  established.  The  Duke  had  early 
made  choice  of  Fletcher  for  his  coadjutor,  and  had 
proved  his  sagacity  by  making  so  good  a  choice  ;  for 
Lord  Milton  was  a  man  of  great  ability  in  business, 
a  man  of  good  sense,  and  of  excellent  talents  for  man- 
aging men  ;  and  though  his  conversation  was  on  a 
limited  scale,  because  his  knowledge  was  very  much 
so,  yet  being  possessed  of  indefeasible  power  at  that 
time  in  Scotland,  and  keeping  an  excellent  table,  his 
defects  were  overlooked,  and  he  was  held  to  be  aa 
agreeable  as  be  was  able. 

His  talents  had  been  illustrated  by  the  incapacity 
of  the  Tweeddale  Ministry,  who  were  in  power  during 
the  Rebellion,  and  who  had  been  obliged  to  resort  to 
Milton  for  intelligence  and  advice.  When  the  Rebel- 
lion was  suppressed,  and  the  Duke  of  Argyle  brought 
again  into  power,  he  and  Fletcher  very  wisely  gained 
the  hearts  of  the  Jacobites,  who  were  still  very 
numerous,  by  adopting  the  most  lenient  measures, 
and  taking  the  distressed  families  under  their  pro- 
tection, while  the  Squadrone  party  continued  as  vio- 
lent against  them  as  ever.  This  made  them  almost 
universally  successful  in  the  parliamentary  election 
which  followed  the  Rebellion,  and  established  their 


izecy  Google 


PEHSONAL   SKETCHES.  261 

power  till  the  death  of  the  Duke,  which  happened  in 
1761. 

Hi8  [Lord  Milton's]  youngest  daughter,  afterwards 
Mrs  Wedderbum,  was  one  of  the  first  females  in  point 
of  understanding  as  well  as  heart  that  ever  fell  in  my 
way  to  be  intimately  acquainted  with.  As  there  was 
much  weakness  and  intrigue  in  the  mother  and  some 
other  branches  of  the  family,  she  had  a  difficult  part 
to  act,  but  she  performed  it  with  much  address  ;  for 
whUe  she  preserved  her  father's  predilection  and  con- 
fidence, she  remained  well  with  the  rest  of  the  family. 
The  eldest  brother,  Andrew,  lived  for  most  part  with 
the  Duke  of  Argyle,  at  London,  as  his  private  secre- 
tary, and  was  M.F.  for  East  Lothian  ;  and  though  not 
a  man  who  produced  himself  in  public  life,  was  sufii- 
ciently  knowing  and  accomplished  to  be  a  very  amiable 
member  of  society.  After  the  death  of  the  Duke  of 
Argyle  in  1761,  and  of  his  father  in  1767,  he  lived 
for  most  part  at  his  seat  at  Saltoun,  in  East  Lothian. 
He  was  succeeded  as  member  of  Parliament  for  that 
county  by  Sir  Greorge  Suttie,  who  bad  been  a  lieu- 
tenant-colonel in  the  army,  and  who,  with  many 
others,  left  the  service  in  disgust  with  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland,  who,  though  he  had  always  been  beat  in 
Flanders,  had  disobliged  sundry  officers  of  good  pro- 
mise. ITiis  Sir  George,  however,  was  much  overrated. 
He  was  held  to  be  a  great  officer,  because  he  had  a 
way  of  thinking  of  his  own,  and  had  learned  from  his 
kinsman.  Marshal  Stair,  to  draw  the  plan  of  a  cam- 
paign.   He  was  held  to  be  a  great  patriot,  because  he 


izecy  Google 


262  PEKSONAL  SKETCHES. 

wore  a  coanie  coat  and  unpowdered  hair,  while  he 
was  looking  for  a  p03t  with  the  utmost  anxiety.  He 
waa  Teckoned  a  man  of  much  sense  because  he  said 
so  himself,  and  had  such  an  embarrassed  stuttering 
elocution  that  one  was  not  sure  but  it  was  trua 
He  was  understood  to  be  a  great  improver  of  land, 
because  he  was  ^ways  talking  of  farming,  and  bad 
invented  a  cheap  method  of  fencing  his  fields  by  com- 
bining a  low  stone  wall  and  a  hedge  together,  which, 
on  experiment,  did  not  answer.  For  all  those  qualities 
he  got  credit  for  some  time ;  but  nobody  ever  men- 
tioned the  real  strength  of  his  character,  which  was 
that  of  an  uncommonly  kind  and  indulgent  brother  to 
a  lai^  family  of  brothers  and  sisters,  whom  he  allowed, 
during  his  absence  in  a  five  years'  war,  to  dilapidate  his 
estate,  and  leave  him  less  than  half  his  income.  Lord 
Stair  had  been  caught  by  the  boldness  of  his  cousin  in 
attempting  to  make  the  plan  of  a  campaign,  which  had 
given  the  young  man  a  false  measure  of  his  own  ability. 
For  two  summers,  about  this  time,  I  went  for  some 
weeks  to  Dunse  Well,  which  was  in  high  vogue  at 
this  period,  when  I  was  often  at  Polwarth  Manse,  the 
dwelling  of  Mr  and  Mrs  Home,  the  last  of  whom  was 
aunt  of  Mary  Eoddam,  the  young  lady  whom  I  after- 
wards married,  and  who  had  lived  there  since  the 
death  of  her  father  and  mother  in  the  years  1744  and 
1749.  John  Home  passed  half  his  time  in  this  house, 
Mr  William  Home^  a  brother  of  the  Laird  of  Bassen- 
dean,  being  his  cousin,  and  Mrs  Home  (Mary  Roddam) 
a  superior  woman.     By  frequenting  this  house  I  was 


oy  Google 


PEBSONAL  SKETCHES.  263 

introduced  to  the  Earl  of  Marchmont,  whose  seat  was 
hard  by.  His  second  lady,  who  was  young  and 
handsome,  but  a  simple  and  quiet  woman,  and  three 
daughters  he  had  by  his  former  lady,  were  all  under 
due  subjection,  for  his  lordship  kept  a  high  command 
at  home.  The  daughters  were  all  clever,  particularly 
Lady  Mai^aret,  and  stood  less  in  awe  than  the 
Countess,  who,  had  it  not  been  for  her  only  child, 
Lord  Polwarth,  then  an  infant,  would  have  led  but 
an  uncomfortable  life.  The  family  of  Marchmont — 
which  rose  to  the  peerage  at  the  Revolution,  and  to 
the  ascendant  in  the  country,  through  the  weakness 
and  Jacobitism  of  the  more  ancient  Earls  of  Home, 
from  whom  they  were  descended — to  preserve  their 
superiority,  paid  great  court  to  the  county,  and  par- 
ticularly to  the  clergy,  because  they  were  the  only 
stanch  friends  to  Government.  Marchmont  was 
lively  and  eloquent  in  conversation,  with  a  tincture 
of  dassical  learning,  and  some  knowledge  of  the  con- 
stitution, especially  of  the  forms  of  the  House  of 
Peers ;  but  his  wit  appeared  to  me  to  be  petulant, 
and  his  understanding  shallow.  His  twin-brother, 
Hume  Campbell,  then  Lord-Register  for  Scotland, 
and  one  of  the  most  eloquent  lawyers  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  seemed  to  me  to  be  a  man  of  sounder 
judgment  than  his  brother ;  his  want  of  manhood, 
however,  had  been  disclosed  by  his  receiving  an  insult 
from  William  Pitt,  the  father,  which  he  had  probably 
been  tempted  to  inflict  on  bis  having  heard  what  had 
happened  to  him  in  Edinburgh  in  his  youthful  days. 


izecy  Google 


264  TOBIAS  SMOLLEIT. 

In  one  of  the  summers  in  which  I  was  in  that  part 
of  the  country,  the  Lord-Register  gave  a  ball  and 
supper  in  the  town-hall  of  Greenlaw,  which  I  men- 
tion because  I  had  there  an  opportunity  of  conversing 
with  Lady  Murray  and  her  friend  Lady  Hervey,  who 
was  understood  to  be  one  of  the  most  accomplished 
and  witty  ladies  in  England.  There  were  in  this  neigh- 
bourhood several  very  agreeable  clergymen :  Chatto 
was  very  acute  and  sensible — Ridpath  judicious  and 
learned — Dickson  an  able  ecclesiastic,  and  m  aster  of 
agriculture. 

In  one  of  those  years  it  was,  when  Dunse  "Well 
was  most  frequented,  that  the  Marchmont  family  for 
several  weeks  attended,  and  came  to  Dunse,  and 
breakfasted  at  a  small  tavern  by  the  bowling-green. 
We  generally  sat  down  twenty-four  or  twenty-five  to 
breakfast  in  a  very  small  room.  Marchmont  and  his 
brother  behaved  with  great  courtesy,  seldom  sitting 
down,  but  aiding  the  servants.  Francis  Garden  was 
there,  and  increased  the  mirth  of  the  company.  Most 
of  the  company  remained  all  the  forenoon  at  the 
bowling-green,  where  we  had  very  agreeable  parties. 

It  was  also  in  one  of  those  years  that  Smollett 
visited  Scotland  for  the  first  time,  aftOT  having  left 
Glasgow  immediately  after  his  education  was  finished, 
and  his  engaging  as  a  surgeon's  mate  on  board  a  man- 
of-war,  which  gave  him  an  opportunity  of  witnessing 
the  siege  of  Carthagena,  which  he  has  so  minately 
described  in  his  Roderick  Random.  He  came  out  to 
Musselburgh  and  passed  a  day  and  a  night  with  me^ 


oy  Google 


TOBIAS   SMOLLETT.  265 

and  went  to  church  aud  heard  me  preach.  I  in- 
troduced him  to  Cardonnei  the  Commissioner,  with 
whom  he  snpped,  and  they  were  much  pleased  with 
each  other.  Smollett  has  reversed  this  in  his  Hum- 
phrey Clinker,  where  he  makes  the  Commissioner  his 
old  acquaintance.*  He  went  next  to  Glasgow  and 
that  neighbourhood  to  visit  his  friends,  and  returned 
again  to  Edinburgh  in  October,  when  I  had  frequent 
meetings  with  him^ — one  in  particular,  in  a  tavern, 
where  there  supped  with  him  Commissioner  Cardon- 
nei, Mr  Hepburn  of  Keith,  John  Home,  and  one  or 
two  more.  Hepburn  was  so  much  pleased  with  Car- 
donnei, that  he  said  that  if  he  went  into  rebellion 
again,  it  should  be  for  the  grandson  of  the  Buke  of 
Monmouth.  Cardonnei  and  I  went  with  Smollett  to 
Sir  David  Kinloch's,  and  passed  the  day,  when  John 
Home  and  Logan  and  I  conducted  him  to  Dunbar, 
where  we  stayed  together  all  night. 

Smollett  was  a  man  of  veiy  agreeable  conversation 
and  of  much  genuine  humour ;  and,  though  not  a 
profound  scholar,  possessed  a  philosophical  mind,  and 
was  capable  of  making  the  soundest  observations  on 
human  life,  and  of  discerning  the  excellence  or  seeing 
the  ridicule  of  every  character  he  met  with.  Fielding 
only  exceUed  him  in  giving  a  dramatic  story  to  his 
novels,  but,  in  my  opinion,  was  inferior  to  him  in  the 
true  comic  vein.      He  was  one  of  the  many  very 

*  But  on  nomiiig  the  far  more  ditttinguiahed  men  seen  by  Mm  in  the 
"hothead  of  genius,"  Bramble  Mys,   "These  acquaintances  I  owe  to  the 
friendahip  of  Dr  Carljle,  who  wants  nothing  but  inclination  to  fignie  wiUi  , 
tbo  rest  on  piqier."— Bn. 


izecy  Google 


266  PERSONAL  SKETCHES. 

pleasant  men  with  whom  it  was  my  good  fortune  to 
be  intimately  acquainted.  Mr  Cardonnel,  whom  I 
have  mentioned,  was  another  who  excelled,  like  Smol- 
lett, in  a  great  variety  of  pleasant  stories.  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple,  North  Berwick,  had  as  much  conversation 
and  wit  as  any  man  of  his  time,  having  been  long  an 
M.P.  David  Hume  and  Dr  John  Jardine  were  like- 
wise both  admirable,  and  had  the  peculiar  talent  of 
rallying  their  companions  on  their  good  qualities. 
Dr  William  Wight  and  Thomas  Hepburn  were  also 
remarkable  —  the  one  for  brilliancy,  vivacity,  and 
smartness ;  the  other  for  the  shrewdness  of  his  re- 
marks and  irresistible  repartees.  The  Eight  Honour- 
able Charles  Townshend  and  Patrick  Lord  Elibank 
were  likewise  admirable ;  for  though  the  first  was 
inferior  in  knowledge  to  the  second,  yet  he  had  such 
flowing  eloquence,  so  fine  a  voice,  and  such  richness 
of  expression,  joined  to  brilliant  wit  and  a  fine  vein  of 
mimicry,  as  made  him  shine  in  every  company.  Eli- 
bank was  more  enlightened  and  more  profound,  and 
had  a  mind  that  embraced  the  greatest  variety  of 
topics,  and  produced  the  most  original  remarks.  He 
was  rather  a  humourist  than  a  man  of  humour ;  but 
that  bias  of  his  temper  led  him  to  defend  paradoxes 
and  uncommon  opinions  with  a  copiousness  and  in- 
genuity that  was  surprising.  He  had  been  a  lieu- 
tenant-colonel in  the  army,  and  was  at  the  si^e  of 
Carthagena,  of  which  he  left  an  elegant  and  Xenophon- 
like  account  (which  I'm  afraid  is  lost).  He  was  a 
Jacobite,  and  a  member  of  the  famous  Cocoa-tree  Club, 


oy  Google 


PERSONAL  SKETCHES.  267 

and  resigned  his  commission  on  some  disgust.  Soon 
after  the  Kebellion  of  1745  he  took  up  his  residence 
in  Scotland,  and  his  seat  being  between  Dr  Robert- 
son's church  and  John  Home's,  he  became  intimately 
acquainted  with  them,  who  cured  him  of  his  con- 
tempt for  the  Presbyterian  clergy,  made  him  change 
or  soften  down  many  of  his  original  opinions,  and  pre- 
pared him  for  becoming  a  most  agreeable  member  of 
the  Literary  Society  of  Edinburgh,  among  whom  be 
lived  during  the  remainder  of  his  life  admiring  and 
admired.  We  used  to  say  of  Elibank,  that  were  we 
to  plead  for' our  lives,  he  was  the  man  with  whom  .we 
would  wish  to  converse  for  at  least  one  whole  day 
before  we  made  our  defence. 

Dr  M'Cormick,  who  died  Principal  of  St  Andrews, 
was  rather  a  meny-andrew  than  a  wit ;  but  he  left  as 
many  good  sayings  behind  him,  which  are  remem* 
beted,  as  any  man  of  his  time.  Andrew  Gray,  minis- 
ter of  Abemethy,  was  a  man  of  wit  and  humour, 
which  bad  the  greater  effect  that  his  person  was 
diminutive,  and  his  voice  of  the  smallest  treble. 

Lindsay  was  a  hussar  in  raillery,  who  had  no  mercy, 
and  whose  object  was  to  display  himself  and  to  humble 
the  man  he  played  on.~  Monteath  was  more  than  bis 
match,  for  he  lay  by,  and  took  his  opportunity  of  ^v- 
ing  him  such  southboarda  as  silenced  him  for  the  whole 
evening.*  Happily  for  conyersation,  this  horse-play 
raillery  has  been  left  off  for  more  than  thirty  years 

*  Lmdsa;  was  muuiter  of  the  pariah  of  Kirkliiiton,  and  UoDte«tb  of  the 
{iwi*h  of  Loagformooiu^ — Ed. 


izecy  Google 


268  CULLEN   MIMICRIES. 

among  the  clergy  and  other  liberals.  Dmmmore — of 
the  class  of  lawyers  who  got  the  epithet  of  Monk  from 
Quin,  at  Bath,  on  account  of  his  pleasing  countenance 
and  bland  manners — was  a  first-rate  at  the  science  of 
defence  in  raillery :  he  was  too  good-natured  to  attack. 
He  had  the  knack,  not  only  of  pleasing  fools  with 
themselves,  but  of  making  them  tolerable  to  the  com- 
pany. There  were  two  men,  however,  whose  coming 
into  a  convivial  company  pleased  more  than  anybody 
I  ever  knew  :  the  one  was  Dr  George  Kay,  a  minister 
of  Edinburgh,  who,  to  a  charming  vivacity  when  he 
was  in  good  spirits,  added  the  talent  of  ballad-singing 
better  than  anybody  ever  I  knew ;  the  other  was 
John  Home. 

I  should  not  omit  I^ord  CuUen  here,  though  he  was 
much  my  junior,  who  in  his  youth  possessed  the 
talent  of  mimicry  beyond  all  mankind ;  for  bis  was 
not  merely  an  exact  imitation  of  voice  and  manner 
of  speaking,  but  a  perfect  exhibition  of  every  man's 
manner  of  thinking  on  every  subject.  I  shall  men- 
tion two  or  three  instances,  lest  his  wonderful  powers 
should  fall  into  oblivion. 

When  the  Honourable  James  Stuart  Wortley  lived 
with  Dr  Robertson,  the  Doctor  had  sometimes,  though 
rarely,  to  remonstrate  and  admonish  the  young  gen- 
tleman on  some  parts  of  his  conduct.  He  came  into 
the  room  between  ten  and  eleven  in  the  morning, 
when  Mr  Stuart  was  still  in  bed,  with  the  windows 
shut  and  the  curtains  drawn  close,  when  he  took  the 
opportunity,  in  his  mild  and  rational  manner  (for  he 


oy  Google 


CULLEN   MIMICRIES.  269 

could  not  chide),  to  give  him  a  lecture  od  the  maouer 
of  life  he  was  leading.  When  he  was  done,  "  This  is 
rather  too  much,  my  dear  Doctor,"  said  James ;  "  for 
you  told  me  all  this  not  above  an  hour  ago."  The 
case  was,  that  Cullen  had  been  beforehand  with  the 
Doctor,  and  seizing  the  opportunity,  read  his  Mend 
such  a  lecture  as  he  thought  the  Doctor  might  pro- 
bably do  that  morning.  It  was  so  very  like  in  thought 
and  in  words,  tiiat  Stuart  took  it  for  a  visitation 
from  tKe  Doctor. 

I  was  witness  to  another  exhibition  similar  to  this. 
It  was  one  day  in  the  General  Assembly  1765,  when 
there  happened  to  be  a  student  of  physic  who  was 
seized  with  a  convulsion  fit,  which  occasioned  much 
commotion  in  the  bouse,  and  drew  a  score  of  other 
English  students  around  him.  When  the  Assembly 
adjourned,  about  a  dozen  of  us  went  to  dine  in  the 
Poker  club-room  at  Nicholson's,  when  Dr  Robertson 
came  and  told  us  he  must  dine  with  the  Commis- 
sioner, but  would  join  us  soon.  Immediately  after 
we  dined,  somebody  wished  to  hear  from  Cullen  what 
Robertson  would  say  about  the  incident  that  had 
taken  place,  which  he  did  immediately,  lest  the  Prin- 
cipal should  come  in.  He  had  hardly  finished  when 
he  arrived.  After  the  company  had  drank  his  health, 
Jardine  said  slyly,  "Principal,  was  it  not  a  strange 
accident  that  happened  to-day  in  the  Assembly  1" 
Robertsoa's  answer  was  exactly  in  tbe  strain,  and 
almost  in  the  very  words,  of  Cullen.  This  raised  a 
very  loud  laugh  in  the  company,  when  the  Doctor, 


izecy  Google 


270  CXJLLEU  HIUICBI£fl. 

more  ru£Bed  than  I  ever  almost  saw  him,  said,  with  a 
severe  look  at  Cullen,  "  I  perceive  somebody  has  been 
ploughing  with  my  heifer  before  I  came  in." 

On  another  occasion  he  was  asked  to  exhibit,  when 
he  answered  that  his  subjects  were  so  much  hackneyed 
that  he  could  not  go  over  them  with  spirit ;  but  if 
any  of  them  would  mention  a  new  subject,  he  would 
try  to  please  them.  One  of  the  company  mentioned 
tbe  wild  beast  in  the  Govaudan,  when,  after  laying 
bis  head  on  the  table,  not  for  more  than  two  or  three 
minutes,  he  lifted  himself  up  and  said,  "  Now  I  have 
it,"  and  immediately  gave  us  the  thoughts  of  the 
Judges  Auchiuleck,  Kames,  and  Monboddo,  and  Br 
Robertson,  with  a  characteristical  exactness  of  senti- 
ment, as  well  as  words,  tone,  and  manDer,  as  aston- 
ished the  company.  This  happened  at  Br  Blair's,  who 
then  lived  in  James's  Square.* 

This  was  a  very  pleasing  but  dangerous  talent,  for 
it  led  to  dissipation.  When  he  had  left  off  his  usu^ 
mode  of  exhibition  when  called  upon,  yet  he  could 
not  irestrain  himself  from  displaying  in  his  common 
conversation,  in  which  he  intermingled  specimens  of 
his  superlative  art  as  the  characters  came  in  his  way, 
which  to  me  was  much  more  agreeable  than  the  pro- 
fessed exhibition.  As  he  was  more  knowing  and 
accomplished  than  almost  any  judge  in  his  time, 
had  all  other  qualities  been  of  a  piece,  his  company 

*  The  Banguinaiy  f^ta  &ttribiit«d  to  "the  great  beait  of  the  Oevaudin" 
excited  all  Europe  in  ITG^  and  there  was  mucli  aatomahineiit  when,  being 
at  last  killed,  it  was  found  to  be  only  a  large  wolL  Horace  Walpole  saw 
ita  oarcaas  io  the  Queea's  autechamber  at  Veruillea.— £d. 


oy  Google 


THE  aENERAL  ASSEMBLY.  271 

would  very  long  have  been  courted.  In  giving  some 
account  of  those  veiy  pleasant  characters  which  it 
■was  my  good  fortune  to  know,  1  have  anticipated 
several  years ;  for  Mr  Robert  Cullen,  for  instance,  did 
not  begin  to  be  known  till  after  1760.  But  I  shall 
now  return  to  my  narrative. 

It  was  in  the  General  Assembly  1 753,  as  I  have 
before  mentioned,  that  Dr  Webster  being  Moderator, 
he  put  an  end  to  the  ancient  mode  of  calling  up  Prin- 
cipals, and  Professors,  and  Judges,  Ac,  to  give  their 
opinion  on  cases  which  came  before  the  Assembly,  by 
declaring  that  he  would  call  upon  no  person,  but 
would  expect  that  every  member  should  freely  deliver 
his  opinion  when  he  had  any  to  offer.  This  brought 
on  the  junior  members,  and  much  animated  and  im- 
proved the  debates.  The  old  gentlemen  at  first  were 
sulky  and  held  their  tongues,  but  in  two  or  three 
days  they  found  them  again,  lest  they  should  lose 
their  ascendant.  I  never  afterwards  saw  the  practice 
revived  of  calling  upon  members  to  speak,  except 
once  or  twice  when  Principal  Tullidelph  attended, 
whom  everybody  wished  to  hear,  but  who  would  not 
rise  without  having  that  piece  of  respect  paid  to  him. 

At  this  Assembly  it  was  that  an  attempt  was 
made  to  have  Gillespie,  the-deposed  minister,  restored ; 
but  as  he  had  not  taken  the  proper  steps  to  conciliate 
the  Church,  but^  on  the  contrary,  had  continued  to 
preach,  and  had  set  up  a  separate  congregation,  the 
application  by  his  friends  was  refused  by  a  great 
majority,  and  was  never  repeated. 


oy  Google 


272  DAVID   HOME. 

At  this  time  David  Hume  was  living  in  Edinburgh 
and  composing  his  History  of  Great  Britain.  He 
was  a  man  of  great  knowledge,  and  of  a  social  and 
benevolent  temper,  and  truly  the  best-natured  man 
in  the  world.  He  was  branded  with  the  title  of 
Atheist,  on  account  T)f  the  many  attacks  on  revealed 
religion  that  are  to  be  found  in  his  philosophical 
works,  and  in  many  places  of  his  History  the  last  of 
which  are  still  more  objectionable  than  the  first,  which 
a  friendly  critic  might  caU  only  sceptical.  Apropos 
of  this,  when  Mr  Eobert  Adam,  the  celebrated  archi- 
tect, and  his  brother,  lived  in  Edinburgh  with  their 
mother,  an  aunt  of  Dr  Robertson's,  and  a  very  re- 
spectable woman,  she  said  to  her  son,  "  I  shall  be  glad 
to  see  any  of  your  companions  to  dinner,  but  I  hope 
you  will  never  bring  the  Atheist  here  to  disturb  my 
peaca"  But  Eobert  soon  fell  on  a  method  to  recon- 
cile her  to  him,  for  he  introduced  him  imder  another 
name,  or  concealed  it  carefully  from  her.  When  the 
company  parted  she  said  to  her  son,  "  I  must  confess 
that  you  bring  very  agreeable  companions  about  you, 
but  the  large  jolly  man  who  sat  next  me  is  the  most 
agreeable  of  them  all"  "  This  was  the  very  Atheist," 
said  he,  "  mother,  that  you  was  so  much  afraid  of." 
"  Well,"  says  she,  "  you  may  bring  him  here  as  much 
as  you  please,  for  he's  the  most  innocent,  agreeable, 
facetious  man  I  ever  met  with."  This  was  truly  the 
case  with  him;  for  though  he  had  much  learning  and 
a  fine  taste,  and  was  professedly  a  sceptic,  though  by 
no  means  an  atheist,  he  had  the  gi'eatest  simplicity 


oy  Google 


DAVID  HUME.  273 

of  mind  and  mannere  with  the  utmost  facility  and 
benevolence  of  temper  of  any  man  I  ever  knew.  His 
conversation  was  truly  irresistible,  for  while  it  was 
enlightened,  it  was  n^ve  almost  to  puerility. 

I  was  one  of  those  who  never  believed  that  David 
Hume's  sceptical  principles  bad  laid  fast  hold  on  his 
mind,  but  thought  that  his  books  proceeded  rather 
from  afiectatioo  of  superiority  and  pride  of  under- 
standing  and  love  of  vainglory.  I  was  confirmed  in 
this  opinion,  after  his  death,  by  what  the  Honourable 
Patrick  Boyle,  one  of  his  most  intimate  Mends,  told 
me  many  years  ago  at  my  house  in  Musselburgh, 
where  he  used  to  come  and  dine  the  first  Sunday  of 
every  General  Assembly,  after  his  brother.  Lord  Glas- 
gow, ceased  to  be  Lord  High  Ck>mmissioner.  When 
we  were  talking  of  David,  Mrs  Carlyle  asked  Mr  Boyle 
if  he  thought  David  Hume  was  as  great  an  unbeliever 
as  the  world  took  him  to  be  1  He  answered,  that  the 
world  judged  from  his  books,  as  they  had  a  right  to 
do ;  but  he  thought  otherwise,  who  had  known  him 
all  his  life,  and  mentioned  the  following  incident : 
When  David  and  he  were  both  in  London,  at  the 
period  when  David's  mother  died,  Mr  Boyle,  hearing 
of  it,  soon  after  went  into  his  apartment — for  they 
lodged  in  the  same  house — when  he  found  him  in  the 
deepest  affliction  and  in  a  flood  of  tears.  After  the 
usufd  topics  of  condolence,  Mr  Boyle  said  to  him, 
"My  friend,  you  owe  this  uncommon  grief  to  your 
having  thrown  off  the  principles  of  religion ;  for  if 
you  had  not,  you  would  have  been  consoled  by  the 


izecy  Google 


S74  DAVID  HUME. 

firm  belief  that  the  good  lady,  who  was  not  only  the 
best  of  mothers,  but  the  most  pious  of  Christians,  was 
DOW  completely  happy  in  the  realms  of  the  just."  To 
which  David  replied,  "  Though  I  threw  out  my  specu- 
lations to  entertain  and  employ  the  learned  and  meta- 
physical world,  yet  in  other  things  I  do  not  think  so 
differently  from  the  rest  of  mankind  as  you  may 
imagine."  To  this  my  wife  was  a  witness.  This  con- 
versation took  place  the  year  after  David  died,  when 
Dr  Hill,  who  wm  to  preach,  had  gone  to  a  room  to 
look  over  his  notes. 

At  this  period,  when  he  first  lived  in  Edinburgh, 
and  was  writing  his  History  of  England,  his  circum- 
stancea  were  narrow,  and  he  accepted  the  oflSce  of 
Librarian  to  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  worth  £40 
per  annum.  But  it  was  not  for  the  salary  that  he 
accepted  this  employment,  but  that  he  might  have 
easy  access  to  the  books  in  that  celebrated  library ; 
for,  to  my  certain  knowledge,  he  gave  every  farthing 
of  the  salary  to  families  in  distress.  Of  a  piece  with 
this  temper  was  his  curiosity  and  credulity,  which 
were  without  bounds,  a  specimen  of  which  shall  be 
afterwards  given  when  I  come  down  to  Militia  and 
the  Poker.  His  economy  waa  strict,  as  he  loved  inde- 
pendency ;  and  yet  he  was  able  at  that  time  to  give 
suppers  to  his  friends  in  his  small  lodging  in  the 
Canongate.  He  took  much  to  the  company  of  the 
younger  dei^,  not  from  a  wish  to  bring  them  over 
to  his  opinions,  for  ho  never  attempted  to  overturn 
any  man's  principles,  but  they  best  understood  hw 


oy  Google 


DAVID  HUME.  275 

cottons,  and  could  furnish  him  mth  literary  converr 
satioD.  Robertson  and  John  Home  and  Bannatine 
and  I  lived  all  in  the  countiy,  and  came  only  period- 
ically to  the  town.  Blair  and  Jardine  both  lived  in 
it,  and  suppers  being  the  only  fashionable  meal  at 
that  time,  we  dined  where  wc  best  could,  and  by 
cadies  assembled  our  firiends  to  meet  us  in  a  tavern 
by  nine  o'clock;  and  a  fine  time  it  was  when  we  could 
collect  David  Hume,  Adam  Smith,  Adam  Ferguson, 
Lord  Elibank,  and  Brs  Blair  and  Jardine,  ou  an  hour's 
warning.  I  remember  one  night  that  David  Hume, 
who,  having  dined  abroad,  came  rather  late  to  us,  and 
directly  pulled  a  large  key  from  hia  pocket,  which  he 
laid  on  the  table.  This  he  said  was  given  him  by 
his  maid  Pe^y  (much  more  like  a  man  than  a  woman) 
that  she  might  not  sit  up  for  him,  for  she  said  when 
the  honest  fellows  came  in  from  the  country,  he  never 
returned  home  tdl  after  one  o'clock.  This  intimacy 
of  the  young  clergy  with  David  Hume  enraged  the 
zealots  on  the  opposite  side,  who  little  knew  how  im- 
possible it  was  for  him,  had  he  been  willing,  to  shake 
their  principles. 

As  Mr  Hume's  circumstances  improved  he  enlarged 
his  mode  of  living,  and  instead  of  the  roasted  hen  and 
minced  collops,  and  a  bottle  of  punch,  he  gave  both 
elegant  dinners  and  suppers,  and  the  best  claret,  and, 
which  was  best  of  all,  he  furnished  the  entertainment 
with  the  most  instructive  and  pleasing  conversation, 
for  he  assembled  whosoever  were  most  knowing  and 
agreeable  among  either  the  laity  or  clei^.     This  he 


izecy  Google 


276  DAVID   HUME, 

always  did,  but  still  more  unsparingly  when  lie  be- 
came what  he  called  rich.  For  innocent  mirth  and 
agreeable  raillery  I  never  knew  his  match.  Jardine, 
who  sometimes  bore  hard  upon  him — for  he  had  much 
drollery  and  wit,  though  but  little  learning — never 
could  overturn  his  temper.  Lord  Elibank  resembled 
David  in  hiB  talent  for  collecting  agreeable  com- 
panions together,  and  had  a  house  in  town  for  several 
winters  chiefly  for  that  purpose. 

David,  who  delighted  in .  what  the  French  call 
plaisanterie,  with  the  aid  of  Miss  Nancy  Ord,  one  of 
the  Chief  Baron's  daughters,  contrived  and  executed 
one  that  gave  him  very  great  delight.  As  t^e  New 
Town  was  making  its  progress  westward,  he  bmlt  a 
house  in  the  south-west  comer  of  St  Andrew  Square. 
The  street  leading  south  to  Princes  Street  had  not 
yet  got  its  name  affixed,  but  they  got  a  workman 
early  one  morning  to  paint  on  the  corner-stone  of 
David's  house  "  St  David's  Street,"  where  it  remjuns 
to  this  day. 

He  was  at  first  quite  delighted  with  Ossian's  poems, 
and  gloried  in  them ;  but  on  going  to  London  he  went 
over  to  the  other  side,  and  loudly  affirmed  them  to 
be  inventions  of  Macpherson.  I  happened  to  say  one 
dny,  when  he  was  declaiming  against  Macpherson, 
that  I  had  met  with  nobody  of  his  opinion  but  Wil- 
liam Caddel  of  Cockenzie,  and  President  Dundas, 
which  he  took  ill,  and  was  some  time  of  forgetting. 
This  is  one  instance  of  what  Smellie  says  of  him,  that 
though  of  the  best  temper  in  the  world,  yet  he  could 


izecpy  Google 


DAVID  HUME.  277 

be  touched  by  opposition  or  rudeness.  This  waa  the 
only  time  I  had  ever  observed  David's  temper  change. 
I  can  call  to  mind  an  instance  or  two  of  his  good- 
natured  pleasantry.  Being  at  Gilmerton,  where  David 
Hume  was  on  a  visit,  Sir  David  Kinloch  made  him  go 
to  Athlestaneford  Church,  where  I  preached  for  John 
Home.  When  we  met  before  dinner,  "  What  did  you 
mean,"  saya  he  to  me,  "  by  treating  John's  congrega- 
tion to-day  with  one  of  Cicero's  academics  1  I  did  not 
think  that  such  heathen  morality  would  have  passed 
in  East  Lothian."  On  Monday,  when  we  were  assem- 
bling to  breakfast,  David  retired  to  the  end  of  the 
dining-room|  when  Sir  David  entered :  "  What  are  you 
doing  there,  Davy  ?  come  to  your  breakfast."  "  Take 
away  the  enemy  first,"  says  David.  The  baronet, 
thinking  it  waa  the  warm  fire  that  kept  David  in  the 
lower  end  of  the  room,  rung  the  bell  for  a  servant  to 
cany  some  of  it  ofT.  It  waa  not  the  fire  that  Beared 
David,  but  a  large  Bible  that  waa  left  on  a  stand  at 
the  upper  end  of  the  room,  a  chapter  of  which  had 
been  read  at  the  family  prayers  the  ni^t  before,  that 
good  custom  not  being  then  out  of  use  when  clergy- 
men were  in  the  house.  Add  to  this  John  Home 
saying  to  him  at  the  Poker  Club,  when  everybody 
wondered  what  could  have  made  a  clerk  of  Sir  Wil- 
liam Forbes  run  away  with  £900 — "I  know  that 
very  well,"  says  John  Home  to  David ;  "  for  when 
he  was  taken,  there  was  found  in  hia  pocket  your 
PhUoaophical  Works  and  Boston's  Fourfold  State 
cf  Man" 


oy  Google 


278  DAVID  HUME. 

Darid  Hume,  during  all  his  life,  had  written  the 
most  pleasing  and  agreeable  letters  to  his  friends.  I 
have  preserved  two  of  these.  But  I  lately  saw  two 
of  more  early  date  in  the  hands  of  Hr  Sandiland 
Dysart,  Esq.,  W.S.,  to  his  mother,  who  was  a  friend 
of  David's,  and  a  very  accomplished  woman,  one  of 
them  dated  in  1751,  on  occasion  of  bis  brother  Hume 
of  Ninewell's  marriage  ;  and  the  other  in  1 754,  with 
a  present  of  the  first  volume  of  his  History,  both  of 
which  are  written  in  a  vein  of  pleasantry  and  playful- 
ness which  nothing  can  exceed,  and  which  makes  me 
think  that  a  collection  of  his  letters  would  be  a  valu- 
able present  to  the  world,  and  present  throughout  a 
very  pleasing  picture  of  his  mind.* 

I  have  heard  him  say  that  Baron  Montesquieu,  when 
he  asked  him  if  he  did  not  think  that  there  would 
soon  be  a  revolution  in  France  favourable  to  liberty, 
answered,  "No,  for  their  noblesse  had  all  become 
poltroons."  He  said  that  the  dub  in  Paris  (Baron 
Holbach's)  to  which  he  belonged,  were  of  opinion  that 
Christianity  would  be  abolished  in  Europe  by  the  end 
of  the  eighteenth  centiiry ;  and  that  they  laughed  at 
Andrew  Stuaxt  for  making  a  battle  in  favour  of  a 
future  state,  and  called  him  "  L'ame  Immortelle." 

David  Hume,  like  Smith,  had  no  discernment  at  aU 
of  characters.  The  only  two  clergymen  whose  inter- 
fists  he  espoused,  and  for  one  of  whom  he  provided. 
Were  the  two  silliest  fellows  in  the  Church.     With 


izecy  Google 


ADAM  SMITH.  279 

CTeiy  opportunity,  he  was  ridiculously  shy  of  asking 
favoura,  on  account  of  preserving  his  independence, 
wMch  always  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  very  foolish  kind 
of  pride.  His  friend  John  Home,  with  not  more  be- 
nevolence, but  with  no  acraples  from  a  wish  of  inde- 
pendency for  which  he  was  not  born,  availed  himself 
of  his  influence  and  provided  for  hundreds,  and  yet 
he  never  asked  anything  for  himself. 

Adam  Smith,  though  perhaps  only  second  to  David 
in  learning  and  ingenuity,  was  far  inferior  to  him  in 
conversational  talents.  In  that  of  public  speakiog 
they  were  equal — David  never  tried  it,  and  I  never 
heard  Adam  but  once,  which  was  at  the  first  meeting 
of  the  Sdect  Society,  when  he  opened  up  the  d^ign 
of  the  meeting.  His  voice  was  harsh  and  enunciation 
thick,  approaching  to  stammering.  His  conversation 
was  not  colloquial,  but  like  lecturing,  in  which  I  have 
been  told  he  was  not  deficient,  especially  when  he 
grew  warm.  He  was  the  most  absent  man  in  com- 
pany that  I  ever  saw,  moving  his  lips,  and  talking  to 
himself,  and  smiling,  in  the  midst  of  large  companies. 
If  you  awaked  him  from  his  reverie  and  made  him 
attend  to  the  subject  of  conversation,  he  immediately 
began  a  harangue,  and  never  stopped  till  he  told  you 
all  he  knew  about  it,  with  the  utmost  philosophical 
ingenuity.  He  knew  nothing  of  characters,  and  yet 
was  ready  to  draw  them  on  the  slightest  invitation. 
But  when  you  checked  him  or  doubted,  he  retracted 
with  the  utmost  ease,  and  contradicted  all  he  had 
been  saying.    Ills  journey  abroad  with  the  Duke  of 


izecy  Google 


280  ADAM  SHtXE. 

Biiccleuch  cured  him  in  part  of  those  foibles ;  but  Btill 
he  appeared  very  unfit  for  the  intercourse  of  the  world 
as  a  travelling  tutor.  But  the  Duke  was  a  character, 
both  in  point  of  heart  and  understanding,  to  surmount 
all  disadvantages — he  could  leam  nothing  ill  from  a 
philosopher  of  the  utmost  probity  and  benevolence. 
If  he  [Smith]  had  been  more  a  man  of  address  and  of 
the  world,  be  might  perhaps  have  given  a  ply  to  the 
Duke's  fiue  mind,  which  was  much  better  when  left 
to  its  own  energy.  Charles  Townshend  had  chosen 
Smith,  not  for  his  fitness  for  the  purpose,  but  for  his 
own  glory  in  having  sent  an  eminent  Scottish  philo- 
sopher to  travel  with  the  Duke. 

Smith  had  from  the  Duke  a  bond  for  a  life  annuity 
of  £300,  till  an  office  of  equal  value  was  obtained  for 
him  in  Britain.  When  the  Duke  got  him  appointed 
a  Commissioner  of  the  Customs  in  Scotland,  he  went 
out  to  Dalkeith  with  the  bond  in  his  pocket,  and, 
offering  it  to  the  Duke,  told  him  that  he  thought  him- 
self bound  in  honour  to  surrender  the  bond,  as  his 
Grace  had  now  got  him  a  place  of  £500.  The  Duke 
answered  that  Mr  Smith  seemed  more  careful  of  his 
own  honour  than  of  his,  which  he  found  wounded  by 
the  proposal.  Thus  acted  that  good  Duke,  who,  being 
entirely  void  of  vanity,  did  not  value  himself  on 
splendid  generosities.  He  had  acted  in  much  the 
same  manner  to  Dr  Hallam,  who  had  been  his  tutor 
at  Eton ;  for  when  Mr  Townshend  proposed  giving 
Hallam  an  annuity  of  £100  when  the  Duke  was  taken 
from  him,  "  No,"  says  he,  "  it  is  my  desire  that  Hallam 


izecy  Google 


ADAM  3MITU.  281 

may  have  as  miicli  as  Stnitli,  it  being  a  great  mortiH' 
cation  to  him  that  he  ia  not  to  tras^el  with  me." 

Though  Smith  had  some  little  Jealousy  in  his  tem- 
per, he  had  the  most  unbounded  beneTolence.  His 
smile  of  approbation  was  truly  captiTating.  His 
aflectionate  temper  was  proved  by  his  dutiful  attend- 
ance on  his  mother.  One  instance  I  remember  which 
marked  his  character.  John  Home  and  be,  travelling 
down  from  London  together  [in  1776],  met  David 
Hume  going  to  Bath  for  the  recovery  of  his  health. 
He  anxiously  wished  them  both  to  return  with  him  : 
John  agreed,  but  Smith  excused  himself  on  account 
of  the  state  of  his  mother's  health,  whom  he  needs 
must  see.  Smith's  fine  writing  is  chiefiy  displayed  in 
his  book  on  Moral  Sentiment,  which  is  the  pleasantest 
and  most  eloquent  book  on  the  subject.  His  Wealth 
of  Nations,  from  which  he  was  judged  to  be  an  in- 
ventive genius  of  the  first  order,  is  tedious  and  full  of 
repetition.  His  separate  essays  in  the  second  volume 
have  the  air  of  being  occasional  pamphlets,  without 
much  force  or  determination.  On  political  subjects 
his  opinions  were  not  very  sound. 

Dr  Adam  Ferguson  was  a  very  different  kind  of 
man.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Highland  clei^yman,  who 
was  much  respected,  and  had  good  connections.  He 
had  the  pide  and  high  spirit  of  his  countrymen.  He 
was  bred  at  St  Andrews  University,  and  had  gone 
early  into  the  world ;  for  being  a  favourite  of  a 
Ihichess  Dowager  of  Athole,  and  bred  to  the  Church, 
she  had  him  appointed  chaplain  to  the  42d  rc^ment. 


izecy  Google 


ADAM  FEBGUSON. 


then  commaQded  by  Lord  John  Murray,  her  son,  when 
he  was  not  more  than  twenty-two.  The  Duchess  had 
imposed  a  very  difficult  task  upon  him,  which  was  to 
be  a  kind  of  tutor  or  guardian  to  Lord  John;  that  is 
to  say,  to  gain  his  confidence  and  keep  him  in  peace 
with  his  officers,  which  it  was  difficult  to  do.  This> 
however,  he  actually  accomplished,  by  adding  all  the 
decorum  belonging  to  the  clerical  character  to  the 
manners  of  a  gentleman ;  the  effect  of  which  was,  that 
he  was  highly  respected  by  all  the  officers,  and  adored 
by  his  countrymen,  the  common  soldiers.  He  re- 
mained chaplain  to  this  regiment,  and  went  about 
with  them,  till  1755,  when  they  went  to  America,  on 
which  occasion  he  resigned,  as  it  did  not  suit  his  views 
to  attend  them  there.  He  was  a  year  or  two  with 
them  in  Ireland,  and  likewise  attended  them  on  the 
expedition  to  Brittany  under  General  Sinclair,  where 
his  friends  David  Hume  and  Colonel  Edmonstone  also 
were.  This  turned  his  mind  to  the  study  of  war, 
which  appears  in  his  Roman  History,  where  many  of 
the  battles  are  better  described  than  by  any  historian 
but  Polybius,  who  was  an  eyewitness  to  so  many. 

He  had  the  manners  of  a  man  of  the  world,  and  the 
demeanour  of  a  high-bred  gentleman,  insomuch  that 
his  company  was  much  sought  after ;  for  though  he 
conversed  with  ease,  it  was  with  a  dignified  reserve. 
If  he  had  any  fault  in  conversation,  it  was  of  a  piece 
with  what  I  have  said  of  his  temper,  for  the  elevation 
of  his  mind  prompted  him  to  such  sudden  transitions 
and  dark  allusions  that  it  was  not  always  easy  to 


oy  Google 


ADAU  FERGUSON.  283 

follow  Tiiin,  though  he  waa  a  very  good  speaker.  He 
had  another  talent,  unknown  to  any  bat  his  intimates, 
which  was  a  boundless  vein  of  humour,  which  he 
indulged  when  there  were  none  others  present,  and 
which  flowed  from  his  pen  in  eTcry  familiar  letter  he 
wrote.  He  had  the  faults,  however,  that  belonged  to 
that  character,  for  he  was  apt  to  be  jealous  of  his 
rivals,  and  indignant  against  assumed  superiority. 
His  wife  used  to  say  that  it  was  very  fortunate  that 
I  was  so  much  in  Edinburgh,  as  I  was  a  great  peace- 
maker among  them.  She  did  not  perceive  that  her 
own  husband  was  the  most  difficult  of  them  all.  But 
as  they  were  all  honourable  men  in  the  highest  degree, 
John  Home  and  I  together  kept  diem  on  very  good 
terms :  I  mean  by  them,  Smith  and  Ferguson  and 
David  Hume ;  for  Robertson  was  very  good-natured, 
and  soon  disarmed  the  failing  of  Ferguson,  of  whom 
he  waa  afraid.  With  respect  to  taste,  we  held  David 
Hume  and  Adam  Smith  inferior  to  the  rest,  for  they 
were  both  prejudiced  in  favour  of  the  French  trage- 
dies, and  did  not  sufficiently  appreciate  Shakespeare 
and  Milton.  Their  taste  was  a  rational  act,  rather 
than  the  instantaneous  effect  of  fine  feeling.  David 
Hume  said  Ferguson  had  more  genius  than  any  of 
them,  as  he  had  made  himself  so  much  master  of 
a  difficxUt  science — ^viz.,  Natural  Philosophy,  which 
he  had  never  studied  but  when  at  college — in  three 
months,  so  as  to  be  able  to  teach  it. 

The  time  came  when  those  who  were  overawed  by 
Fei^ison  repaid  him  for  his  haughtiness;  for  when 


izecy  Google 


284  ADAM   FERQUSON. 

his  Roman  Hi^ory  was  published,  at  a  period  when 
he  had  lost  his  health,  and  had  not  been  able  to 
correct  it  diligently,  by  a  certain  propensity  they 
had,  unknown  to  themselves,  acquired,  to  disparage 
everything  that  came  from  Ferguson,  they  did  his 
book  more  hurt  than  they  could  have  done  by  open 
criticism.  It  was  provoking  to  hear  those  who  were 
so  ready  to  give  loud  praises  to  very  shallow  and 
imperfect  English  productions — to  curry  favour,  as  we 
supposed,  with  the  booksellers  and  authors  concerned 
— takmg  every  opportunity  to  undermine  the  reputa- 
tion of  Ferguson's  book.  "  It  was  not  a  Roman  his- 
tory," said  they  (which  it  did  not  say  it  was).  "  This 
delineation  of  the  constitution  of  the  republic  is  well 
sketched  ;  but  for  the  rest,  it  is  anything  but  history, 
and  then  it  is  so  incorrect  that  it  is  a  perfect  shame." 
All  his  other  books  met  with  the  same  treatment, 
while,  at  the  same  time,  there  were  a  few  of  us  who 
could  not  refrain  from  saying  that  Ferguson's  was  the 
best  history  of  Rome  ;  that  what  he  had  omitted  was 
fabiUous  or  insignificant,  and  what  he  had  wrote  was 
more  profound  in  research  into  characters,  and  gave 
a  more  just  delineation  of  them  than  any  book  now 
extant.  The  same  thing  we  said  of  his  book  on 
Moral  PhUoaophy,  which  we  held  to  be  the  book  that 
did  the  most  honour  of  any  to  the  Scotch  philoao- 
phers,  because  it  gave  the  most  perfect  picture  of 
moral  virtues,  with  all  their  irresistible  attractions. 
His  book  on  Civil  Society  ought  only  to  be  considered 
as  a  college  exercise,  and  yet  there  is  in  it  a  turn  of 


oy  Google 


DE   EOBEKTSON.  285 

thooght  and  a  species  of  eloquence  peculiar  to  Fergu- 
son. Smith  had  been  weak  enough  to  accuse  him 
of  having  borrowed  some  of  his  inventions  without 
owning  them.  This  Ferguson  denied,  but  owned  he 
derived  many  notions  from  a  French  author,  and  that 
Smith  had  been  there  before  him.  David  Hume  did 
not  live  to  see  Ferguson's  History,  otherwise  his 
candid  praise  would  have  prevented'  all  the  subtle 
remarks  of  the  jealous  or  resentful. 

With  res5)ect  to  Robertson  and  Blair,  their  lives  and 
characters  have  been  fully  laid  before  the  public^ 
by  Professor  Dugald  Stewart  in  a  long  life  of  Robert- 
BOD,  where,  though  the  picture  is  rather  in  disjointed 
members,  yet  there  is  hardly  anything  omitted  that 
tends  to  make  a  judicious  reader  master  of  the  char- 
acter, Dr  Blair'a  character  is  more  obvious  in  a  short 
but  very  elegant  and  true  account  of  him,  drawn  up 
by  Dr  Finlayson.  John  Hdl  is  writing  a  more  difTuse 
account  of  the  latter,  which  may  not  be  so  like.  To 
the  character  of  Robertson  I  have  only  to  add  here, 
that  though  he  was  truly  a  very  great  master  of  con- 
versation, and  in  general  perfectly  agreeable,  yet  he 
appeared  sometimes  so  very  fond  of  talking,  even 
when  showing-off  was  out  of  the  question,  and  so 
much  addicted  to  the  translation  of  other  people's 
thoughts,  that  he  sometimes  appeared  tedious  to  his 
best  &iends.*  Being  on  one  occasion  invited  to  dine 
with  Patrick  Robertson,  his  brother,  I  missed  my 
friend,  whom  I  had  met  there  on  all  former  occasions; 

*  Socaboro,  p.  171. 


oTvGoogle 


£86  I>R  BOBEETSON. 

"  I  have  not  invited  him  to-day,"  says  Peter,  "  for  I 
have  a  very  good  company,  and  hell  let  nobody 
speak  but  himself."  Once  he  was  staying  with  me 
for  a  week,  and  I  carried  him  to  dine  with  our 
parish  club,  who  were  fuUy  assembled  to  see  and  hear 
Dr  Robertson,  but  Dr  Finlay  of  Dnunmore  took 
it  in  his  head  to  come  that  day,  where  he  had  not 
been  for  a  year  before,  who  took  the  lead,  being  then 
rich  and  self-sufficient,  though  a  great  babbler,  and 
entirely  disappointed  the  company,  and  gave  us  all 
the  headache.  He  [Robertson]  was  very  much  a  mas- 
ter of  conversation,  and  very  desirous  to  lead  it,  and 
to  make  dissertations  and  raise  theories  that  some- 
times provoked  the  laugh  against  him.  One  instance 
of  this  was  when  he  had  gone  a  jaunt  into  England 
with  some  of  Henry  Dundas's  {Lord  Melville's)  family, 
lie  [Dundas]  and  Mr  Baron  Cockbum  and  Robert 
Sinclair  were  on  horsebacl^  and  seeing  a  gallows  on  a 
neighbouring  hiUock,  they  rode  round  to  have  a  nearer 
view  of  the  felon  on  the  gallows.  "When  they  met  in 
the  inn,  Robertson  immediately  began  a  dissertation 
on  the  character  of  nations,  and  how  much  the  Eng- 
lish, like  the  Romans,  were  h^dened  by  their  cruel 
diversions  of  cock-fighting,  bull-baiting,  bruising,  &c. ; 
for  had  they  not  observed  three  Englishmen  on  horse- 
back do  what  no  Scotchman  or Here  Dundas, 

having  compassion,  interrupted  him,  and  said, "  WhatI 
did  you  not  know.  Principal,  that  it  was  Cockbum 
and  Sinclair  and  me  ? "  *     This  put  an  end  to  theories, 

*  Batoq  Cockbom  wu  tlie  father  of  the  Ute  Lord  Cockbum.— Ed. 


oy  Google 


DR  EOBEETSON.  287 

&c  for  tbat  day.  Robertson's  trauBlationa  and  para- 
phrases on  other  people's  thoughts  were  so  beautiful 
and  so  harmless  that  I  never  saw  anybody  lay  claim 
to  their  own  ;  but  it  was  not  bo  when  he  forgot  him- 
self so  far  as  to  think  he  had  been  present  where  he 
had  not  been,  and  done  what  he  had  not  the  least 
hand  in — one  very  singular  instance  of  which  I  re- 
member. Hugh  Bannatine  and  some  dergymen  of 
Haddington  Presbytery  came  to  town  in  great  haste, 
on  their  being  threatened  with  having  their  goods 
distrained  for  payment  of  the  window-tax.  One 
of  them  called  on  me  as  he  passed ;  but  as  I  was 
abroad,  he  left  a  note  (or  told  Mrs  C),  to  come  to 
them  directly.  I  rode  instantly  to  town  and  met 
them,  and  it  was  t^;reed  on  to  send  immediately  to 
the  solicitor,  James  Montgomery.  A  cady  was  de- 
spatched, but  he  could  not  be  found,  till  I  at  last 
heard  his  voice  as  I  passed  the  door  of  a  neighbour- 
ing room.  He  came  to  us  on  being  sent  for,  and  he 
immediately  granted  the  alarmed  brethren  a  sist.  Not 
a  week  after,  three  or  four  of  the  same  clergymen, 
dining  at  the  Doctor's  house  where  I  was,  the  business 
was  talked  of,  when  he  said,  "  Was  not  I  very  fortu- 
nate in  ferreting  out  the  solicitor  at  Walker's,  when 
no  cady  could  find  him  ?  "  "  No,  no,"  says  I,  "  Prin- 
cipal ;  I  had  that  good-luck,  and  you  were  not  so 
much  as  at  the  meeting,"  We  had  sent  to  him,  and 
he  could  not  come.  "  Well,  well,"  replied  he,  "  I  have 
heard  so  much  about  it  that  I  thought  I  had  been 
there."    He  was  the  best-tempered  man  in  the  world. 


izecy  Google 


288  DE  ROBERTSON. 

and  tie  yoiing  gentlemen  who  had  lived  for  many 
years  in  his  house  declared  they  never  saw  him  once 
ruffled.  His  table,  which  had  always  been  hospitable, 
even  when  his  income  was  smaU,  became  fall  and 
elegant  when  his  situation  was  improved.  As  he 
loved  a  long  repast,  as  he  called  it,  he  was  as  ready 
to  give  it  at  home  as  to  receive  it  abroad.  The  soft- 
ness of  his  temper,  and  his  habits  at  the  head  of  a 
party,  led  him  to  seem  to  promise  what  he  was  not 
able  to  perform,  which  weakness  raised  up  to  him 
some  very  inveterate  enemies,  while  at  the  same  time 
his  true  friends  saw  that  those  weaknesses  were  rather 
amiable  than  provoking.  He  was  not  so  much  be- 
loved by  women  as  by  men,  which  we  laughingly 
used  to  say  was  owing  to  their  rivalship  as  talkers, 
but  was  much  more  owing  to  his  having  been  very 
little  in  company  with  ladies  in  his  youth.  He  was 
early  married,  though  his  wife  (a  very  good  one)  was 
not  his  first  choice,  as  Stewart  in  his  Life  would  make 
us  believe.  Though  not  very  complaisant  to  women, 
he  was  not  beyond  their  regimen  any  more  than  Dr 
George  "VVishart,  for  instances  of  both  their  frailties 
on  that  side  cotdd  be  quoted,  Tis  as  well  to  mention 
them  here.  In  the  year  '78,  when  Drs  Robertson  and 
Drysdale  had  with  much  pains  prepared  an  assembly 
to  elect  young  Mr  Robertson  into  the  Procurator's 
chair,  and  to  get  Dr  Drysdale  chosen  Principal  Clerk 
to  the  Assembly,  as  colleague  and  successor  to  Dr 
George  Wishart,  it  was  necessary  that  Dr  Wishart 
should  resign,  in  order  to  his  being  re-elected  with 


oy  Google 


DR  K0BEBT80N.  289 

Drysdale ;  but  this,  when  first  applied  to,  he  positively 
refused  to  do,  because  he  had  given  his  word  to  Dr 
Dick  that  he  would  give  him  a  year's  warning  before 
he  resigned.  In  spite  of  this  declaration  a  siege  was 
laid  to  the  honest  man  by  amazons.  After  several 
hearings,  in  which  female  eloqueoce  was  displayed  in 
all  its  forms,  and  after  many  days,  he  yielded,  as  he 
said  himself,  to  the  earnest  and  violent  solicitations  of 
Dr  Drj'sdale's  family.  He  never  after  had  any  inter- 
course with  that  family,  nor  saw  them  more.  Mr 
James  Lindsay  told  me  this  anecdote. 

Dr  Robertson's  weakness  was  as  follows :  He  had 
engaged  heartily  with  me,  when  in  1788  I  stood 
candidate  for  the  clerkship,  Dr  Drysdale  having 
shown  evident  marks  of  decline.  In  the  year  1787  I 
had  a  long  evening's  walk  with  the  Procurator,  when, 
after  mentioning  every  candidate  for  that  office  we 
could  think  of,  the  Procurator  at  last  said  that  no- 
body had  such  a  good  chance  as  myself.  After  a 
long  discussion  I  yielded,  and  we  in  due  form  com- 
municated this  resolution  to  his  father,  who  consented 
with  all  his  heart,  and  gave  us  much  advice  and  some 
aid.  When  the  vacancy  happened,  in  1789,  Robert 
Adam  assisted  his  brother-in-law  with  all  his  interest, 
which  was  considerable.  In  the  mean  time  the  same 
influence  was  used  with  Dr  Robertson  as  had  been 
with  Dr  Wishart,  in  a  still  more  formidable  shape ; 
for  Mrs  Drysdale  was  liis  cousin-german,  and  threat- 
ened him  with  the  eternal  hate  of  all  the  family. 
He  also  yielded  ;  and  Robert  Adam,  when  seriously 


izecy  Google 


290  DR  ROBERTSON. 

pressed  with  a  view  to  drop  his  canvass  if  fiobertson 
advised  to — "  No,"  Robertson  said,  "  go  on ; "  as  he 
thought  he  had  the  beat  chance.  Robert  Adam  told 
this  to  Professor  Ferguson  when  he  solicited  his  vote. 
Robertson's  conversation  was  not  always  so  prudent 
as  his  conduct,  one  instance  of  which  was  hia  always 
asserting  that  any  minister  of  state  who  did  not  take 
care  of  himself  when  he  bad  an  opportunity  was  no 
very  wise  man.  This  maxim  shocked  most  young 
people,  who  thought  the  Doctor's  standard  of  public 
virtue  was  not  very  high.  This  manner  of  talking 
likewise  seconded  a  notion  that  prevailed  that  he  was 
a  very  selfish  man.  "With  all  those  defects,  his  domestic 
society  was  pleasing  beyond  measure ;  for  his  wife, 
though  not  a  woman  of  parts,  was  well  suited  to  him, 
who  was  more  fitted  to  lead  than  to  be  led ;  and  his 
sons  and  daughters  led  so  happy  a  life  that  his  guests, 
which  we  were  often  for  a  week  together,  met  with 
nothing  but  welcome,  and  peace,  and  joy.  This  inter- 
course was  not  much  diminished  by  his  having  not 
put  any  confidence  in  me  when  he  left  the  business  of 
the  Church,  further  than  saying  that  he  intended  to  do 
it.  Though  he  knew  that  I  was  much  resorted  to  for 
advice  when  he  retired,  he  never  talked  to  me  on  the 
subject,  at  which  I  was  somewhat  indignant.  His 
deviations  in  politics  lessened  the  freedom  of  our  con- 
versation, though  we  still  continued  in  good  habits ; 
but  ever  after  he  left  the  leading  in  Church  affairs,  he 
appeared  to  me  to  have  lost  his  spirits;  and  still  more, 
when  the  magistrates  resorted  to  Dr  Blair,  instead  of 


oy  Google 


DR  BLAIH. 


him,  for  advice  about  their  choice  of  professors  and 
ministers.  I  had  discovered  his  having  sacrificed  me 
to  Mrs  Drysdale,  in  1 789,  but  was  long  acquainted  with 
his  veaknesses,  and  forgave  him ;  nor  did  I  ever  up- 
braid him  with  it  but  in  general  terms,  such  as  that  I 
had  lost  the  clerkship  by  the  keenness  of  my  opponents 
and  the  coldness  of  my  friends.  I  had  such  a  conscious 
superiority  over  him  in  that  affair  that  I  did  not  choose 
to  put  an  old  friend  to  the  trial  of  making  his  fault 
greater  by  a  lame  excuse. 

Dr  Blair  was  a  different  kind  of  man  from  Bobett- 
son,  and  his  character  is  very  justly  delineated  by  Dr 
Finlayson,  so  far  as  he  goes.  Eobertson  was  most 
sagacious,  Blair  was  most  naif.  Neither  of  them  could 
be  said  to  have  either  wit  or  humour.  Of  the  latter 
Robertson  had  a  small  tincture — Blair  had  hardly  a 
rdish  for  it.  Kobertson  had  a  bold  and  ambitious 
mind,  and  a  strong  desire  to  make  himself  considerable; 
Blair  was  timid  and  unambitious,  and  withheld  him- 
self from  public  business  of  every  kind,  and  seemed 
to  have  no  wish  but  to  be  admired  as  a  preacher, 
particularly  by  the  ladies.  His  conversation  was  so 
infantine  that  many  people  thought  it  impossible,  at 
first  sight,  that  he  could  be  a  man  of  sense  or  genius. 
He  was  as  eager  about  a  new  paper  to  his  wife's 
drawing-room,  or  his  own  new  wig,  as  about  a  new 
tragedy  or  a  new  epic  poem.  Not  long  before  his 
death  I  called  upon  him,  when  I  found  him  restless 
and  fidgetty.  "  What  is  the  matter  with  you  to-day,"' 
says  I,  "  my  good  friend — are  you  welH"    "  0  yes," 


oy  Google 


DR  BLAIR. 


aays  he,  "  but  1  mu3b  dresa  myaelf,  for  tlie  Duchess  of 
Leinster  has  ordered  her  granddaughters  not  to  leave 
Scotland  without  seeing  me."  "  Go  and  dress  your- 
self, Doctor,  and  I  shall  read  this  novel ;  for  I  am  re- 
solved to  see  the  Duchess  of  Leinater's  granddaughtere, 
for  I  knew  their  father  and  grandfather."  This  being 
settled,  the  young  ladies,  with  their  governess,  arrived 
at  one,  and  turned  out  poor  little  girls  of  twelve  and 
thirteen,  who  could  hardly  be  supposed  to  carry  a 
well-turned  compliment  which  the  Doctor  gave  them 
in  charge  to  their  grandmother. 

Robertson  had  ao  great  a  desire  to  shine  hinaself, 
that  I  hardly  ever  saw  him  patiently  bear  anybody 
else's  showing-ofif  but  Dr  Johnson  and  Garrick.  Blair, 
on  the  contrary,  though  capable  of  the  most  profound 
conversation,  when  circumstances  led  to  it,  had  not 
the  least  desire  to  shine,  but  was  delighted  beyond 
measure  to  show  other  people  in  their  best  guise  to  his 
friends.  "  Did  not  I  show  you  the  lion  well  to-day  1 " 
used  he  to  say  after  the  exhibition  of  a  remarkable 
stranger.  For  a  vain  man,  he  was  the  least  envious  I 
ever  knew.  He  had  truly  a  pure  mind,  in  which  there 
was  not  the  least  malignity ;  for  though  he  was  of  a 
quick  and  lively  temper,  and  apt  to  be  warm  and 
impatient  about  trifles,  his  wife,  who  was  a  superior 
woman,  only  laughed,  and '  his  friends  joined  her. 
Though  Kobertson  was  never  ruffled,  he  had  more 
animosity  in  his  nature  than  Blair.  They  were  both 
reckoned  selfish  by  those  who  envied  their  prosperity, 
but  on  very  unequal  grounds ;  for  though  Blair  talked 


izecy  Google 


DB   BLAIR.  293 

selfiBhly  enoQgh  sometime  yet  he  uever  failed  in 
generous  actions.  In  one  respect  they  were  quite  alike. 
Having  been  bred  at  a  time  when  the  common  people 
thought  to  play  with  cards  or  dice  was  a  sin,  and 
everybody  thought  it  an  indecorum  in  clergymen,  they 
could  neither  of  them  play  at  golf  or  bowls,  and  far 
less  at  cards  or  backgammon,  and  on  that  account 
were  very  unhappy  when  from  home  in  friends'  houses 
in  the  country  in  rainy  weather.  As  I  had  set  the  first 
example  of  playing  at  cards  at  home  with  unlocked 
doors,  and  so  relieved  the  clergy  from  ridicule  on  that 
side,  they  both  learned  to  play  at  whist  after  they  were 
sixty.  Robertson  did  very  well — Blair  never  shone. 
He  had  his  country  quarters  for  two  summers  in  my 
parish,  where  he  and  his  wife  were  quite  happy. 
We  were  liluch  together.  Mrs  C,  who  had  wit  and 
humour  in  a  high  degree,  and  an  acuteness  and  extent 
of  mind  that  made  her  fit  to  converse  with  philosophers, 
and  indeed  a  great  favourite  with  them  all,  gained 
much  upon  Blair;  and,  as  Mi-s  B.  alleged,  could  make 
him  believe  whatever  she  pleased.  They  took  delight 
in  raising  the  wonder  of  the  sage  Doctor.  "  Who  told 
you  that  story,  my  dear  Doctor  1 "  "  No,"  says  he, 
"  don't  you  doubt  it,  for  it  was  Mrs  C.  who  told  me." 
On  my  laughing — "  and  so,  so,"  said  he,  "  I  must  here- 
after make  allowance  for  her  imagination." 

Blair  had  lain  under  obligation  to  Lord  I^ven's 
family  for  his  first  church,  which  he  left  within  tho 
year;  but  though  that  connection  was  so  soon  dis- 
solved, and  though  Blair  took  a  side  in  Church  politics 


oy  Google 


wholly  opposite  to  Lord  Leven's,  the  Doctor  always 
behaved  to  the  family  with  great  respect,  and  kept  up 
a  visiting  correspondence  with  them  all  his  life.  Not 
80  Robertson  with  the  Arniston  family,  who  had  got 
him  the  church  of  Gladsmuir.  The  first  President 
failed  and  died — not,  however,  till  he  had  marked  hia 
approbation  of  Kobertson — in  1 751.  His  manner  had 
not  been  pleasing  to  him,  so  that  he  was  alienated  till 
Harry  grew  up ;  but  him  he  deserted  also,  on  the 
change  in  1782,  being  dazzled  with  the  prospect  of 
bis  son's  having  charge  of  ecclesiastical  affairs,  as  his 
cousin  John  Adam  was  to  have  of  political,  during 
Rodiingham's  new  ministry.  This  threw  a  cloud  on 
Eobertson  which  was  never  dispelled.  Blair  had  for  a 
year  been  tutor  to  Simon  Fraaer,  Lord  Lovat's  eldest 
son,  whose  steady  friendship  he  preserved  to  the  last, 
though  the  General  was  not  remarkable  for  that  ami- 
able weakness ;  witness  the  saying  of  a  common  soldier 
whom  he  had  often  promised  to  make  a  sergeant,  but 
never  performed,  "  Oh !  Simon,  Simon,  as  long  as  you 
continue  to  live,  Lord  Lovat  is  not  dead." 

Five  or  six  days  before  he  [Blair]  died,  finding  him 
well  and  in  good  spirits,  I  said  to  him,  "  Since  you  don't 
choose  to  dine  abroad  in  this  season  (December),  you 
may  at  least  let  a  friend  or  two  dine  with  you."  "  Well, 
well,  come  you  and  dine  with  me  to-morrow,"  looking 
earnestly  at  Miss  Hunter,  his  niece.  "I  am  engaged 
to-morrow,  but  I  can  return  at  four  to-day."  He  looked 
more  earnestly  at  his  niece.  "  What's  to  hinder  himi" 
said  she,  meaning  to  answer  his  look,  which  said. 


oy  Google 


JOHN  HOME.  S95 

"  Have  you  any  dinner  to-day,  Betty  ? "  I  returned, 
accordingly,  at  four,  and  never  passed  four  hours  more 
agreeably  with  him,  nor  had  more  enlightened  conver- 
sation. Nay  more,  three  days  before  his  death  he  sent 
to  John  Home  a  part  of  hia  History,  with  two  or  three 
pages  of  criticism  on  that  part  of  it  that  relates  to 
Provost  Driimmond,  in  which  he  and  I  thought  John 
egregiously  wrong. 

It  was  long  before  Blair's  circumstances  were  full, 
yet  he  lived  handsomely,  and  had  literary  strangers  at 
his  bouse,  as  well  as  many  friends.  A  task  imposed 
on  both  Robertson  and  Blair  was  reading  manuscript 
prepared  for  the  press,  of  which  Blair  had  the  greatest 
share  of  the  poetry,  and  Kobertson  of  the  other  writ- 
ings, and  they  were  both  kind  encouragers  of  young 
men  of  merit. 

In  John  Home's  younger  days  he  had  a  good  share  of 
wit,  much  sprightliness  and  vivacity,  so  that  he  infused 
joy  and  a  social  exhilaration  wherever  he  came.  His 
address  was  cordial  and  benevolent,  which  inspired  his 
companions  with  similar  sentiments.  Superior  know- 
ledge and  learning,  except  in  the  department  of  poetry, 
he  had  not,  bufsuch  was  the  charm  of  his  fine  spirits 
in  those  days,  that  when  he  left  the  room  prematurely, 
which  was  but  seldom  the  case,  the  company  grew 
dull,  and  soon  dissolved.  As  John  all  his  life  had  a 
thorough  contempt  for  such  as  neglected  or  disap- 
proved of  his  poetry,  he  treated  all  who  approved  of  his 
works  with  a  partiality  which  more  than  approached 
to  flattery.    The  effect  of  this  temper  was,  that  all  his 


oy  Google 


296  JOHN  HOME. 

opinions  of  men  and  things  were  prejudices,  which 
thongh  it  did  not  disqualify  him  for  writing  admirable 
poetry,  yet  made  him  unfit  for  writing  history  or  other 
prose  works.  He  was  in  no  respect  a  man  of  business, 
though  he  now  and  then  spoke  with  some  energy  and 
success  in  the  General  Assembly ;  but  he  bad  no  turn 
for  debate,  which  made  me  glad  when  he  was  dis* 
appointed  in  his  wish  of  obtaining  a  seat  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  which  was  owing  to  the  good  sense  of 
Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  and  Sir  William  Pulteney. 

This  has  been  a  long  digression  from  my  narration; 
but  having  noted  down  one  character,  I  thought  it  best 
to  go  on  with  a  few  more,  lest  I  should  forget  some 
particulars  which  then  occurred  to  me. 

It  was  in  the  year  1754  that  my  cousin,  Captain 
Lyon,  died  at  London,  of  a  high  fever.  His  wife, 
Lady  Catherine  Bridges,  had  conducted  herself  so 
very  loosely  and  ill,  that  it  was  suspected  that  she 
wished  for  his  death ;  but  it  was  a  brain  fever  of 
which  he  died  ;  and  as  his  wife  had  sent  for  Dr  Monro, 
the  physician  employed  about  the  insane,  his  mother, 
in  the  rage  of  her  grief,  alleged  that  his  wife  had 
occasioned  his  death.  Her  two  children  died  not  long 
after.  Lady  Catherine  confirmed  all  her  mother-in- 
law's  suspicions  by  marryiug  a  Mr  Stanhope,  one  of  her 
many  lovers.  By  this  time  a  large  fortune  had  fallen 
to  her.  She  was  truly  a  worthless  woman,  to  my  know- 
ledge. Lyon  and  his  children  were  buried  in  the  Duke 
of  Chandos's  vault  at  Canons,  by  His  Grace's  order. 

In  this  year,  1 754,  I  remember  nothing  remarkable 


izecy  Google 


THE  SELECT  SOCIETY.  297 

in  the  General  Assembly.  But  this  was  the  year  iu 
which  the  Select  Society  was  established,  which  im- 
proved and  gave  a  name  to  the  literati  of  this  country, 
then  beginning  to  diBtinguish  themselves.  I  gave  an 
account  of  this  institution,  and  a  list  of  the  membei's, 
to  Dugald  Stuart,  which  he  inserted  in  his  Life  of 
Robertson.  But  that  list  did  not  contain  the  whole 
of  the  members ;  some  bad  died  before  the  list  was 
printed,  and  some  were  admitted  after  it  was  printed. 
Of  the  first  were  Lord  Dalmeny,  the  elder  brother  of  the 
present  Lord  Kosebery,  who  was  a  man  of  letters  and 
an  amateur,  and,  though  ho  did  not  speak  himself, 
generally  carried  home  six  or  eight  of  those  who  did 
to  sup  with  him.  There  was  also  a  Peter  Duff,  a 
writer  to  the  signet,  who  was  a  shrewd,  sensible  fellow, 
and  pretending  to  be  unlearned,  surprised  us  with  his 
observations  in  strong  Buchan.*  The  Duke  of  Hamil- 
ton of  that  period,  a  man  of  letters,  could  he  have 
kept  himself  sober,  was  also  a  member,  and  spoke 
there  one  night.  Lord  Dalmeny  died  in  1755.  Mr 
Robert  Alexander,  wine  merchant,  a  very  worthy  man, 
but  a  bad  speaker,  entertained  us  all  with  warm  sup- 
pers and  excellent  claret,  as  a  recompense  for  the 
patient  hearing  of  his  ineffectual  attempts,  when  I 
often  thought  he  would  have  beat  out  his  brains  on 
account  of  their  constipation.  The  conversation  at 
those  convivial  meetings  frequently  improved  the 
members  more  by  free  conversation  than  the  speeches 


oy  Google 


2a8  SKETCHES   AND   INCIDENTS. 

in  tlie  Society.  It  waa  those  meetings  id  particular 
that  rubbed  off  all  comers,  as  we  call  it,  by  collision, 
and  made  the  literati  of  Edinburgh  less  captious  and 
pedantic  than  they  were  elsewhere. 

The  Earl  of  Hopetoun  waa  Commissioner  of  the 
General  Assembly.  The  Earl  of  Dumfries  had  wished 
for  it ;  but  some  of  the  ministers,  thinking  that  it 
would  be  proper  to  disappoint  him,  by  a  little  intrigue 
contrived  to  get  the  King  to  nominate  Hopetoun,  who 
accepted  it  for  one  year,  and  entertained  his  company 
in  a  sumptuous  manner.  At  his  table  I  saw  the 
Duchess  of  Hamilton  (Mary  Gurming),  without  doubt 
the  most  beautiful  woman  of  her  time. 

In  the  end  of  summer.  Lady  Dalkeith,  the  Duke  of 
Buccleuch's  mother,  who  had  been  a  widow  since  the 
year  1750,  came  to  Dalkeith,  and  brought  with  her 
the  Honourable  Mr  Stuart  M'Kenzie  and  his  lady,  the 
Countess's  sister,  and  remained  there  for  two  months. 
They  had  public  days  twice  in  the  week,  and  I  fre- 
quently dined  there.  The  Countess  was  well-bred  and 
agreeable ;  and,  acting  plays  being  the  rage  at  the 
time  among  people  of  quality,  she  proposed  to  act  a 
tragedy  at  Dalkeith  House,  viz.  "  The  Fair  Penitent," 
in  which  her  ladyship  and  Mr  M'Kenzie  were  to  have 
principal  parts.  Mr  John  Grant,  advocate,  then  chief 
manager  of  the  Duke  of  Buccleuch's  estates,  and  living 
at  Castlesteads,  was  to  play  the  part  of  the  father,  and 
it  was  requested  of  me  to  assist  him  in  preparing  his 
part.  I  found  him  a  stiff,  bad  reader,  of  affected 
English,  which  we  call  napping,  and  tolerably  obsti- 


oy  Google 


SKETCHES  AND   INCIDENTS.  299 

nate.  But  luckily  for  both  master  and  scholar,  the 
humour  was  soon  changed,  by  somebody  representing 
to  her  ladyship  that  her  acting  plays  would  give 
offence.  Mr  M'Kenzie  was  very  agreeable,  his  vanity 
having  carried  him  so  far  above  his  family  pride  a3  to 
make  him  wish  to  please  his  inferiors.  I  was  simple 
enough  then  to  think  that  my  conversation  and  man- 
ners had  not  been  disagreeable  to  him,  so  that  when  I 
was  at  London  four  years  after,  I  attempted  to  avail 
myself  of  his  acquaintance  ;  but  it  would  not  do,  for  I 
was  chilled  to  death  on  my  first  approach,  so  that  all 
my  intimacy  vanished  in  a  few  jokes,  which  sometimes 
he  condescended  to  make  when  he  met  me  on  the 
streets,  and  which  I  received  with  the  coldness  they 
were  entitled  to. 

By  this  time  John  Home  had  almost  finished  his 
tragedy  of  Dovglas ;  for  on  one  of  the  days  that  I  was 
at  Dalkeith  House  I  met  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  who,  on 
my  telling  him  that  I  had  three  acts  of  it  written  in 
my  hand,  came  round  with  me  to  my  house  in  Mussel- 
burgh, where  I  read  them,  to  his  great  delight.  This 
was  in  July  or  August  1754.  I  do  not  remember 
whether  or  not  he  saw  tbe  two  last  acts  at  this  time — 
I  should  think  not ;  for  I  remember  that  I  wrote  three 
acts  of  it  a  good  many  months  afterwards,  to  be  sent 
up  suddenly  to  Sir  Gilbert,  while  a  writer's  clerk  wrote 
out  fair  the  other  two  acts. 

In  February  of  this  year  Home  and  I  suflFered 
severely  by  the  death  of  friends.  George  Logan,  min- 
ister of  Ormiston,  was  seized  with  a  brain  fever,  of 


oy  Google 


300  SKETCHES   AND    IKCIDENT3. 

which  he  died  ia  a  few  days.  I  was  sent  for  by  his 
wife,  and  remained  by  liis  bedside  from  five  in  the 
afternoon  till  one  in  the  morning,  when  he  expired. 
He  raved  the  whole  time,  except  during  the  few  min- 
utes in  which  I  prayed  with  him.  I  am  not  sure  that 
he  knew,  for  he  soon  relapsed  into  his  luvings  again, 
and  never  ceased  till  the  great  silencer  came.  I  have 
given  the  character  of  his  mind  before  (p.  234).  The 
grief  of  his  wife,  who  never  could  be  comforted,  though 
ehe  lived  to  an  advanced  age,  was  a  proof  of  his  kind 
and  affectionate  temper.     They  had  no  children. 

After  my  friend's  death  I  had  returned  home  on 
Sunday  morning  to  do  duty  in  Inveresk  church,  and 
in  the  evening  about  six,  John  Home,  to  whom  I  had 
sent  an  express,  arrived  from  Polwarth.  On  hearing 
the  bad  news,  he  had  almost  fainted,  and  threw  himself 
on  the  bed,  and  sobbed  and  wept.  After  a  while  I 
raised  him,  by  asking  if  he  could  think  of  no  misfor- 
tune greater  than  the  death  of  Logan  1  He  started 
up,  and  cried,  "  Is  my  brother  David  gone  1 "  I  had 
received  an  express  from  his  brother  George,  in  Leith, 
that  afternoon,  to  tell  me  of  their  brother  David's 
death  on  the  voyage.  He  was  John's  only  uterine 
brother  alive — had  been  at  home  the  autumn  before 
— and  was  truly  a  fine-spirited  promising  young  man. 
He  had  gone  out  that  fall  first  mate  of  an  Indiaman. 
After  another  short  paroxysm  of  grief — for  his  stock 
was  almost  spent  before — he  rose  and  took  his  supper, 
and,  insisting  on  my  making  a  good  bowl  of  pimch,  wo 
talked  over  the  perfections  of  the  deceased,  went  to 


oy  Google 


CLERGYMEN  ON   A  RAMBLE.  301 

bed  aud  slept  sound.  la  the  momiog  be  was  taken 
up  with  the  suit  of  mouraiog  he  was  going  to  order, 
and  for  which  he  went  to  Edinburgh  on  purpose.  I 
mention  these  circumstances  to  show  that  there  are 
very  superior  minds  on  which  the  loss  of  friends  makes 
very  little  impression.  He  was  not  likely  to  feel  more 
on  any  future  occasion  than  on  this ;  for  as  people 
grow  older,  not  only  experience  hardens  them  to  such 
events,  but,  growing  daily  more  selfish,  they  feel  less 
for  other  people. 

In  the  month  of  February  1755,  John  Home's  tra- 
gedy of  Douglas  was  completely  prepared  for  the 
stage,  and  had  received  all  the  corrections  and  im- 
provements that  it  needed  by  many  excellent  critics, 
who  were  Mr  Home's  friends,  whom  I  have  mentioned 
before,  and  with  whom  he  daily  lived.  [He  accord- 
ingly set  out  for  London,  and]  were  I  to  relate  all  the 
circumstances,  serious  and  ludicrous,  which  attended 
the  outset  of  this  journey,  I  am  persuaded  they  would 
not  be  exceeded  by  any  novelist  who  has  wrote  since 
the  days  of  the  inimitable  Don  Quixote.  Six  or  seven 
Merse  ministers — the  half  of  whom  bad  slept  at  the 
manse  of  Polwarth,  bad  as  it  was,  the  night  before — 
set  out  for  Woolerhaughhead  in  a  snowy  morning  in 
February.  Before  we  had  gone  far  we  discovered  that 
our  bard  had  no  mode  of  carrying  his  precious  trea- 
sure, which  we  thought  enough  of,  but  hardly  foresaw 
that  it  was  to  be  pronounced  "a  perfect  tragedy  by  the 
best  judges ;  for  when  David  Hume  gave  it  that 
praise,  he  spoke  only  the  sentiment  of  the  whole  re- 


oy  Google 


302  CLERGYMEN    ON    A    RAMBLE. 

public  of  belles  lettres.  The  tragedy  in  one  pocket 
of  his  greatcoat,  and  his  clean  shirt  and  nightcap  in 
the  other,  though  they  balanced  each  other,  was 
thought  an  unsafe  mode  of  conveyance ;  and  our 
friend — who,  like  most  of  his  brother  poets,  was  unapt 
to  foresee  difficulties  and  provide  against  them— had 
neglected  to  buy  a  pair  of  leather  bags  as  he  passed 
through  Haddington.  We  bethought  us  that  possibly 
James  Landreth,  minister  of  Simprin,  and  clerk  of  the 
Synorl,  would  be  provided  with  such  a  convenience 
for  the  carriage  of  his  Synod  records;  and  having  no 
wife,  no  atra  euro,  to  resist  our  request,  we  unani- 
mously turned  aside  half-a-mile  to  call  at  James's ;  and, 
concealing  our  intention  at  first,  we  easily  persuaded 
the  honest  man  to  join  us  in  this  convoy  to  his  friend 
Mr  Home,  and  then  observing  the  danger  the  manu- 
script might  run  in  a  greatcoat-pocket  on  a  journey 
of  400  miles,  we  inquired  if  he  could  lend  Mr  Home 
his  valise  only  as  far  as  Wooler,  where  he  would  pur- 
chase a  new  pair  for  himself.  This  he  very  cheerfully 
granted.  But  while  his  pony  was  preparing,  he  had 
another  trial  to  go  through  ;  for  Cupples,  who  never 
had  any  money,  though  he  was  a  bachelor  too,  and 
had  twice  the  stipend  of  Landreth,  took  the  latter 
into  another  room,  where  the  conference  lasted  longei* 
than  we  wished  for,  so  that  we  had  to  bawl  out  for 
them  to  come  away.  We  afterwards  understood  that 
Cupples,  having  only  four  shillings,  was  pressing  Land- 
reth to  lend  him  balf-a-guinea,  that  he  might  be  able 
to  defray  the  expense  of  the  journey.     Honest  James, 


oy  Google 


CLEEOYM£N  ON  A   EAMBLG.  303 

who  knew  that  John  Home,  if  he  did  not  return  his 
own  valise,  which  was  very  improbable,  would  provide 
him  in  a  better  pair,  had  frankly  agreed  to  the  first 
request ;  but  as  he  knew  Cupples  never  paid  anything, 
he  was  very  reluctant  to  part  with  his  half-guinea. 
However,  having  at  last  agreed,  we  at  last  set  out,  and 
I  think  gallant  troops,  but  so-and-so  accoutred,  to  make 
an  inroad  on  the  English  border.  By  good  luck  the 
river  Tweed  was  not  come  down,  and  we  crossed  it 
safely  at  the  ford  near  Norham  Castle;  and,  as  the  day 
mended,  we  got  to  Woolerhaughhead  by  four  o'clock, 
where  we  got  but  an  indifferent  dinner,  for  it  was  but  a 
miserable  house  in  those  days  ;  but  a  happier  or  more 
jocose  and  merry  company  could  hardly  be  assembled. 

John  Home  and  I,  who  slept  in  one  room,  or  per- 
haps in  one  bed,  as  was  usual  in  those  days,  were  dis- 
turbed by  a  noise  in  the  night,  which  being  in  the 
next  room,  where  Laurie  and  Monteith  were,  we  found 
they  had  quarrelled  and  fought,  and  the  former  had 
pushed  the  latter  out  of  bed.  After  having  acted  as 
mediators  in  this  quarrel,  we  had  sound  sleep  till 
morning.  Having  breakfasted  as  well  as  the  house 
could  afford,  Cupples  and  I,  who  had  agreed  to  go  two 
days'  journey  further  with  Mr  Home,  set  off  south- 
wards with  him,  and  the  rest  returned  by  the  way 
they  had  come  to  Berwickshire  again. 

Mr  Home  had  by  that  time  got  a  very  fine  gallo- 
way from  his  friend  Robert  Adam  when  he  was  set- 
ting out  for  Italy.  John  had  called  this  horse  Piercy, 
who,  though  only  fourteen  and  a  half  hands  high,  was 


oy  Google 


304  CLERGYMEN   ON    A   RAMBLE. 

one  of  the  best  trotters  ever  seen,  and  having  a  good 
deal  of  blood  in  him,  when  he  was  well  used,  was  in- 
defatigable. He  carried  our  bard  for  many  years  with 
much  classical  fame,  and  rose  in  reputation  with  his 
master,  but  at  last  made  an  inglorious  end.*  I  had  a 
fine  galloway  too,  though  not  more  than  thirteen  and 
a  half  hands,  which,  though  much  slower  than  Piercy, 
easily  went  at  the  rate  of  fifty  miles  a-day,  on  the 
turnpike  road,  without  being  at  all  tired. 

Cupples  and  I  attended  Home  as  far  as  Forryhill, 
about  six  miles,  where,  after  remaining  all  night  with 
him,  we  parted  next  morning,  he  for  London,  and  we 
on  our  return  home.  Poor  Home  had  no  better  suc- 
cess on  this  occasion  than  before,  with  still  greater 
mortification  ;  for  Garrick,  after  reading  the  play,  re- 
turned it  with  an  opinion  that  it  was  totally  unfit  for 
the  stage.    On  this  occasion  Home  wrote  a  pathetic 

*  Pitrci/'t  end. — Robert  Adam,  on  hia  setting  out  for  London  to  go  to 
Italy,  and  some  of  hia  brothers,  witli  John,  and  CommiBBioner  Cardonnel, 
had  dined  with  me  one  day.  Cardonuel,  while  their  horses  were  getting 
ready,  inBisted  on  our  going  to  hie  garden  to  drink  a  couple  of  bottlee  of 
Home  Fi-encU  white  wine,  which  he  said  was  as  good  aa  champagne.  We 
went  with  him,  but  when  we  sat  down  in  hia  arbour  we  misaed  Bob  Adam. 
We  Boon  finished  our  wine,  which  we  drank  out  of  rammcTB,  and  returned 
to  the  manse,  where  we  fuund  Robert  galli^iing  round  the  green  on  Piercy 
like  a  mad  man,  which  he  repeated,  after  seeing  us,  for  at  least  ten  time*. 
Home  stopped  him,  and  had  some  talk  with  him ;  lo  the  brothein  at  lait 
went  off  quietly  for  Edinburgh,  while  Home  remained  to  stay  all  night  or 
go  home.  He  told  me  what  put  Robert  into  such  trim.  He  had  Ymea 
making  love  to  my  maid  Jenny,  who  was  B  handsome  lass,  anA.  had  even 
gone  the  length  of  offering  to  carry  her  to  London,  and  pension  her  there. 
All  his  o&era  were  rejected,  which  had  put  liim  in  a  flurry.  This  happened 
in  summer  1754.  Many  a  time  Piercy  carried  John  to  London,  and  onoe  in 
six  daye.  He  «ent  Jiim  at  last  to  Sir  David  Einlocb,  that  he  mi^t  end  hi« 
days  in  peace  and  ease  in  one  of  the  parks  of  Gilmerton.  Sir  David  tired 
ot  him  in  a  few  week*,  and  sold  him  to  an  egg-carrier  for  twenty  shillings  t 


izecy  Google 


CLEBGYMEN  ON  A  BAMBLE.  305 

coj^  of  verses,  addr^sed  to  Shakespeare's  image  in 
Westminster  Abbey. 

Cupples  and  I  had  a  diverting  journey  back  ;  for 
as  his  money  had  failed,  and  I  had  not  an  overflow, 
we  were  obliged  to  feed  our  horses  in  Newcastle  with- 
out dining,  and  to  make  the  best  of  our  way  to  Mor- 
peth, where  we  got  an  excellent  hot  sapper.  Next 
day,  staying  too  long  in  Alnwick  to  visit  the  castle, 
we  lost  our  way  in  the  night,  and  were  in  some  hazard, 
and  it  was  past  twelve  before  we  reached  Berwick ; 
but  in  those  days  nothing  came  wrong  to  us — youth 
and  good  spirits  made  us  convert  all  maladventures 
into  fun.  The  Virgin's  Inn,  as  it  was  called,  being  at 
that  time  the  best,  and  on  the  south  aide  of  the  bridge, 
made  us  forget  all  our  disasters. 

It  was  in  the  time  of  the  sitting  of  the  General 
Assembly  that  Lord  Drummore  died,  at  the  age  of 
sixty-three.  He  had  gone  the  Western  Circuit ;  and 
by  drying  up  an  issue  in  his  1^,  being  a  corpulent 
man  who  needed  such  a  drain,  he  contracted  a  gan- 
grene, of  which  he  died  in  a  few  weeks,  very  much 
regretted — more,  indeed)  than  any  man  I  ever  knew. 
His  having  got  a  legacy  from*  the  year 

before,  and  built  himself  a  comfortable  house  on  his 
small  estate,  where  he  only  had  a  cottage  before,  and 
where  he  had  slept  only  two  or  three  nights  for  his 
illness,  was  a  circumstance  that  made  his  family  and 
friends  feel  it  the  more.  He  had  been  married  to  an 
advocate's  daughter  of  Aberdeenshire,  of  the  name  of 

■  Blank  ill  Ma 


oy  Google 


306  POLITICS — THE  WAE. 

Home,  by  whom  a  good  estate  came  into  liia  family. 
By  her  he  had  five  bods  and  three  daughters.  Three 
of  the  sons  in  succession  inherited  the  name  and  estate 
of  Home. 

After  Lord  Drummore  became  a  widower,  he  at- 
tached himself  to  a  mistress,  which,  to  do  so  openly  as 
he  did,  was  at  that  time  reckoned  a  great  indecorum, 
at  least  in  one  of  his  age  and  reverend  office.  Tlds  was 
all  that  could  be  laid  to  bis  charge,  which,  however, 
did  not  abate  the  universal  concern  of  the  city  and 
county  when  he  was  dying.  His  cousin,  Lord  Cath- 
cart,  was  Commissioner  that  year  for  tbe  first  time. 
His  eldest  son  at  his  death  was  Lieutenant-Greneral 
Home  Dalrymple  ;  his  second,  David  Dalrymple, 
some  time  afterwards  Lord  Westhall ;  hia  youngest, 
Campbell,  who  was  distinguished  afterwards  in  the 
West  Indies,  and  was  a  lieutenant-colonel  and  Gover- 
nor of  Guadaloupe. 

At  my  father's  desire,  who  was  minister  of  the  parish 
where  Drummore  resided,  I  wrote  a  character  of  him, 
which  he  delivered  from  his  pulpit  the  Sunday  after 
his  funeral.  This  was  printed  in  the  Scots  Magazine 
for  June  1755,  and  was  commended  by  the  publisher, 
and  well  received  by  the  public.  This  was  the  first 
time  I  had  seen  my  prose  in  print,  and  it  gave  me 
some  confidence  in  my  own  talent 

In  the  year  1756  hostilities  were  begun  between 
the  French  and  British,  after  they  had  given  us  much 
provocation  in  America.  Braddock,  an  officer  of  the 
Guards — very  brave,  though  unfit  for  the  business  on 


oy  Google 


ADMIRAL  BYNG.  307 

which  he  was  sent — haviog  been  defeated  and  slain  at 
Fort  Da  Quesne  (a  misfortune  afterwards  repaired  by 
General  John  Forbes),  reprisals  were  made  by  the 
capture  of  French  ships  without  a  dedaration  of  war. 
The  French  laid  siege  to  Minorca,  and  Admiral  Byng 
was  sent  with  a  fleet  of  thirteen  ships  of  the  line 
'  to  throw  in  succours  and  raise  the  siege.  The  expec- 
tation of  the  country  was  raised  very  high  on  this 
occasion,  and  yet  was  disappointed. 

CoDcerDing  this  I  remember  a  very  singular  anec- 
dote. Daring  the  sitting  of  the  General  Assembly 
that  year,  by  desire  of  James  Lindsay,  a  company  of 
seven  or  eight,  all  clergymen,  supped  at  a  punch-house 
in  the  Bow,  kept  by  an  old  servant  of  lus,  who  had 
also  been  with  G^rge  Wishart.  In  that  time  of  san- 
guine hopes  of  a  complete  victory,  and  the  total  defeat 
of  the  French  fleet,  all  the  company  expressed  their 
full  belief  that  the  next  post  would  bring  us  great 
news,  except  John  Home  alone,  who  persisted  in  say- 
ing that  there  would  be  no  battle  at  all,  or,  at  the 
best,  if  there  was  a  battle,  it  would  be  a  drawn  ona 
John's  obstinacy  provoked  the  company,  in  so  much 
that  James  Landreth,  the  person  who  had  lent  him  the 
valise  the  year  before,  ofiered  to  lay  a  half-crown  bowl 
of  punch  that  the  first  mail  from  the  Mediterranean 
would  bring  us  the  news  of  a  complete  victory.  John 
took  this  bet ;  and  when  he  and  I  were  walking  to  our 
lodging  together,  I  asked  what  in  the  world  had  made 
him  so  positive.  He  answered  that  Byng  was  a  man 
who  would   shun  fighting  if  it  were  possible;   and 


izecy  Google 


308  THE  CAEEIEES*  INN. 

that  his  ground  of  kuowledge  was  from  Admiral  Smith, 
who,  a  few  years  back,  had  commanded  at  Leith,  who 
lodged  with  his  friend  Mr  Walter  Scott,  and  who, 
when  ho  was  confined  with  the  gout,  used  to  have 
him  to  come  aDd  chat  with  him,  or  play  at  cards  when 
he  was  able ;  and  that,  talking  of  the  characters  of 
different  admirals,  he  had  told  him  that  Byng,  though 
a  much-admired  commander  and  manoeuvrer  of  a 
fleet,  would  shun  fighting  whenever  he  could.  The 
Gazette  soon  cleared  up  to  us  the  truth  of  this  asser- 
tion, though  the  first  accounts  made  it  be  believed 
that  the  French  were  defeated.  A  full  confirmation 
of  this  anecdote  I  heard  two  years  afterwards. 

It  was  during  this  Assembly  that  the  Carriers'  Inn, 
in  the  lower  end  of  the  West  Bow,  got  into  some 
credit,  and  was  called  the  Diversorium.  Thomas  Nicol- 
8on  was  the  mans  name,  and  his  wife's  Nelly  Douglas. 
They  had  been  servants  of  Lord  EUiock's,  and  had 
taken  up  this  small  inn,  in  which  there  were  three 
rooms,  and  a  stable  below  for  six  or  eight  horses. 
Thomas  was  a  confused,  rattling,  coarse  fellow  ;  Nelly 
was  a  comely  woman,  a  person  of  good  sense,  and  very 
worthy.  Some  of  our  companions  frequented  the 
house,  and  Home  and  I  suspected  it  was  the  hand- 
some landlady  who  had  attracted  their  notice,  but  it 
was  not  so.  Nelly  was  an  honest  woman,  but  she  had 
prompted  her  husband  to  lend  them  two  or  three 
guineas  on  occasions,  and  did  not  suddenly  demand 
repayment  ■  Home  and  I  followed  Logan,  James 
Craig,  and  William  Gullen,  and  were  pleased  with  the 


oy  Google 


THE  CABBIEBS    INH.  309 

house.  He  and  I  happening  to  dine  with  Dr  Robert- 
Bon  at  his  uncle's,  who  lived  in  Pinkie  House,  a  week 
before  the  General  Assembly,  some  of  us  proposed  to 
order  Thomas  Nicolson  to  lay  in  twelve  dozen  of  the 
same  claret,  then  ISa.  per  dozen,  from  Mr  Scott,  wine 
merchant  at  Leith — for  in  his  house  we  proposed  to 
make  our  Assembly  parties  ;  for,  being  out  of  the  way, 
we  proposed  to  have  snug  parties  of  our  own  friends. 
This  was  accordingly  executed,  but  we  could  not  be 
concealed  ;  for,  as  it  happens  in  such  cases,  the  out-of- 
the-way  place  and  mean  house,  and  the  attempt  to  be 
private,  made  it  the  more  frequented — and  no  wonder, 
when  the  company  consisted  of  Robertson,  Home, 
Ferguson,  Jardine,  and  Wilkie,  with  the  addition  of 
David  Hume  and  Lord  Elibank,  the  Master  of  Ross, 
and  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot. 


izecy  Google 


CHAPTEE  VIII. 

1766-1758-.  AGE,  34-36. 


PREPABATIONB  FOR  ACTING  THE  TBAaEDT    OF   "DOUQLAS      IN   EDIN- 

BUROH — THE  BEHBABSAL THE  BUCOBBS — CARLYLE  ATTEMDil — 

A  WAR  OF  PAMPHLETS  —  EBMOVED  INTO  THB  CHURCH  COUBTa 
— THE  "UBEL"  AOAINBT  CABLTLE — THB  BCCLBSIABTICAL  CON- 
FLICT  CHARACTERISTICS    OF    THB  COHBATANTB THE  CLKROT 

OF  BCOTLAND  AND  THE  8TAGB — CONDUCT  OF  DUNDA8  AND  WED- 

DERBUBN HOME    AND    HIS     8UC0KS8 ARCHIBALD     DDKB     OP 

ABOILE  AND  HIB  HABITS. 

In  October  1756,  John  Home  had  been  taken  by  Lord 
Milton's  family  to  Inverary,  to  be  introduced  to  the 
Duke,  who  was  much  taken  with  his  liveliness  and 
gentlemanlike  manners.  The  Duke's  good  opinion 
made  Milton  adhere  more  firmly  to  him,  and  assist  in 
bringing  on  his  play  in  the  end  of  that  season. 

It  was  in  the  end  of  this  year,  1756,  that  Doughs 
was  first  acted  in  Edinburgh.  Mr  Home  had  been 
unsuccessful  in  London  the  year  before,  but  he  was 
well  with  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  Mr  Oswald  of  Dunnikier, 
and  had  the  favour  and  friendship  of  Lord  Milton  and 
all  his  family  ;  and  it  was  at  last  agreed  among  them 
that,  since  Ganick  could  not  yet  be  prevailed  on  to 
get  Douglas  acted,  it  should  be  brought  on  here  ;  for 
if  it  succeeded  in  the  Edinburgh  theatre,  then  Garridc 
could  resist  no  longer. 


izecy  Google 


ACTING  OF  "DOUGLAS."  311 

There  happened  to  be  a  pretty  good  set  of  players; 
for  Digges,  whose  relations  had  got  him  debarred  &om 
the  London  theatres,  had  come  down  here,  and  per- 
formed many  principal  parts  witl^  saccess.  He  was  a 
very  handsome  young  man  at  that  time,  with  a  genteel 
address.  He  had  drunk  tea  at  Mally  Campbell's,  in 
Glasgow  College,  when  he  was  an  ensign  in  the  year 
1745.  I  was  there,  and  thought  him  very  agreeable. 
He  was,  however,  a  great  profligate  and  spendthrift ; 
and  poltroon,  I'm  afraid,  into  the  bai^ain.  He  had 
been  on  the  stage  for  some  time,  having  been  obliged 
to  leave  the  army.  Mrs  Ward  turned  out  an  exceed- 
ing good  Lady  Randolph  ;  Lowe  performed  Glen- 
alvon  well;  Mr  Haymen  the  Old  Shepherd,  and 
Digges  himself  young  Douglas.  I  attended  two  re- 
hearsals with  our  author,  and  Lord  Elibank,  and  Dr 
Ferguson,  and  David  Hume,  and  was  truly  astonished 
at  the  readiness  with  which  Mrs  Ward  conceived  the 
Lady's  character,  and  bow  happily  she  delivered  it. 
To  be  near  Digges's  lodgings  in  the  Canongate,  where 
the  first  rehearsals  were  performed,  the  gentlemen 
mentioned,  with  two  or  three  more,  dined  together  at 
a  tavern  in  the  Abbey  two  or  three  times,  where  pork 
griskins  being  a  favourite  dish,  this  was  called  the 
Griskin  Club,  and  excited  much  curiosity,  as  every- 
thing did  in  which  certain  people  were  concerned. 

The  play  had  unbounded  success  for  a  great  many 
nighta  in  Edinburgh,  and  was  attended  by  all  the 
literati  and  most  of  the  judges,  who,  except  one  or 
two,  had  not  been  in  use  to  attend  the  theatre.    The 


izecy  Google 


S12  ACTING  OF  "DOUGLAS." 

town  in  general  was  in  an  uproar  of  exultation  that 
a  Scotcliman  had  written  a  tr^edy  of  the  first  rate, 
and  that  its  merit  was  first  submitted  to  their  judg- 
ment. There  were ,  a  few  opposers,  however,  among 
those  who  pretended  to  taste  and  literature,  who  en- 
deavoured to  cry  down  the  performance  in  libellous 
pamphlets  and  ballads  (for  they  durst  not  attempt  to 
oppose  it  in  the  theatre  itself),  and  were  openly  coun- 
tenanced by  Bobert  Dondas  of  Ai-niston,  at  that  time 
Lord  Advocate,  and  all  his  minions  and  expectants. 
The  High-flyiug  set  were  unanimous  against  it,  as 
they  thought  it  a  sin  for  a  clergyman  to  write  any 
play,  let  it  be  ever  so  moral  in  its  tendency.  Several 
ballads  and  pamphlets  were  published  on  our  side  in 
answer  to  the  scurrilities  against  ue,  one  of  which 
was  written  by  Adam  Ferguson,  and  another  by  my- 
self. Ferguson's  was  mild  and  temperate ;  and,  besides 
other  arguments,  supported  the  lawfulness  and  use  of 
dramatic  writing  from  the  example  of  Scripture,  which 
he  exhibited  in  the  story  of  Joseph  and  his  brethren, 
as  having  truly  the  efiect  of  a  dramatic  composition. 
This  was  much  read  among  the  grave  and  sober- 
minded,  and  converted  some,  and  confirmed  many  Id 
their  beUef  of  the  usefulness  of  the  stage.  Mine  was 
of  such  a  different  nature  that  many  people  read  it 
at  first  as  intended  to  rtdicxde  the  performance,  and 
bring  it  into  contempt,  for  it  was  entitled  "  An  Argu- 
ment to  prove  that  the  Tragedy  of  Douglas  ought  to 
be  publidy  burnt  by  the  Hands  of  the  Hangman." 
The  zeal  and  violence  of  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh, 


oy  Google 


ACTiKG   OF  "DOUGLAS."  313 

who  had  made  enactments  and  declarations  to  be 
read  in  the  pulpit,  provoked  me  to  write  this  pam- 
phlet, which,  in  the  ironical  manner  of  Swift,  con- 
tained a  severe  satire  on  all  our  opponents.  This 
was  Bo  well  concealed,  however,  that  the  pamphlet 
being  published  when  I  was  at  Dumfries,  about  the 
end  of  January,  visiting  Pmvost  Bell,  who  was  on  his 
deathbed,  some  copies  arrived  there  by  the  carriers, 
which  being  opened  and  read  by  my  sister  and  aunt 
when  I  was  abroad,  they  conceived  it  to  be  serious, 
and  that  the  tragedy  would  be  qnite  undone,  till  Mr 
Stewart,  the  Comptroller  of  the  Customs,  who  was  a 
man  of  sense  and  reading,  came  in,  and  who  soon 
undeceived  them,  and  convinced  them  that  Douglas 
was  triumphant.  This  pamphlet  had  a  great  effect 
by  elating  our  friends,  and  perhaps  more  in  exasperat- 
ing our  enemies;  which  was  by  no  means  softened  by 
Lord  Elibank  and  David  Hume,  &a,  running  about 
and  crying  it  up  as  the  first  performance  the  world 
had  seen  for  half  a  century. 

What  I  really  valued  myself  most  upon,  however, 
was  half  a  sheet,  which  I  penned  very  suddenly. 
Digges  rode  out  one  forenoon  to  me,  saying  that  he 
had  come  by  Mr  Home's  desire  to  inform  me  that 
all  the  town  had  seen  the  play,  and  that  it  would  run 
no  longer,  unless  some  contrivance  was  fallen  upon  to 
make  the  lower  orders  of  tradesmen  and  apprentices 
come  to  the  playhouse.  After  hearing  several  ways 
of  raising  the  curiosity  of  the  lower  orders,  I  desired 
him  to  take  a  walk  for  half  an  hour,  and  look  at  the 


oy  Google 


311  ACTING   OF  "DOUOLAa 

view  from  Inveresk  churchyard,  which  he  did ;  and, 
in  the  mean  time,  I  drew  up  what  I  entitled  "  A  full 
and  true  History  of  the  Bloody  Tragedy  of  Douglas, 
as  it  is  now  to  be  Been  acting  in  the  Theatre  at  the 
Canongate."  This  was  cried  about  the  streets  next 
day,  and  filled  the  house  for  two  nights  more. 

I  had  attended  the  playhouse,  not  on  the  first  or 
second,  but  on  the  third  night  of  the  performance, 
being  well  aware  that  all  the  fanatics  and  some  other 
enemies  would  be  on  the  watch,  and  make  all  the 
advantage  they  possibly  could  against  me.  But  six 
or  seven  friends  of  the  author,  clergymen  from  the 
Merse,  having  attended,  reproached  me  for  my  cow- 
ardice ;  and  above  all,  the  author  himself  and  some 
female  friends  of  his  having  heated  me  by  their  up- 
braidings,  I  went  on  the  third  night,  and  having 
taken  charge  of  the  ladies,  I  drew  on  myself  all  the 
clamours  of  tongues  and  violence  of  prosecution 
which  I  afterwards  underwent.  I  believe  I  have 
already  mentioned  that  Dr  Patrick  Cuming  having 
become  jealous  of  William  Robertson  and  John  Home 
and  myself  on  account  of  our  intimacy  with  Lord 
Milton,  and  observing  his  active  zeal  about  the 
tragedy  of  Douglas,  took  it  into  his  head  that  he 
could  blow  us  up  and  destroy  our  popularity,  and 
consequently  disgust  Lord  Milton  with  ua.  Very 
warmly,  with  all  the  friends  he  could  get  to  follow 
him — particularly  Hyndman  his  second — he  joined 
with  Webster  and  his  party  io  doing  everything 
they  could  to  depreciate  the  tragedy  of  Douglas,  and 


izecy  Google 


ACTIBO  OP  "DOUGLAS.  315 

disgrace  all  its  partisans.  With  this  view,  besides  the 
Act  of  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh,  which  was  read 
in  all  the  churches,  and  that  of  the  Presbytery  of 
Glasgow,  who  followed  them,  they  had  decoyed  Mr 
Thomas  Whyte,  minister  of  Liberfcon,  an  honest  but  a 
quiet  man,  to  submit  to  a  six-weeks'  suspension  for 
his  having  attended  the  tragedy  of  Douglas,  which  he 
had  confessed  he  had  done.*  This  they  had  con- 
trived as  an  example  for  prosecuting  me,  and  at  least 
getting  a  similar  sentence  pronounced  against  me  by 
the  Presbytery  of  Dalkeith.  On  returning  from  Dum- 
fries, in  the  second  week  of  February  1757,  I  was 
surprised  not  only  to  find  the  amazing  hue  and  cry 
that  had  been  raised  against  Douglas,  but  all  the 
train  that  had  been  laid  against  me,  and  a  summons 
to  attend  the  Presbytery,  to  answer  for  my  conduct, 
on  the  1st  day  of  March. 

On  deliberating  about  this  affair,  with  all  the  know- 
ledge I  had  of  the  laws  of  the  Church  and  the  con- 
fidence I  had  in  the  good-will  of  my  parish,  I  took  a 
firm  resolution  not  to  submit  to  what  I  saw  the  Pres- 
bytery intended,  but  to  stand  my  ground  on  a  firm 
opinion  that  my  offence  was  not  a  foundation  for  a 
libel,  but,  if  anything  at  all,  a  mere  impropriety  or 
offence  against  decorum,  which  ought  to  be  done  at 
privy  censures  by  an  admonition.  This  ground  I 
took,  and  never  departed  &om  it ;  but  I,  at  the  samp 
time,  resolved  to  mount  my  horse,  and  visit  every 

*  Whyte  owed  the  mitigated  sentence  to  his  plea,  that,  though  he  attended, 
he  concealed  *'i'"«»if  oa  well  m  he  could  to  avoid  giving  offence. — Ep. 


,1.0,  Google 


316  ACTINa   OF  "DODGLAS. 

member  of  Presbytery,  especially  my  opponenta,  and, 
by  a  free  confession,  endeavour  to  bring  tbem  over  to 
my  opinion.  They  received  me  differently — some 
with  a  contemptible  dissimnlation,  and  others  with  a 
provoking  reserve  and  haughtiness.  I  saw  that  they 
had  the  majority  of  the  Presbytery  on  their  side,  and 
that  the  cabal  was  firm,  and  that  no  submission  on 
my  part  would  turn  them  aside  from  their  purpose. 
This  confirmed  my  resolution  not  to  yield,  but  to  run 
every  risk  rather  than  furnish  an  example  of  tame 
submission,  not  merely  to  a  fanatical,  but  an  illegtd 
exertion  of  power,  which  would  have  stamped  dis- 
grace on  the  Church  of  Scotland,  kept  the  younger 
clergy  for  half  a  century  longer  in  the  trammels  of 
bigotry  or  hypocrisy,  and  debarred  every  generous 
spirit  from  entering  into  orders.  The  sequel  of  the 
story  is  pretty  fully  and  correctly  stated  in  the  Scots 
Magazine  for  1757,  to  which  I  shall  only  add  a  few 
particulars,  which  were  less  known. 

Joseph  M'Cormick,  at  this  time  tutor  to  young  Mr 
Hepburn  of  Qarkington,  and  afterwards  Principal  of 
St  Andrews  United  Colleges,  had  entered  on  trials 
before  the  Presbytery  of  Dalkeith,  and  had  two  or 
three  times  attended  the  tragedy  of  Douglas.  This 
he  told  them  himself,  which  threw  them  into  a  di- 
lemma, out  of  which  they  did  not  know  how  to 
escape.  To  take  no  notice  of  his  having  attended 
the  theatre,  while  they  were  prosecuting  me,  was  a 
very  glaring  inconsistency.  On  the  other  hand,  to 
send  him  out  as  a  probationer,  with  the  slur  of  an 


oy  Google 


ACTING  OF  "DOUGLAS."  317 

ecclesiastical  censure  on  his  character,  was  injustice 
to  the  young  man,  and  might  disoblige  his  friends. 
So  reasoned  the  Jesuits  of  Dalkeith  Presbytery. 
M'Cormick  himself  showed  them  the  way  out  of  this 
snare  into  which  their  zeal  and  hypocrisy  had  led 
them.  After  allowing  them  to  flounce  about  in  it  for 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  (as  he  told  them  afterwards 
with  infinite  humour),  he  represented  that  his  pupil 
and  he,  having  some  time  before  gone  into  their 
lodgings  in  Edinburgh  for  the  remainder  of  the  sea- 
son, be  would  be  much  obliged  to  the  Presbytery  of 
Dalkeith  if  they  would  transfer  him  to  the  Presby- 
tery of  Edinburgh  to  take  the  remainder  of  his  trials. 
With  this  proposal  they  very  cheerfully  dosed,  whilst 
M'Cormick  inwardly  laughed  (for  he  was  a  laughing 
philosopher)  at  their  profligate  hypocrisy. 

It  is  proper  to  mention  here  that  during  the  course 
of  this  trial  I  received  several  anonymous  letters  from 
a  person  deservedly  high  in  reputation  in  the  Church 
forleaming,  and  ability,  and  liberality  of  sentiment — 
the  late  Dr  Robert  Wallace — which  supported  me  in 
my  resolution,  and  gave  me  the  soimdest  advice  with 
respect  to  the  management  of  my  cause.  I  had  re- 
ceived two  of  those  letters  before  I  knew  from  whence 
they  came,  when,  on  showing  them  to  my  father,  he 
knew  the  hand,  as  the  Doctor  and  he  had  been  at 
coU^e  together.  This  circumstance  prevented  my 
father  from  waveriug,  to  which  he  was  liable,  and 
even  strengthened  my  own  mind. 

It  is  necessary,  likewise,  to  advert  here  to  the  con- 


izecy  Google 


318  ACTING  OF  "  DOUGLAS." 

duct  of  Robert  Daudas  of  AmistoD,  at  that  time 
KiDg'B  Advocate,  aa  it  accounts  for  that  animosity 
which  arose  against  him  among  my  friends  of  the 
Moderate  party,  and  the  success  of  certain  satirical 
ballads  and  pamphlets  which  were  published  some 
years  after.  This  was  his  decided  opposition  to  the 
tragedy  of  Douglas,  which  was  perfectly  known  from 
his  own  manner  of  talking — though  more  cautious 
than  that  of  his  enemies,  who  opened  loud  upon 
Home  and  his  tragedy — and  likewise  from  this  cir- 
cumstance, that  Thomas  TurnbuU,  his  friend,  who 
took  my  side  in  the  Presbytery,  being  influenced  by 
his  brother-in-law,  Dr  Wallace,  was  ever  after  out 
of  favour  at  Amiston  ;  and  what  was  more,  Dr  Wal- 
lace, who  was  of  the  Lord  Advocate's  political  party, 
incurred  his  displeasure  so  much,  that,  during  the 
remainder  of  his  own  life,  Geoi^  Wallace,  advocate, 
who  was  under  the  protection  of  the  family  of  Amis- 
ton,  was  totally  neglected.*  This  piece  of  injustice 
was  not  explained  till  after  his  death,  when  his  son 
Robert,  of  the  most  amiable  and  liberal  mind,  gave 
him  [Wallace]  a  judge's  place  in  the  commiBsariat. 
of  Edinburgh.  It  was  farther  proved  by  the  unsea- 
sonable application  of  my  friend,  Mr  Baron  Grant, 
who  was  his  political  friend  and  companion,  to  allay 
the  heat  of  the  Presbytery  of  Dalkeith,  and  induce 
them  to    withdraw  their  prosecution,  when  a  word 

*  G«orge  WaUaee,  aal^or  ot  a  folio  Tolume— the  first  of  an  indeSnite 
wriea  aerer  completed— called  X  Sydea  o/ Uie  Prindplei  of  Ihe  Law  of  Seot- 
land,  and  of  a  book  on  The  Nature  and  Deeceat  qf  certain  Peeragea  aotmtdtd 
uilh  Ike  Kingdom  (^Stotlatid.     A«  to  his  father,  see  above,  p.  S40. — Ep. 


oy  Google 


THE  ECCLESIASTICAL  LIBEL.  319 

from  him  would  have  done.  This  conduct  of  Dundaa 
might  in  part  be  imputed  to  his  want  of  taste  and 
discernment  in  what  related  to  the  belles  lettres,  and 
to  a  certain  violence  of  temper,  which  could  endure 
□0  one  that  did  not  bend  to  him  ;  or  to  his  jealousy 
of  Sir  G.  Elliot  and  Andrew  Pringle,  who  were  our 
zealous  friends;  or  his  hatred  of  Lord  Milton,  who  so 
warmly  patronised  John  Home.  It  was  amusing  to 
observe,  during  tie  course  of  the  summer,  when 
Wilkie's  Spigoniad  appeared,  how  loud  the  retainers 
of  the  house  of  Amiston  were  in  its  praise,  saying  they 
knew  how  to  distinguish  between  good  and  bad  poetry; 
and  now  they  had  got  something  to  commend. 

Coming,  Webster,  and  Hyndman,  and  a  fiery  man 
at  Leith,  whose  name  I  forget,  were  the  committee 
who  drew  lip  the  libel.  Webster,  who  had  no  bowels, 
and  who  could  do  mischief  with  the  joy  of  an  ape, 
suggested  aU  the  circumstances  of  aggravation,  and 
was  quite  delighted  when  he  got  his  colleagues  of  the 
committee  to  insert  sach  circumstances  as  my  eating 
and  drinking  with  Sarah  Ward,  and  taking  my  place 
in  the  playhouse  by  turning  some  gentlemen  out  of 
their  seats,  and  committing  a  riot,  &c.* 

*  "Tlie  libel"  u  the  nsme  of  the  document  or  writ  bj  which,  inScotUnd, 
ft  cUigymftii,  charged  by  tui  ecclesiutical  court  with  an  offence,  is  brought 
before  hii  accusen  for  trial  and  judgment.  The  term  is  taken  from  the 
Roman  liiefii  aeaitaiorii.  Of  the  libel  agaimt  Carlyle,  which  ia  long,  and 
well  supplied  with  the  usual  technicaJitiea,  the  following  specimena  will 
perhaps  be  coniidered  eufficient :  "  On  the  eighth  day  of  December,  in  the 
year  lerenteen  hnndnd  and  fifty-six,  or  upon  one  or  other  of  the  days  of 
November  or  October  serenteen  hundred  and  fifty-aix,  or  upon  one  or  other 
of  the  days  of  January  serenteen  hundred  and  fifty-seven  years,  he,  tbe  taid 
Ur  Alexander  Carlyle,  did,  without  necessity,  keep  company,  familiarly 


oy  Google 


320  THE  ECCLESIASTICAL  LIBEL. 

At  a  very  full  meeting  of  my  frieuds  in  Boyd's 
large  room,  in  the  Canongate,  the  night  before  the 
Synod  met,  I  proposed  Dr  Dick,  who  had  recently 
been  admitted  a  miuister  in  Edinburgh,  for  the  Mo- 
derator's chair.  I  had  prepared  my  friends  before- 
hand for  this  proposal,  and  was  induced  to  do  it  for 
several  reasons.  One  was  to  exclude  Robertson, 
whose  speaking  would  be  of  more  consequence  if  not 
in  the  chair.  Another  was  to  show  my  friend  Dick 
to  the  rest,  and  to  make  them  confidential  with  him, 
and  to  fix  so  able  an  assistant  in  our  party.  He  was 
accordingly  elected  without  opposition,  and  performed 
his  duty  with  the  utmost  spirit  and  manhood ;  for, 
besides  preserving  general  good  order,  he,  with  un- 
common decision  and  readiness,  severely  rebuked 
Hyndman  when  he  was  very  ofiensive.     The  lacbite 

coDvene,  and  eat  and  drinlt  with  West  Digga  (one  of  the  wrtora  on  the  mi' 
licensed  atage  or  theatre  at  tlie  head  of  the  CaaoDgate  of  Edinburgh,  cran- 
moiily  called  the  Concert-Hall),  in  the  house  of  Henry  ThomBon,  rintner  in 
the  Abbey,  near  to  the  Falace  of  Holyrood  Houee,  or  in  lome  other  hoose 
or  tavern  within  the  city  or  Buburln  of  Edinburgh,  or  Canongate,  or  said 
Abbey,  or  Leith ;  at  least  he,  the  said  Mr  Alexander  Corlyle,  did,  wiUioot 
neceBtity,  at  the  time  or  timei,  place  or  places  above  libelled,  convene  in  a 
familiar  manner  with  the  said  West  Diggs,  or  with  Miss  Sarah  Ward,  an 
actresB  on  the  aud  theatre,  or  with  some  o(her  of  the  penons  who  are  in 
the  coune  of  acting  plays  io  the  said  theatre^  pentmB  that  do  not  reside  in 
his  pariah,  and  who,  by  their  profession,  and  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  are  of 
bad  fame,  and  who  cannot  obtain  from  any  minister  a  testimonial  of  their 
moral  character  .  .  .  and  he,  the  said  Mr  Aleiander  Carlyle,  did  not 
only  appear  pubUcly  in  the  said  unlicensed  theatre,  but  took  possesaion 
of  a  bos,  or  a  place  in  one  of  the  boxes,  of  the  said  bouse,  in  a  disorderiy 
way,  and  turned  some  gentlemen  out  of  it  in  a  forcible  manner,  and  did 
there  witnees  the  acting  or  representation  of  the  foresaid  bagedy  called 
Dougiat,  when  acted  for  hite  or  reward,  in  which  the  name  of  Qod  was 
ftotanei  or  taken  in  vain  by  mock  prayers  and  tremendous  oaths  or  ez- 
presaions,  such  as — '  by  the  blood  of  the  cross, '  and  '  the  wounda  of  Him 
who  died  for  us  on  the  accursed  tree.'  "_-£d. 


,1.0,  Google 


THE  ECCLESIASTICAL  LIBEL.  321 

of  Hyndman'a  mind,  which  was  well  known  to  Dick 
and  me,  made  him  submit  to  this  rebuke  irom  the 
chair,  though,  in  reality,  he  was  not  out  of  order. 
What  a  pity  it  was  that  Robertson  afterwards  lost 
this  man  in  the  manner  I  shall  afterwards  mention  I 

It  was  remarked  that  there  were  only  three  of  a 
majority  in  the  Synod  for  the  sentence  which  my 
friends  had  devised,  assisted  by  the  very  good  sense 
of  Professor  Robert  Hamilton,  and  his  intricate  and 
embarrassed  expression,  which  concealed  while  it  pal- 
liated— and  that  two  of  those  three  were  John  Home, 
the  author,  and  my  father ;  but  neither  of  their  votes 
could  have  been  rejected,  and  the  moderator's  casting- 
vote  woidd  have  been  with  us. 

My  speech  in  my  own  defence  in  the  Synod,  which 
I  drew  up  rather  in  the  form  of  a  remonstrance  than 
an  argument,  leaving  that  to  Robertson  and  my  other 
friends,  made  a  very  good  impression  on  the  audience. 
John  Dalrymple,  junior  of  Cranstoun,  was  my  advo- 
cate at  the  bar,  and  did  justice  to  the  cause  he  had 
voluntarily  undertaken,  which,  while  it  served  me 
effectually,  gave  him  the  first  opportunity  he  had  of 
displaying  his  talents  before  a  popular  assembly. 
Robertson's  was  a  speech  of  great  address,  and  had  a 
good  effect ;  but  none  was  better  than  that  of  Andrew 
Pringle,  Esq.,  the  Solicitor,  who,  I  think,  was  the  most 
eloquent  of  all  the  Scottish  bar  in  my  time.  The 
Presbytery  thought  fit  to  appeal.  When  it  came  to 
the  Assembly,  the  sentence  of  the  Synod  was  ably 
defended,  and  as  a  proof  that  the  heat  and  animosity 


oy  Google 


322  THE   ECCLESIASTICAL  LIBEL. 

raised  against  the  tragedy  of  Douglas  and.  its  sup- 
portere  was  artiBcial  and  local,  the  sentence  of  the 
Synod  was  affirmed  by  117  to  39.  When  it  was 
over,  PrimroBe,  one  of  my  wannest  opposere,  turned 
to  me,  and,  shaking  hands,  "  I  wish  you  joy,"  said  he, 
"  of  this  sentence  in  your  favour ;  and  if  you  hereafter 
choose  to  go  to  every  play  that  is  acted,  I  shall  bake 
no  notice." 

Next  day,  on  &  proposal  which  waa  seconded  by 
George  Dempster,  my  firm  friend,  the  Assembly  passed 
an  Act  declaratory,  forbidding  the  clergy  to  counten- 
ance the  theatre.  But  Primrose  was  in  the  right,  for 
manners  are  stronger  than  laws ;  and  this  Act,  which 
was  made  on  recent  provocation,  was  the  only  Act  of 
the  Church  of  Scotland  against  the  theatre — so  waa  it 
totally  neglected.  Although  the  clergy  in  Edinburgh 
and  its  neighbourhood  had  abstained  from  the  theatre 
because  it  gave  offence,  yet  the  more  remote  clergymen, 
when  occasionally  in  town,  had  (dmost  universally  at- 
tended the  playhouse ;  and  now  that  the  subject  had 
been  solemnly  discussed,  and  all  men  were  convinced 
that  the  violent  proceedings  they  had  witnessed  were 
the  effects  of  bigotry  or  jealousy,  mixed  with  party- 
spirit  and  cabal,  the  more  distant  clergy  returned  to 
their  usual  amusement  in  the  theatre  when  occasion- 
ally in  town.  It  is  remarkable,  that  in  the  year  1784, 
when  the  great  actress  Mrs  Siddons  first' appeared  in 
Edinbui^h,  during  the  sitting  of  the  General  Assembly, 
that  court  was  obliged  to  fix  all  its  important  business 
for  the  alternate  days  when  she  did  not  act,  as  all  the 


izecy  Google 


THE  ECCtEStASnCAL  LIBEL.  328 

younger  members,  clergy  as  well  as  laity,  took  their 
stations  in  the  theatre  on  those  days  by  three  in  the 
afternoon.  Drs  Robertson  and  Blair,  though  they 
both  visited  this  great  actress  in  private,  often  regret- 
ted to  me  that  they  had  not  seized  the  opportunity 
which  waa  given  them,  by  her  superior  talents  and 
unexceptionable  character,  of  going  openly  to  the 
theatre,  which  would  have  put  an  end  to  all  future 
animadversions  on  the  subject.  This  conduct  of 
theirs  was  keeping  the  reserve  of  their  own  imaginary 
importance  to  the  last ;  and  their  regretting  it  was 
very  just,  for  by  that  time  they  got  no  credit  for  their 
abstinence,  and  the  struggle  between  the  liberal  and 
the  restrained  and  affected  manners  of  the  clergy  had 
been  long  at  an  end,  by  my  having  finally  stood  my 
ground,  and  been  so  well  supported  by  so  great  a 
majority  in  the  Church. 

Of  the  many  exertions  I  and  my  friends  have  made 
for  the  credit  and  interest  of  the  clergy  of  the  Church 
of  Scotland,  there  was  none  more  meritorious  or  of 
better  effects  than  this.  The  laws  of  the  Church  were 
sufficiently  strict  to  prevent  persons  of  conduct  really 
criming  from  entering  into  it ;  and  it  was  of  great 
importance  to  discriminate  the  artificial  virtues  and 
vices,  formed  by  ignorance  and  superstition,  from 
those  that  are  real,  lest  the  continuance  of  such  a  bar 
should  have  given  check  to  the  rising  liberality  of  the 
young  scholars,  and  prevented  those  of  better  birth 
or  more  ingenious  minds  from  entering  into  ^e 
profession. 


izecy  Google 


824  THE   CLERGY  AND  THE  STAGE. 

One  of  the  chief  actors  ia  this  farce  suffered  most 
for  the  duplicity  of  his  cocduct,  for  he  who  was  at 
the  head  of  the  Moderate  party,  through  jealousy  or 
bad  temper,  having  with  some  of  his  friends  headed 
the  party  against  the  tragedy  of  Dotu/las,  his  fol- 
lovers  in  the  Highlands  and  remoter  parts,  of  the 
Moderate  party,  were  so  much  offended  with  his 
hypocritical  conduct,  as  they  called  it,  that  they  left 
him  ever  after,  and  joined  with  those  whom  he  had 
taken  so  much  pains  to  disgrace,  whilst  he  and  ike 
other  old  leaders  themselves  united  with  their  former 
opponents.* 

Mr  Alexander  Wedderbum,  afterwards  Lord  Chan- 
cellor and  Earl  of  Boslyn,  not  having  come  down 
time  enough  to  speak  or  vote  in  the  cause  (by  design 
or  not  is  more  than  I  know),  but  appearing  on  the 
day  after,  took  an  opportunity  to  give  Peter  Cum- 
ing a  very  complete  dressing.  Peter  was  chaplain 
to  Lord  Grange  for  some  years  before  he  was  settled 
at  Kirknewton,  and  after  my  father  at  Lochmaben, 
from  whence  he  was  brought  to  Edinburgh. 

With  respect  to  Webster,  best  known  at  that  time 
1^  the  designation  of  Dr  Bonum  Magnum,  his  Pro- 
teus-like character  seldom  lost  by  any  transaction, 
and  in  this  case  he  was  only  acting  his  natural  part, 
■which  was  that  of  running  down  all  indecencies  in 
clergymen  but  those  of  the  table,  and  doing  mischief, 
like  a  monkey,  for  its  own  satisfaction. 


oy  Google 


THE  CLERGY  AND  THE  STAGE,        325 

One  event  waa  curious  in  the  sequel.  Mr  John 
Home,  who  was  the  author  of  the  tragedy,  and  of  all 
the  mischief  consequent  upon  it — while  his  Presbyliery 
of  Haddington  had  been  from  time  to  time  obstracted 
in  their  designs  by  the  good  management  of  Stedman, 
Robertson,  and  Bannatine,  and  were  now  preparing 
in  earnest  to  cany  on  a  prosecution  against  him — on 
the  7th  of  June  that  year  gave  in  a  demission  of  his 
office,  and  withdrew  from  the  Church,  without  the 
least  animadversion  on  his  conduct,  which  threw  com- 
plete ridicule  on  the  opposite  party,  and  made  the 
flame  which  had  been  raised  against  me,  appear  hypo- 
critical and  odious  to  the  last  degree. 

Mr  Home,  after  the  great  success  of  his  tragedy  of 
Douglas  in  Edinburgh,  went  to  London  early  in  1 757, 
and  had  his  tragedy  acted  in  Covent  Garden  (for 
Garrick,  though  now  his  friend,  could  not  possibly  let 
it  be  performed  in  his  theatre  after  having  pronounced 
it  unfit  for  the  stage),  where  it  had  great  success. 
This  tragedy  still  maintains  its  ground,  has  been  more 
frequently  acted,  and  is  more  popular,  than  any  tragedy 
in  the  English  language. 

After  John  Home  resigned  liis  charge,  he  and  Adam 
Ferguson  retired  to  a  lodging  at  Braid  for  three  months 
to  study,  where  they  were  very  busy.  During  that 
time  Mrs  Kinloch  of  Gilmerton  was  brought  to  bed 
of  her  eighth  child,  and  died  immediately  after.  This 
was  a  very  great  loss  to  her  family  of  five  sons  and 
three  daughters,  as  her  being  withdrawn  from  the  care 
of  their  education  accounts  better  for  the  misconduct 


izecy  Google 


326  A  DOMESTIC  TEAGEDY. 

and  misery  of  four  of  her  sons,  than  the  general  belief 
of  the  country  that  the  house  of  Gilmerton  could  never 
thrive  after  the  injustice  done  to  their  eldest  son  by 
Sir  Francis  and  his  wife  and  their  son  David,  who 
was  involved  in  their  guilt,  and  was  made  heir  to 
the  estate  instead  of  his  brother.  These  superstitious 
notions,  however  ill  founded,  may  sometimes,  perhaps^ 
check  the  doing  of  atrocious  deeds.  Bat  what  shall 
we  say  when  Sir  Francis,  who  succeeded  his  father 
Sir  David,  survived  him  only  a  few  days,  though  he 
was  the  most  able,  the  most  ingenious,  the  most 
worthy  and  virtuous  young  man  of  the  whole  county 
to  which  he  belonged,  and  died  by  fratricide — a  crime 
rare  everywhere,  and  almost  imknown  in  this  country.* 
No  greater  misfortune  can  befall  any  family,  when 
children  are  in  their  infancy,  than  the  loss  of  a  mother 
of  good  sense  and  dignity  of  manners. 

Home  being  very  busy  with  some  of  his  dramatic 
works,  and  not  having  leisure  to  attend  Sir  David  in 
his  affliction,  which  was  sincere,  applied  to  me  to  make 
an  excursion  with  him  into  the  north  of  England  for  a 
week  or  two  to  amuse  him.  I  consented,  and  when.  I 
went  to  Gilmerton  by  concert,  I  found  that  the  baronet 
had  conjoined  two  other  gentlemen  to  the  party — my 
friend  Mr  Baron  Grant,  and  Mr  Montgomery,  after- 
wards Chief-Baron  and  Sir  James,  who  was  my  friend 
ever  after.     Those  two  gentlemen  were  pn  horseback, 

*  Sir  Aichi'bald  Kinloch  wna  brought  to  trial  in  1795  tor  the  murder  of 
his  older  brother  Sir  Fraacia,  whom  he  shot  With  a,  pistol  in.  the  hmUy 
nmnaioD  of  Gilmerton.  Tho  verdict  of  the  jury  tOBtaincd  a  pica  of  iiuunitj. 
Bee  Slate  TriaU,  XXV.  SOL— Ea.  ... 


oy  Google 


BTJKE  OF  AKGYLE.  327 

and  Sir  David  and  I  in  his  post-chaise,  a  vehicle  which 
had  but  recently  been  brought  into  Scotland,  as  our 
turnpike  roads  were  but  in  their  infency.  We  went 
no  farther  than  Sir  John  Hall's,  at  Dunglass,  the  first 
day;  and  as  we  pretended  to  be  inquiring  into  the 
state  of  husbandry,  we  made  very  short  journeys, 
turning  aside  to  see  anything  curious  in  the  mode  of 
improvement  of  land  that  fell  in  our  way,  sometimes 
staying  all  night  in  inns,  and  sometimes  in  gentlemen's 
houses,  as  they  fell  in  our  way ;  for  Sir  David  was  well 
known  to  many  of  the  Northumbrians  for  his  hospi- 
tality and  skill  in  cattle.  We  went  no  ferther  than 
Newcastle  and  its  environs,  and  returned  after  a  fort- 
night's very  agreeable  amusement  On  this  expedition 
I  made  some  very  agreeable  acquaintance,  of  which  X 
afterwards  availed  myself, — Ralph  Carr,  an  eminent 
merchant,  still  alive  (August  1S04),  and  his  brother- 
in-law  Mr  Withrington,  styled  "  the  honest  attorney  of 
the  north,"  and  his  son  John,  an  accomplished  young 
man,  who  died  a  few  years  ago,  and  was  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  ancient  family  of  that  name. 

Some  time  this  summer,  after  a  convivial  meeting, 
Dr  Wight  and  I  were  left  alone  for  an  hour  or  two 
with  Alexander  Wedderburn,  who  opened  himself  to 
us  as  much  as  he  was  capable  of  doing  to  anybody, 
and  the  impression  he  left  corresponded  with  the  cha- 
racter he  had  among  his  intimates. 

It  was  in  the  end  of  this  year  that  I  was  introduced 
to  Archibald,  Duke  of  Argyle,  who  usually  passed 
some  days  at  Brunstanc,  Lord  Milton's  seat,  as  he 


izecDy  Google 


828  DUKE  OF  ARGYLE. 

went  to  Inverary  and  returned.  It  was  on  his  way 
back  to  London  that  1  was  sent  for  one  Sunday  morn- 
ing to  come  to  Bninstane  to  dine  that  day  with  the 
Duka  That  1  could  not  do,  as  I  had  to  do  duty  in 
my  own  church  in  the  afternoon,  and  diniier  in  those 
days  was  at  two  o'clock.  I  went  up  iu  the  evening, 
when  the  Duke  was  taking  his  nap,  as  usual,  in  an 
elbow-chair,  with  a  black  silk  cap  over  his  eyes.  There 
was  uo  company  but  Lord  and  Lady  Milton,  Mr 
Fletcher,  and  the  young  ladies,  with  William  Alstone, 
who  was  a  con&dential  and  political  secretary  of 
Milton's. 

After  a  little,  I  observed  the  Duke  lift  up  his  cap, 
and  seeing  a  stranger  in  the  room,  he  pulled  it  over 
his  eyes  again,  and  beckoned  Miss  Fletcher  to  him, 
who  told  him  who  I  was.  In  a  little  while  he  got 
up,  and  advancing  to  me,  and  taking  me  by  the  hand, 
said  he  "  was  glad  to  see  me,  but  that,  between  sleeping 
and  waking,  he  had  taken  me  for  his  cousin,  the  Earl 
of  Home,  who  I  still  think  you  resemble ;  but  that 
could  not  be,  for  I  know  that  he  is  at  Gibraltar."  When 
we  returned  to  our  seats,  Mally  Fletcher  whispered 
me  that  my  bread  vms  baJcen,  for  that  Lord  Home 
was  one  of  his  greatest  favourites.  This  I  laughed  at, 
for  the  old  gentleman  had  said  that  as  an  apology  for 
his  having  done  what  he  might  think  not  quite  polite 
in  calling  Mally  Fletcher  to  him,  and  not  taking  any 
notice  of  me  for  a  minute  or  two  afterwards  The 
good  opinion  of  that  family  was  enough  to  secure  me 
a  favourable  reception  at  first,  and  I  knew  he  would 


oy  Google 


LOKD  MILTON.  329 

not  like  me  worse  for  having  stood  a  battle  with, 
and  beat,  the  Highflyers  of  our  Church,  whom  he 
abhorred ;  for  he  was  not  so  accessible  to  Peter  Cum- 
ing as  Lord  Milton  was,  whom  he  tried  to  persuade 
that  his  having  joioed  the  other  party  was  out  of 
tenderness  to  me,  for  it  was  the  intention  of  the 
Highflyers  to  depose  me  if  he  had  not  moderated  their 
counsels.  But  I  had  a  friend  behind  the  curtain  in 
his  daughter.  Miss  Betty,  whom  he  used  to  take  out 
in  the  coach  with  him  alone,  to  settle  his  mind  when 
he  was  in  any  doubt  or  perplexity ;  for,  like  all  other 
ministers,  he  was  surrounded  with  intrigue  and  deceit. 
Ferguson  was,  besides,  now  come  into  favour  with  him, 
for  his  dignified  and  sententious  manner  of  talking 
had  pleased  him  no  leas  than  John  Home's  pleasantry 
and  unveiled  flattery.  Milton  had  a  mind  su£Bciently 
acute  to  comprehend  Ferguson's  profound  speculations, 
though  his  own  forte  did  not  lie  in  any  kind  of  philo- 
sophy, but  the  knowledge  of  men,  and  the  management 
of  them,  while  Ferguson  was  his  admiring  scholar  in 
those  articles.  He  had  been  much  teased  about  the 
tragedy  of  Douglas,  for  Cuming  had  still  access  to 
him  at  certain  hourB  by  the  political  back-door  from 
Gray's  Close,  and  had  alarmed  him  much ;  especially 
immediately  after  the  publication  of  my  pamphlet,  ^n 
Argument,  (fee,  which  had  irritated  the  wild  brethren 
so  much,  said  Peter,  that  he  could  not  answer  for  what 
mischief  might  follow.  When  he  had  been  by  such 
means  kept  in  a  very  fretful  humour,  he  came  up  into 
the  drawing-room,  where  David  Himie  was,  with  John 


izecy  Google 


330  LORD  MILTON  AMD  DAVID  HUME. 

aod Ferguson  and  myself;  on  David's  saying  aome- 
thing.  with  his  usual  good-humour,  to  smooth  his 
wrinkly  brow,  Milton  turned  to  him  with  great  a^«rity, 
and  said  that  he  had  better  hold  his  peace  on  the 
subject,  for  it  was  owing  to  him,  and  keeping  company 
with  him.  that  such  a  clamour  was  raised.  David  made 
no  reply,  but  soon  after  took  his  hat  and  cane,  and 
left  the  room,  never  more  to  enter  the  house,  which 
he  never  did,  though  much  pains  was  taken  after- 
wards, for  Milton  soon  repented,  and  David  would 
have  returned,  but  Betty  Fletcher  opposed  it,  rather 
foregoing  his  company  at  their  house  than  suffer  him 
to  degrade  himself— such  was  the  generous  spirit  of 
that  young  lady.  Had  it  not  been  for  Ferguson  and 
her,  John  Home  and  I  would  have  been  expelled  also. 
Early  in  the  year  1758  my  favourite  in  the  house  of 
Brunstane  changed  her  name,  for  on  the  6th  of  Feb- 
ruary she  was  married  to  Captain  John  Wedderbum  of 
Gosfotd,  much  to  the  satisfaction  of  Lord  Milton  and 
all  her  friends,  as  he  was  a  man  of  superior  character, 
had  then  a  good  fortune  and  the  prospect  of  a  better, 
which  was  fulfilled  not  long  afterwards  when  he 
succeeded  to  the  title  and  estate  of  Pitferran  by  the 
nanie  of  Sir  John  Halkett.  As  I  was  frequently  at 
Brunstane  about  this  time,  I  became  the  confidant  of 
both  the  parties,  and  the  bride  was  desirous  to  have 
me  to  tie  the  nuptial  knot.  But  this  failed  through 
Lord  Milton's  love  of  order,  which  made  him  employ 
the  parish  minister,  Bennet  of  Duddiogston.  This 
she  wrote  me  with  much  regret  on  the  morning  of 


izecy  Google 


A  MARRIAGE  IN  LONDON.  SSI 

her  matriage  j  bat  added,  that  as  on  that  day  she 
would  "becovae  mistress  of  a  house  of  her  own,  she 
uudsted  that  I  should  meet  her  there,  and  receive  her 
when  she  entered  the  house  of  Gosfofd. 
-  About  the  end  of  February  or  beginning  of  March 
this  year,  I  went  to  London  with  my  eldest  sister, 
Margaret,  to  get  her  married  with  Dr  Dickson,  M.D.' 
It  is  to  be  noted  that  we  could  get  uo  four-wheeled 
chaise  till  we  came  to  Durham,  those  conveyances 
being  then  only  in  their  infancy, — the  two- wheeled 
close  chaise,  which  had  been  used  for  some  time,  and 
was  called  an  Italian  chaise,  having  been  found  very 
inconvenient.  Turnpike  roads  were  only  in  their 
commencement  in  the  north.  Dr  Dickson,  with  a 
friend,  met  ua  at  StUtou.  We  arrived  safe  at  my 
aunt  Lyon's  in  New  Bond  Street,  she  being  then  alive, 
as  well  as  her  sister,  Mrs  Paterson.  To  the  proper 
celebration  of  the  marriage  there  were  three  things 
wanting — a  licence,  a  parson,  and  a  beat  maid.  In 
the  last,  the  Honourable  Miss  NeUy  Murray,  Lord 
Elibank's  sister,  afterwards  Lady  Stewart,  and  still 
alive  in  September  1804,  offered  her  services,  which 
did  us  honour,  and  pleased  my  two  aunts  very  much, 
especially  Mrs  Lyon,  whose  head  was  constantly 
swimming  with  vanity,  which  even  her  uncommon 
misfortune,  after  having  fulfilled  the  utmost  wish  of 
ambition,  had  not  cured.  A  licence  was  easily  bought 
at  Doctors'  Commons,  and  Dr  John  Blair,  afterwards 
a  prebend  of  Weatminater,  my  particular  friend,  was 

*  See  ubuTC,  p.  20C 


izecy  Google 


332  LONDON. 

easily  prevailed  with  to  secure  the  use  of  a  church 
and  perform  the  ceremony.  This  business  being  put 
successfully  over,  and  having  seen  my  sister  and  her 
husband  into  lodgings  in  the  city  till  their  house  was 
ready,  I  took  up  my  abode  at  my  aunts',  and  occa^ 
sionally  at  John  Home's  lodging  in  South  Audley 
Street,  which  he  had  talien  to  be  near  Lord  Bute,  who 
had  become  his  great  friend  and  patron,  having  intro- 
duced him  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who  had  settled 
on  him  a  pension  of  XlOO  per  annum. 


izecy  Google 


CHAPTER   IX. 

175S :  AGE,  SB. 
Fmse  noBERmoN  in  London  about  hib  bistort— noME  joins 

THEK  —  THEIR  FRIENDS  AND  ADVENTURES  —  CtlATnAlT  —  JOHN 
BLAIR  THE  HATBBMATICIAN— DISBOF  DODOLAB — SMOLLETT  AND 
BIB  LEVEE  OF   AUTHORS — A  DAY   WITH    GARRICK   AT   DIB  VILLA 

PEATB    AT    OOLF    THERE  —  A     MBTBODIBT    UEEHNQ- BOUSE 

THE  CI.ERGT  OP  BCOTUND  AND  TBB  WINDOW-TAX — ADAK  THE 
ARCBITECT — AN  EXPEDITION  TO  FORTBUODTH — ADVENTURES  BY 
LAND  AND  SEA — MKBTINO  WITH  LORD  BUTB — THE  JOURNEY 
HOU  B — OX  FORD — WOOD8T0C  K — BLENHEIM — BIBH IKOHAM — LORD 
LITTLETON — BHENSTONE  AT  THE  LEA  BOWES, 

Dr  Robertson  having  come  to  London  at  this  time 
to  offer  his  History  of  Scotland  for  sale,  where  he  had 
never  been  before,  we  went  to  see  the  lions  together, 
and  had  for  the  most  part  the  same  acquaintance. 
Dr  William  Pitcairn,  a  very  respectable  physician  in 
the  city,  and  a  great  friend  of  Dr  Dickson's,  was  a 
cousin  of  Dr  Robert&on's,  whose  mother  was  a  Fit- 
cairn  ;  we  became  very  intimate  with  him.  Drs 
Armstrong  and  Orme  were  also  of  their  society.  Pit- 
cairn was  a  very  huidsome  man,  a  little  tamed  of 
fifty,  of  a  very  gentlemanly  address.  AVhen  he  settled 
first  in  London  he  was  patronised  by  an  Alderman 
Behn,  who,  being  a  Jacobite,  and  not  doubting  that 
Pitcairn  was  of  the  same  side,  as  he  had  travelled 
with  Duke  Hamilton,  he  set  him  up  as  a  candidate 


izecy  Google 


334  LOKDON  SOCIETY  IS  1758. 

for  Bartholomew's  Hospital  During  the  canvaaa 
the  Alderman  came  to  the  Doctor,  and  asked  him 
with  impatient  heat  if  it  was  true  that  he  was  the 
son  of  a  Presbyterian  minister  in  -Bcotland,  which 
Pitcaim  not  being  able  to  deny,  the  other  conjured 
him  to  conceal  that  circumstance  like  murder,  other- 
wise it  would  infallibly  blow  them  up.  He  was 
elected  pJiysician  to  that  hospital,  and  soon  rose  to 
great  business  in  the  city. 

Dr  Pitcaim  was  a  bachelor,  and  lived  handsomely, 
but  chiefly  entertained  young  Scotch  physicians  who 
had  no  establishment.  Of  those,  Dra  Armstrong  and 
Dickson  were  much  with  him.  As  our  connections 
drew  Robertson  and  me  frequently  to  the  city  before 
my  sister's  house  was  ready,  by  earnest  invitation  we 
both  took  up  our  lodging  at  his  house.  We  never 
saw  our  landlord  in  the  morning,  for  he  went  to  the 
hospital  before  eight  o'clock;  but  his  housekeeper  had 
orders  to  ask  us  at  breakfast  if  we  intended  to  dine 
there,  and  to  tell  us  when  her  master  was  expected. 
The  Doctor  always  returned  from  his  round  of  visits 
before  three,  which  was  his  hour  of  dinner,  and  quite 
happy. if  he  found  us  there.  Exactly  at  five  his 
chariot  caine  to  the  door  to  carry  him  out  on  his 
afternoon  visits.  We  sat  as  long  as  we  liked  at  table, 
and  drunk  excellent  claret.  He  returned  soon  after 
eight  o'clock  ;  if  he  found  his  company  still  together, 
which  was'  sometimes  the  case,  he  was  highly  pleased. 
He  immediately  entered  into  our  humour,  ate  a  bit 
of  cold  meat,  drank  a  little  wine,  and  went  to  bed 


izecy  Google 


WNDON  SOCIETY  IN    1758.  335 

before  ten  o'clock.  This  was  a  veiy  uncommon  strain 
of  hospitality,  which,  I  am  glad  to  record,  on  repeated 
trials,  never  was  exhausted.  He  lived  on  in  the  same 
manner  till  1782,  when  he  was  past  eighty;  and 
when  I  was  in  London  for  the  last  time,  he  was  then 
perfectly  entire,  and  made  his  morning  touir  on  foot, 
I  dined  once  with  him  at  that  period  in  his  own 
house  with  a  large  company  of  ladies  and  gentlemen, 
and  at  Dr  Hamilton's,  his  cousin,  of  St  Martin's 
Church,  on  both  of  which  occasions  he  was  remark- 
ably gay.  He  survived  for  a  year  or  two  longer.  Dr 
David  Pitcaim,  the  son  of  his  brother  the  major, 
'^rho  was  killed  early  in  the  American  rebellion,  was 
heir  both  of  his  fortune  and  professional  merit. 

With  Eobertson  and  Home  in  London  I  passed 
the  time  very  agreeably ;  for  though  Home  was  now 
entirely  at  the  command  of  Lord  Bute,  whose  nod 
made  him  break  every  engagement — for  it  was  not 
given  above  an  hour  or  two  before  dinner — yet  as  he 
was  sometimes  at  liberty  when  the  noble  lord  was  to 
dine  abroad,  like  a  horse  loosened  from  his  stake,  he 
was  more  sportful  than  usual.  We  had  Sir  David 
Kinloch  likewise,  who  had  come  to  consult  physicians, 
and  Dr  Charles  Congalton,  who  was  his  attendant. 
With  them  we  met  often  at  the  British.  Charles 
was  my  old  companion,  and  a  more  naif  and  ingenu- 
ous soul  never  was  bom.  I  said  to  him  one  day, 
"CharUe,  bow  do  you  like  the  English,  now  that 
you  have  seen  them  twice  for  two  or  three  months  1" 
"  I  .cannot  answer  vour  question,"  replied  he,  "  for  I 


izecy  Google 


330  LORD    CHATHAU. 

am  not  acquainted  witli  any  of  them."  "  What  I  not 
acquainted!"  said  I.  "Yes,"  saya  he,  "I  have  seen 
half-a-dozen  of  them  calling  on  Sir  David,  but  I  never 
enter  into  conversation  with  the  John  Bulls,  for,  to 
tell  you  the  truth,  I  don't  yet  well  understand  what 
they  say." 

The  first  William  Pitt  had  at  this  time  risen  to  the 
zenith  of  his  glory,  when  Robertson  and  I,  after  fre- 
quent attempts  to  hear  him  speak,  when  there  was 
nothing  passing  in  the  House  that  called  him,  we  at 
last  heard  a  debate  on  the  Habeas  Ckirpus  Act,  which 
Pitt  had  new  modelled  in  order  to  throw  a  slur  on 
Lord  Mansfield,  who  had  taken  some  liberties,  it  was 
alleged,  with  that  law,  which  made  him  unpopular. 
We  accordingly  took  our  places  in  the  gallery,  and  for 
the  first  three  hours  were  much  disposed  to  sleep  by 
the  dull  tedious  speeches  of  two  or  three  lawyers,  till 
at  last  the  Attorney-General,  afterwards  Lord  Cam- 
den, rose  and  spoke  with  clearness,  argument,  and 
eloquence.  He  was  answered  ably  by  Mr  York, 
Solicitor-General.  Dr  Hay,  the  King's  Advocate  in 
Doctors'  Commona,  spoke  next,  with  a  clearness,  a 
force,  and  brevity,  which  pleased  us  much.  At  length 
Mr  Pitt  rose,  and  with  that  commanding  eloquence 
in  which  he  excelled,  he  spoke  for  half  an  hour,  with 
an  overpowering  force  of  persuasion  more  than  the 
clear  conviction  of  argument.  He  was  opposed  by 
several  speakers,  to  none  of  whom  he  vouchsafed  to 
make  an  answer,  but  to  James  Oswald  of  Dunikier, 
who  was  a  very  able  man,  though  not  an  eloquent 


oy  Google 


LORD  OHATRAM.  337 

speaker.  With  all  our  admiration  of  Pitt's  eloquence, 
■which  was  surely  of  the  highest  order,  Eoberteon  and 
I  felt  the  same  sentiment,  which  was  the  desire  to 
resist  a  tyrant,  who,  like  a  domineering  schoolmaster, 
kept  his  boys  in  order  by  raising  their  fears  without 
wasting  argument  upon  them.  ITiis  haughty  manner 
is  necessary,  perhaps,  in  every  leader  of  the  House  of 
Commons;  for  when  he  is  civil  and  condescending, 
he  soon  loses  his  authority,  and  is  trampled  upon.  Is 
this  common  to  all  political  assemblies  1  or  is  it  only 
a  part  of  the  character  of  the  English  in  all  ordinary 
political  affairs,  till  they  are  heated  by  faction  or 
alanaed  by  danger,  to  yield  to  the  statesman  who  is 
most  assuming  1  * 

Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  of  Minto  was  at  this  time  one  of 
the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty,  and  we  were  frequently 
■with  him.  He  was  a  very  accomplished  and  sensible 
man,  and  John  Home  had  not  found  him  a  cold  friend, 
as  he  was  supposed  to  be,  for  by  his  means  chiefly  he 
had  been  put  under  the  protection  of  Lord  Bute,  a 
favour  which  John  did  not  coldly  return  ;  for,  on  the 
accession  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  Home,  who  was  then 
in  full  confidence  with  his  lordship,  recommended  the 
baronet  most  effectually  to  him, — a  clear  proof  of 
which  I  saw  in  a  letter  from  Lord  Bute  to  Home. 

Dr  John  Blair,  who,  on  account  of  a  certain  petu- 
lant and  ■wrangling  humour,  was  disliked  by  many 
people,    particularly  by    Smollett,   in   spite   of  Bob 

*  Jama  Oswald.  See  "Memorials  of  the  Pulilic  life  and  Cbancterof 
the  Itight  Hon.  James  Oswald,"  Svo,  1S25.— Elk 


oy  Google 


338  BLAIE — DOUGLAS. 

Smith's  intimacy  with  both,  had  been  put  about  the 
Duke  of  York  as  his  mathematical  teacher,  and  was 
afterwards  his  secretaty;  he  also  had  been  recotnmeDded 
to  that  situation  by  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  through  Home, 
and  was  not  ungrateful.  Blair  was  a  good-natured 
pleasant  fellow,  and  very  agreeable  to  everybody  who 
could  bear  his  flippaocy  of  speech.  He  was,  indeed, 
one  of  the  most  friendly  men  in  the  world,  as  he 
showed  in  many  instances,  from  purchasing  a  pair  of 
shoes  and  stockings  for  any  of  his  old  companions,  to 
providing  them  a  settlement  for  life.  He  got  to  be 
a  prebendary  in  Westminster  by  the  interest  of  the 
Duke  of  York ;  and,  had  his  Koyal  Highness  lived, 
would  have  been  promoted  to  the  bench  of  bishops.  He 
was  senior  to  J.  Home  and  me,  but  we  were  well  ac- 
quainted at  college.  He  died  of  the  influenza  in  1782.* 
John  Douglas,  who  has  for  some  time  been  Bishop 
of  Salisbury,  and  who  is  one  of  the  most  able  and 
learned  men  on  that  bench,  had  at  this  time  but 
small  preferment.  He  had  been  tutor  to  Lord  Pul- 
teney,  and  was  at  this  time  secretary  to  Ijord  Bath, 
and  lived  with  him,  by  which  means  he  had  acquired 
a  very  exact  knowledge  of  the  Court,  as  well  as  of 
both  Houses  of  Parliament,  and  all  their  connec- 
tions. I  became  acquainted  with  him  at  this  time,  and 
preserved  my  connection  with  him,  which  I  valued 
much,  by  sundry  meetings  and  frequent  correspond- 
ence. He  is  still  living,  though  two  years  older  than 
me,  and  much  weakened  by  the  gout.      His  sister, 

'  3oe  above,  p.  186, 


izecy  Google 


Mrs  Anderson,  who  at  this  time  kept  the  British 
Coffeehouse,  was,  like  her  brother,  a  person  of  superior 
character. 

Ilobertson  had  never  seen  Smollett,  and  was  very 
desirous  of  his  acquaintance.  By  this  time  the  Doc- 
tor had  retired  to  Chdsea,  and  came  seldom  to  town. 
Home  and  I,  however,  found  that  he  came  once 
a-week  to  Forrest's  Coffeehouse,  and  sometimes  dined 
there ;  so  we  managed  an  appointment  with  him  on 
his  day,  when  he  agreed  to  dine  with  us.  He  was 
now  become  a  great  man,  and  being  much  of  a  hu- 
morist, was  not  to  be  put  out  of  his  way.  Home  and 
Eobertson  and  Smith  and  I  met  him  there,  when  he 
had  several  of  his  minions  about  him,  to  whom  he 
prescribed  tasks  of  translation,  compilation,  or  abridg- 
ment, which,  after  he  had  seen,  he  recommended  to 
the  booksellers.  We  dined  together,  and  Smollett 
was  very  brilliant.  Having  to  stay  all  night,  that 
we  might  spend  the  evening  together,  he  only  begged 
leave  to  withdraw  for  an  hour,  that  he  might  give 
audience  to  his  myrmidons ;  we  insisted  that,  if  his 
business  [permitted],  it  should  be  in  the  room 
where  we  sat.  The  Doctor  agreed,  and  the  authors 
were  introduced,  to  the  number  of  five,  I  think,  most 
of  whom  were  soon  dismissed.  He  kept  two,  how- 
ever, to  supper,  whispering  to  us  that  he  believed 
they  would  amuse  us,  which  they  certainly  did,  for 
they  were  curious  chiuracters. 

We  passed  a  very  pleasant  and  joyful  evening. 
When  we  broke  up,  Robertson  expressed  great  sur- 


izecy  Google 


340  .  SMOLLETT. 

prise  at  the  polished  and  agreeable  manners  and  the 
great  urbanity  of  his  coQversation.  He  had  imagined 
that  a  mail's  manners  must  bear  a  likeness  to  his 
books,  and  as  Smollett  had  described  so  well  the 
characters  of  ruffians  and  profligates,  that  he  must, 
of  course,  resemble  them.  This  was  not  the  first  in- 
stance we  had  of  the  rawness,  in/respect  of  the  world, 
that  still  blunted  our  sagacious 'ffiend's  observations. 

Aa  Ferguson  had  one  day  in  the  week  when  he  could 
be  in  town,  we  established  a  club  at  a  coffeehouse  in 
Saville  Row  or  Sackville  Street,  where  we  could  meet 
him  at  dinner,  which  we  did  every  "Wednesday  at  three 
o'clock.  There  were  J.  Home,  and  Robertson,  and 
Wedderburn,  and  Jack  Dalrymple,  and  Bob  Adam, 
Ferguson,  and  myself,  Wedderburn  brought  with 
him  an  attorney  of  the  name  of  Dagg,  a  little  odd- 
looking  silent  feUow  to  be  sure,  whom  none  of  us  had 
ever  seen  before,  and  about  whom  Wedderburn  had 
not  condescended  to  explain  himself.  Somebody  was 
appointed  to  talk  to  him,  and  to  express  the  uneasi- 
ness of  the  club  at  his  bringing  an  utter  stranger 
among  them.  His  answer  was,  that  Dagg  was  a  very 
important  friend  of  his,  who  was  extremely  desirous 
to  meet  that  company,  and  that  he  would  answer  for 
his  silence  and  discretion.  He  added  that  he  prayed 
the  club  to  admit  him,  for  he  learned  more  from  him  of 
the  forms  of  English  law,  in  his  walk  from  and  return 
to  the  Temple,  than  he  could  do  by  a  week's  reading. 
This  excuse  was  admitted,  though  some  of  us  thought 
it  a  lame  one,   and    that  it  smelt  of  an  assumed 


oy  Google 


OARBICK  AND  JOHN  HOME.  341 

superiority  that  we  did  not  admit  of.  As  Ferguson 
rode  back  to  Harrow,  we  always  parted  between  five 
and  six  o'clock ;  and  it  will  hardly  be  now  believed 
that  our  reckomng  never  exceeded  Ss.  a-piece.  We 
had  a  very  good  dinner,  and  plenty  of  punch,  &c., 
tbongb  no  claret,  for  that  sum. 

Having  met,  we  generally  went  that  night  to  Dniry 
Lane  Theatre,  Granick  being  in  town.  I  had  frequent 
opportunities  of  being  in  company  with  this  cele- 
brated actor,  of  whom  Mr  Home  was  now  in  full  pos- 
session, though  he  had  rejected  his  tragedy  of  Dok^/as 
as  totally  unfit  for  the  stage.  I  am  afraid  it  was  not 
his  own  more  mature  judgment  that  brought  him 
round,  but  his  idolatry  to  the  rising  sun,  for  he  bad 
observed  what  a  hold  Home  had  got  of  Lord  Bute, 
and,  by  his  means,  of  the  Prince  of  Wales.  As  Gar- 
rick's  vanity  and  interestedness  bad  made  him  digest 
the  mortification  of  seeing  Douglas  already  become 
the  most  popular  play  on  the  stage,  so  John  Home's 
facility,  and  the  hopes  of  getting  him  to  play  in  his 
future  tragedies,  made  him  forgive  Garrick'a  former 
want  of  taste  and  judgment,  and  they  were  now  be- 
come the  greatest  friends  in  the  world.  If  anything 
had  been  wanting  to  complete  Garrick's  conquest  of 
Home,  it  was  making  choice  of  him  as  his  second  in 
a  quarrel  he  had  with  Calcraf^  (for  John  was  very 
heroic),  which  never  came  to  a  duel,  as  well  as  several 
other  quarrels  of  the  same  kind,  and  with  the  same 
issue,  in  which  John  was  chosen  second. 

Garrick,  though  not  of  an  understanding  of  the 


oy  Google 


342  GA£RICK   AND  JOHN  HOME. 

fii«t,  Dor  of  the  highest  cultivated  miod,  had  great 
vivacity  and  quickneBS,  and  was  very  entertiuning 
company.  Though  vanity  was  his  prominent  feature, 
and  a  troublesome  and  watchful  jealousy  the  constant 
visible  guard  of  his  reputation  to  a  ridiculous  degree, 
yet  his  desire  to  oblige,  his  want  of  arrogance,  and 
the  delicacy  of  his  mimicry,  made  him  veiy  agreeable. 
He  had  no  affected  reserve,  but,  on  the  lei«t  hint, 
would  start  up  at  any  time  and  give  the  company  one 
of  his  best  speeches.  As  Grarrick  had  been  in  Dublin 
when  I  was  in  London  in  1746,  I  assiduously  at- 
tended him  at  this  time,  and  saw  him  in  all  his  prin- 
cipal parts,  both  in  tragedy  and  comedy.  He  used 
to  say  himself,  that  he  was  more  at  home  in  comedy 
than  in  tragedy,  and  I  was  of  his  opinion.  I  thought 
I  could  conceive  something  more  perfect  in  tragedy, 
but  in  comedy  he  completely  filled  up  my  ideas  of 
perfection.  There  may  be  a  deception  in  this,  for 
every  well-educated  person  has  formed  to  himself 
some  idea  of  the  characters,  both  in  ancient  and 
modern  tragedy,  and  if  the  actor  falls  short  of  that, 
he  is  thought  to  be  deficient  in  judgment ;  whereas 
comedy  being  an  imitation  of  living  manners,  as  they 
rise  in  succession  among  inferior  orders  of  men,  the 
spectator  can  have  formed  no  rule  or  standard  of  judg- 
ment previous  to  the  representation,  but  must  accept 
of  the  picture  the  actor  gives  him,  and  must  approve 
of  it,  if  it  is  lively,  though  it  should  not  be  true. 

Garrick  was  so  friendly  to  John  Home  that  he 
gave  a  dinner  to  his  friends  and  companions  at  his 


oy  Google 


VISIT  TO  GAEEICK.  313 

house  at  Hampton,  which  he  did  but  seldom.  He 
had  told  us  to  bring  golf  clubs  and  balls  that  we 
might  play  at  that  game  on  Molesly  Hurst.  We 
accordingly  set  out  in  good  time,  six  of  us  in  a  lan- 
dau. As  we  passed  through  Kensington,  the  Cold- 
stream regiment  were  changing  guard,  and,  on  seeing 
our  clubs,  they  gave  us  three  cheers  in  honour  of  a 
diversion  peculiar  to  Scotland ;  so  much  does  the 
remembrance  of  one's  native  country  dilate  the  heart, 
when  one  has  been  some  time  absent.  The  same 
sentiment  made  us  open  our  purses,  and  give  our 
countrymen  wherewithal  to  drink  the  "Land  o'  Cakes." 
Garrick  met  us  by  the  way,  so  impatient  he  seemed 
to  be  for  his  company.  There  were  John  Home,  and 
Kobertson,  and  Wedderbum,  and  Bobert  and  James 
Adam,  and  Colonel  David  Wedderbum,  who  was 
killed  when  commander  of  the  army  in  Bombay,  in 
the  year  [1773].  He  was  held  by  his  companions  to 
be  in  every  respect  as  clever  and  able  a  man  as  bis 
elder  brother  the  Chancellor,  with  a  much  more  gay, 
popular,  and  social  temper. 

Immediately  after  we  arrived,  we  crossed  the  river 
to  the  golfing-ground,  which  was  very  good.  None  of 
the  company  could  play  but  John  Home  and  myself, 
and  Parson  Black  from  Aberdeen,  who,  being  chaplain 
to  a  regiment  during  some  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's 
campaigns,  had  been  pointed  out  to  his  Royal  Highness 
as  a  proper  person  to  teach  him  the  game  of  chess  :  the 
Duke  was  such  an  apt  scholar  that  he  never  lost  a 
game  after  the  first  day  ;  and  he  recompensed  Black 


oy  Google 


344  VISIT  TO  GAEEICK. 

for  having  beat  bim  so  cnielly,  by  procuring  for  him 
the  living  of  Hampton,  ■which  is  a  good  one.  We  re- 
turned and  dined  sumptuously,  Mrs  Garrick,  the  only 
lady,  now  grown  fat,  though  still  very  lively,  being  a 
woman  of  uncommon  good  sense,  and  now  mistress  of 
English,  was  in  all  respects  most  agreeable  company. 
She  did  not  seem  at  all  to  recognise  me,  which  was 
no  wonder,  at  the  end  of  twelve  years,  having  thrown 
away  my  bag-wig  and  sword,  and  appearing  in  my 
own  grisly  hairs,  and  in  parson's  clothes ;  nor  was  I 
likely  to  remind  her  of  her  former  state." 

Garrick  had  built  a  handsome  temple,  with  a 
statue  of  Shakespeare  in  it,  in  hia  lower  garden,  on  the 
banks  of  the  Thames,  which  wag  separated  from  the 
upper  one  by  a  high-road,  under  which  tliere  was  an 
archway  which  united  the  two  gardens.  Garrick,  in 
compliment  to  Home,  bad  ordered  the  wine  to  be 
carried  to  this  temple,  where  we  were  to  drink  it 
under  the  shade  of  the  copy  of  that  statue  to  which 
Home  had  addressed  his  pathetic  verses  on  the  rejec- 
tion of  his  play.  The  poet  and  the  actor  were  equally 
gay,  and  well  pleased  with  each  other,  on  this  occa- 
sion, with  much  respect  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  total 
oblivion  of  animosity  on  the  other ;  for  vanity  is  a 
passion  that  is  easy  to  be  entreated,  and  unites  freely 
with  all  the  best  aflFectiona  Having  observed  a  green 
mount  in  the  garden,  opposite  the  archway,  I  said  to 
our  landlord,  that  while  the  servants  were  preparing 
the  collation  in  the  temple  I  would  surprise  him  with 

*  Se«  aboTe,  p.  1S4 


izecy  Google 


VISIT  TO   OABRIOK. 


a  stroke  at  the  golf,  as  I  should  drive  a  ball  through 
his  archway  into  the  Thames  once  in  three  strokes. 
I  had  measured  the  distance  with  my  eye  in  walking 
about  the  garden,  and  accordingly,  at  the  second 
stroke,  made  the  ball  alight  in  the  mouth  of  the  gate- 
way, and  roll  down  the  green  slope  into  the  river. 
This  was  so  dexterous  that  he  was  quite  surprised, 
and  begged  the  club  of  me  by  which  such  a  feat  had 
been  performed.  We  passed  a  very  agreeable  after- 
noon ;  and  it  is  hard  to  say  which  were  happier,  the 
landlord  and  landlady,  or  the  guests. 

There  was  a  club  in  London  where  Robertson  and 
I  never  failed  to  attend,  as  we  were  adopted  members 
while  we  stayed  in  town.  It  was  held  once  a-week 
in  the  British  Coffeehouse,  at  eight  in  the  evening ; 
the  members  were  Scotch  physicians  from  the  city 
and  Court  end  of  the  town.  Of  the  first  set  were 
Pitcairn,  Armstrong,  Onne,  and  Dickson ;  of  the 
second  were  William  Hunter,  Clephan,  Mr  Graham 
of  Pall  Mali,  &c. — all  of  them  very  agreeable  men  ; 
Clephan  especially  was  one  of  the  most  sensible, 
learned,  and  judicious  men  I  ever  knew — an  admir- 
able classical  scholar  and  a  fine  historian.  He  often 
led  the  conversation,  but  it  was  with  an  air  of  mo- 
desty and  deference  to  the  company,  which  added  to 
the  weight  of  all  he  said.  Hunter  was  gay  and  lively 
to  the  last  degree,  and  often  came  in  to  us  at  nine 
o'clock  fatigued  and  jaded.  He  had  had  no  dmner, 
but  sapped  on  a  couple  of  eggs,  and  drank  his  glass 
of  claret ;   for  though  we  were  a  punch  club,  we 


oy  Google 


S4(!  SKETCHES  AND  INCIDENTS. 

allowed  him  a  bottle  of  what  he  liked  best.  He 
repaid  us  with  the  brilliancy  of  his  conversation. 
His  toast  was,  "  May  no  English  nobleman  venture 
out  of  the  world  without  a  Scottish  physician,  as  I 
am  sure  there  are  none  who  venture  in."  He  was 
a  famous  lecturer  on  anatomy.  Robertson  and  I 
expressed  a  wish  to  be  admitted  one  day.  He 
appointed  us  a  day,  and  gave  ns  one  of  the  most 
elegant,  clear,  and  brilliant  lectures  on  the  eye  that 
any  of  us  had  ever  heard.  One  iustance  I  must  set 
down  of  the  fallacy  of  medical  prediction — it  was 
this  :  Br  Hunter,  by  his  attendance  on  Lady  Esther 
Pitt,  had  frequent  opportunities  of  seeing  the  great 
orator  when  he  was  ill  of  the  gout,  and  thought  so 
ill  of  his  constitution  that  he  said  more  than  once  to 
us,  with  deep  regret,  that  he  did  not  think  the  great 
man's  life  worth  two  years' purchase;  and  yet  Mr  Pitt 
lived  for  twenty  years,  for  he  did  not  give  way  to 
fate  till  1778. 

As  soon  as  my  sister  got  into  her  house  in  a  court 
in  Aldermansbury,  Dr  Dickson  and  she  gave  a  dinner 
to  my  friends,  with  two  or  three  of  his.  There  were 
Doctors  Pitcaim,  Armstrong,  Smollett,  and  Orme, 
together  with  Dr  Robertson,  John  Blair,  Home,  and 
myself.  We  passed  an  exceedingly  pleasant  day, 
although  Smollett  had  given  Armstrong  a  staggering 
blow  at  the  beginning  of  dinner,  by  asking  him  some 
questions  about  his  nose,  which  was  still  patched,  on 
account  of  his  having  run  it  through  the  side-glass  of 
his  chariot  when  somebody  came  up  to  speak  to  him. 


oy  Google 


SKETCHES   AND    INCIDENTS. 


~  Annstrong  was  naturally  glumpy,  and  this,  I  was 
afraid,  would  have  silenced  him  all  day,  ■which  it 
might,  had  not  Smollett  called  him  familiarly  John 
Boon  after  his  joke  on  his  nose ;  but  he  knew  that 
Smollett  loved  and  respected  him,  and  soon  recovered 
his  good-humour,  and  became  brilliant.  My  sister, 
who  had  one  lady  with  her — one  of  Pitcairn's  nieces,  I 
believe — was  happy  and  agreeable,  and  highly  pleasing 
to  her  guests,  who  confessed  they  had  seldom  seen 
such  a  superior  woman. 

There  was  a  friend  of  Dickson's,  a  Mr  Jackson,  a 
Dumfries  man  and  an  Irish  factor,  as  they  are  called, 
who  was  a  great  humorist,  who,  though  he  had  no 
carriage,  kept  six  hunting-horses.  This  man  offered  to 
mount  us  on  his  horses,  and  go  with  us  to  Windsor. 
After  a  breakfast-dinner  at  his  partner's,  we  set  out 
on  the  16  th  day  of  April,  the  warmest  that  had  be«i 
that  season.  As  the  great  road  was  very  disagreeable, 
Jackson,  who  knew  the  environs  of  London  better  than 
most  people,  as  he  belonged  to  a  hunt,  took  us  through 
green  lanes  as  soon  as  he  could,  and,  giving  us  a  little 
wine  and  water  when  he  pleased,  which  was,  he  said, 
whenever  he  came  to  good  port,  he  landed  us  at 
Staines  Bridge,  in  a  very  good  inn  across  the  bridge. 
His  servant,  who  rode  an  unruly  horse,  had  been  thrown 
from  him  half  an  hour  before  we  reached  Staines. 
He  was  very  much  hurt  about  the  head,  and  with 
difficulty  we  brought  him  along  at  a  slow  pace. 
When  we  arrived,  Jackson  sent  immediately  for  the 
nearest  surgeon,  who  was  a  Mr  Green.    This  man  ex- 


izecy  Google 


348  SKETCHES  AND  INCIDENTS. 

amined  the  servant,  and  found  he  was  not  dangerously 
hurt,  and  Jackson  invited  him  to  stay  supper,  which 
be  did,  and  turned  out  a  very  sensible  conversible  man. 
He  spoke  English  so  well  that  we  could  not  have 
detected  him  to  be  a  Scotchman,  far  less  an  Aber- 
deenaman,  which  he  was ;  but  he  had  gone  very  young 
into  the  navy  as  surgeon's-mate,  and  had  entirely  lost 
his  mother  tongue — almost  the  only  instance  I  ever 
knew  of  any  one  from  that  shire.  There  was  a  poor 
Scotch  Presbyterian,  who  had  a  very  small  living ; 
Jackson  had  a  small  present  of  two  guineas  to  give 
him,  for  the  humorist  was  not  ungenerous.  He  sent 
for  him  in  the  morning,  and  promised  him  a  sermon 
in  his  meeting-house,  for  it  was  Sunday,  and  kept  him 
to  breakfast.  I  had  been  pr^)ared  to  do  this  duty, 
for  Jackson  and  I  slept  in  the  same  room,  and  he  had 
requested  it  as  a  favour,  as  he  said  the  meeting  and 
the  audience  were  very  poor  indeed.  I  was  dressed, 
and  went  down  to  breakfast^  and  was  introduced  to 
Mr  Coldstream.  Soon  afterwards  came  Eobertson, 
undressed,  and  with  his  night-cap  on,  and,  being  in- 
troduced to  Coldstream,  took  no  further  notice  of  him 
(not  his  usual  manner),  and  breakfasted  in  silence. 
When  the  minister  took  his  leave,  he  called  Jackson 
aside,  and  said  he  hoped  he  remembered  he  never  em- 
ployed any  of  the  people  called  Methodists.  This  was 
resolute  in  a  man  who  had  a  wife  and  four  children, 
and  only  £20  a-year,  to  a  gentleman  who  had  just  made 
him  a  present  of  two  guineas.  Jackson  assured  him 
that  none  of  us  were  Methodists,  but  that  I  was  the 


oy  Google 


SKETCHES  AND  INCIDEMTS,  3*9 

persoD  he  had  engaged  to  preach.  I  made  Robertson's 
being  taken  for  a  Methodist  a  luting  joke  against  him. 
We  went  to  the  meeting-house  at  the  hour  of  eleven, 
the  eotry  to  which  was  over  a  pretty  large  dunghill 
Although  the  congregation  was  reinforced  by  two 
officers  of  the  Grey  dragoons,  and  by  a  corporal  and 
an  officer's  man,  with  Jackson's  man  with  his  head 
bound  up,  with  the  Doctor  and  Jackson  and  Coldstream 
and  his  wife,  they  amounted  only  to  twenty-three. 
There  were  two  brothers,  Scotchmen,  clothiers,  who 
were  there,  who  invited  us  to  dinner.  We  repaired  to 
them  at  one  o'clock,  and  after  walking  round  their 
garden,  and  being  much  delighted  with  two  swans 
swimming  in  the  Thames,  whom  they  had  attached  to 
them  by  kindness,  we  sat  down  to  an  excellent  citi- 
zen-like dinner,  and  drank  some  excellent  port-wine. 
Robertson  and  I  bespoke  a  piece  of  parson's  grey  cloth 
of  their  makiog,  which  they  sent  to  Scotland  before 
us,  and  which  turned  out  the  best  we  ever  had.  AYe 
divided  it  among  our  friends.  Before  five  o'clock  we 
.  mounted  our  horses  by  order  of  our  conductor,  and 
rode  to  Windsor  Forest,  where,  in  spite  of  the  warm 
weather  before,  we  found  the  frost  hard  enough  to 
bear  our  horses.  We  returned  without  going  into 
Windsor.  Next  day  we  went  there  time  enough  to 
see  the  castle  and  all  its  curiosities,  and  to  go  down  to 
Eton,  after  which  we  dined  at  an  inn  and  rode  back 
to  Staines,  making  a  circuit  round  the  great  park. 
Much  to  our  satisfaction,  we  found  Dr  Green  waiting 
OS,  whom  Jackson  had  appointed  to  meet  us. 


izecy  Google 


350  SKETCHES   AND   INCIDENTS. 

Jackson  wished  us  to  take  a  circuitous  ride  and  aee 
everything  down  the  Thames  to  London  ;  but  as  we 
were  engaged  with  a  party  of  friends  to  dine  at  Bil- 
lingsgate on  fish  of  the  season,  we  took  leave  of  Mr 
Jackson,  and  left  him  to  come  at  hia  leisure,  while  we 
made  the  best  of  our  way  down  the  Thames,  and 
halted  only  at  Richmond,  where  Eobertson  had  never 
been. 

"We  arrived  in  time  to  meet  our  friends  at  the  Gun, 
where  Dr  Dickson  had  provided  a  choice  dinner  of  all 
the  varieties  of  fish  then  in  season,  at  the  moderate 
price  of  twenty-five  shillings,  one  crown  of  which  was 
paid  for  smelts.  We  were  a  company  of  fifteen  or 
sixteen,  whose  names  I  can't  exactly  remember,  but 
when  I  say  that  there  were  Sir  David  Kinloch,  James 
Veitcb  (Elliock),  Sir  Robert  Keith,  then  only  a  captain 
in  the  Scotch  Dutch,  Robertson,  Home,  &c.,  I  need  not 
say  that  we  were  gay  and  jovial.  An  incident  con- 
tributed not  a  little  to  our  mirth.  Charles  Congalton, 
who  happened  to  sit  next  to  Sir  David,  our  preses, 
it  was  observed,  never  filled  above  a  thimbleful  in 
his  glass,  when  being  asked  the  reason,  he  said  he  could 
not  drink  any  of  their  London  port,  there  waa  such  a 
dramng-togelhemess  in  it.  "  King  the  bell,  Charlie," 
said  our  preses,  "  and  we  will  learn  if  we  can't  get  a 
bottle  of  claret  for  you."  The  bell  was  rung,  the  claret 
came,  and  was  pronounced  very  good  by  the  Baronet 
and  his  doctor.  The  whole  company  soon  joined  in 
that  liquor,  without  which  no  Scotch  gentleman  in 
those  days  could  be  exhilarated.     Bob  Keith  sung  all 


izecy  Google 


SKETCHES   AND    INCIDBNTR.  Sal 

bis  liidicrottB  songs,  and  repeated  all  his  comic  verses, 
aod  gave  us  a  foretaste  of  that  deliglitful  company 
which  he  continued  to  be  to  the  end  of  hia  days.  His 
cousin,  Charles  Dalrymple,  was  only  behind  him  in 
humorous  description  and  naive  remark  —  as  much 
only  as  he  was  in  age  and  the  habits  of  company. 
Our  reckoning  by  this  means,  however,  turned  out, 
instead  of  five  shillings  and  sixpence,  as  Dickson  had 
supposed,  to  be  three  times  that  sum.  The  Baronet 
and  Doctor  were  to  set  out  in  a  few  days  to  France, 
on  their  way  to  Barege. 

I  shall  here  mention  an  anecdote  which  struck  me 
as  a  proof  of  the  wonderful  carelessness  of  physicians. 
Supping  one  night  with  Duncan  Forbes,  Sir  David, 
Lord  Ellioct,  and  sundry  physicians,  while  four  of  us 
were  playing  at  whist,  Lord  EUiock  took  up  a  book, 
and  after  reading  a  while  called  out,  "  Sir  David,  here 
is  your  case,  and  a  perfect  cure  for  it,  that  I  find  in 
this  book."  He  then  read  an  account  of  the  great 
efiect  of  the  waters  of  Barege,  in  the  south  of  France, 
for  such  complaints  as  the  Baronet  laboured  under. 
"  Have  you  heard  of  this  before.  Sir  David  ? "  "  No, 
never,"  answered  he.  "Is  it  new  to  the  Faculty  V 
said  he  to  Armstrong,  who  was  sitting  near  him. 
"  No,"  replied  the  crusty  Doctor,  "  but  we  never 
thought  of  prescribing  it,  as  we  knew  that  he  was 
such  a  coward  that  he  would  rather  be  damned  by  a 
fistula  than  cross  the  Channel  in  a  packet-boat,  especi- 
ally in  time  of  a  French  war."  Sir  David,  having 
his  pride  irritated  by  this  attack,  did  go  to  Barege, 


oy  Google 


352  CHARLES  TOWNSHEND. 

and  completed  a  cure  which  had  been  made  by  Dr 
Ward. 

As  I  had  been  introduced  to  the  Biike  of  Argyle  in 
the  autumn  before  in  Scotland,  I  went  sometimes  to 
hia  evening  parties,  which  were  very  pleasant.  He 
let  in  certain  &iends  every  night  about  seven  o'clocl^ 
when,  after  tea  and  coffee,  there  were  parties  at  aix- 
penny  wliiat,  his  Grace  never  playing  higher.  About 
nine  there  was  a  sideboard  of  cold  victuals  and  wine, 
to  which  everybody  resorted  in  his  turn.  There  was 
seldom  or  ever  any  drinking — never,  indeed,  but  when 
some  of  his  favourite  young  men  came  in,  such  as 
Alexander  Lord  Eglinton,  William  Lord  Home,  &c., 
when  the  old  gentleman  would  rouse  himself  and  call 
for  burgundy  and  champagne,  and  prolong  the  feast 
to  a  late  hour.  In  general  the  company  parted  at 
eleven.  There  could  not  be  a  more  rational  way  of 
passing  the  evening,  for  the  Duke  had  a  wide  range 
of  knowledge,  and  was  very  open  and  communicative. 

The  Eight  Honourable  Charles  Townshend,  my  old 
friend,  had  married  Lady  Balkeith,  the  Duke  of  Buc- 
cleuch's  mother.  Home,  who  was  become  intimate 
with  him,  took  me  there  one  morning,  after  having 
told  him  I  was  in  town,  and  intended  to  call.  He 
received  me  with  open  arms,  and  was  perfectly  fami- 
liar, but  not  a  hint  of  having  seen  me  before.  Ho 
held  the  same  demeanour  to  Jack  Campbell,  Lord 
Stonefield,  who  had  married  one  of  Lord  Bute's  sisters ; 
and  in  spite  of  our  intimacy  afterwards  in  Scotland, 
he  never  made  the  most  distant  allusion  to  anything 


oy  Google 


THE  BtlCCLEUCH  FAMILY.  353 

that  had  happened  at  Leyden.  The  Duke  of  Buc- 
cleuch,  and  his  brother  Campbell  Scott,  were  in  town 
for  the  Easter  holidays.  Mr  Scott  was  much  hand- 
somer and  more  forward  than  the  Duke,  who  was  at 
a  table  in  the  room  where  there  were  some  books. 
The  young  Duke,  then  not  twelve  years  of  age,  was 
taming  over  the  leaves  of  a  book.  "Come  along, 
Duke,"  says  Charles — "  I  see  what  you  would  be  at, 
silent  as  you  are;  show  the  gentlemen  that  dedication 
you  are  bo  fond  of,"  The  Duke  slipt  down  the  book 
OD  the  table,  and  blushed  to  the  eyes,  retiring  a  step 
or  two  from  it.  I  took  up  the  book,  and  soon  saw  it 
was  Barclay  the  schoolmaster's  Latin  Grammar,  which 
he  had  dedicated  to  his  patron.  "  The  Duke,"  says  I, 
"  need  not  be  ashamed  of  this  dedication,  for  the 
author  of  it  is  one  of  the  best  schoolmasters  and 
grammarians  of  any  in  Etcotland,  and  has  brought  the 
school  at  Dalkeith  to  its  former  name  and  lustre." 
This  reassured  the  young  man,  and  he  smiled  with 
some  satisfaction.  Little  did  I  think  at  that  time 
that  I  should  live  to  see  his  grace  the  most  respected 
and  the  most  deservedly  popular  of  any  nobleman  in 
Scotland.  A  few  days  after  this  we  dined  with  Mr 
Townshend  and  the  Countess,  tmd  one  or  two  gentle- 
men, but  the  boys  had  returned  to  school. 

The  clergy  of  Scotland,  being  under  apprehensions 
that  the  window-tax  would  be  extended  to  them,  had 
given  me  in  chai^  to  state  our  case  to  someof  the  minis- 
ters, and  try  to  make  an  impression  in  our  favour.  Sir 
Gilbert  Elhot  listened  to  me,  and  was  friendly ;  March- 


oy  Google 


354  THE  BUCCLEUCH  FAMILY. 

mont  pretended  not  to  understand  my  statement,  and 
was  dry.  But  the  only  man  who  really  understood 
the  business,  and  seemed  ready  to  enter  into  it  with 
zeal,  was  Jeremiah  Dyson,  who,  having  been  a  Dis- 
senter, and  two  years  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh, 
and  withal  very  acute,  perfectly  comprehended  my 
argument,  and  was  willing  to  assist  in  procuring  an 
exemption.  Without  Robert  Dundas,  then  Lord  Ad- 
vocate, nothing,  however,  could  be  done.  I  waited  on 
him,  and  was  received  in  his  usual  way,  with  frankness 
and  familiarity  enough ;  but  he  did  not  think  he  could 
do  anything,  but  deferred  saying  much  about  it  till 
some  future  day,  when  he  would  have  some  friends  with 
me  to  dinner,  and  talk  over  the  affair.  This  cold  or 
rather  haughty  reception,  added  to  some  very  slight- 
ing or  calumnious  sayings  of  his,  both  about  Robert- 
son and  me,  provoked  us  not  a  little,  and  revived  the 
resentment  we  felt  at  his  unhandsome  behaviour  about 
the  tragedy  of  Douglas. 

Our  time  drew  near  for  returning,  which  we  were 
to  do  on  horseback,  and  with  that  we  set  about  fur- 
nishing ourselves  with  horses.  Home  had  his  Piercy 
in  town,  and  James  Adam  (who  was  to  be  our  com- 
panion) had  one  also,  so  that  Robertson  and  I  only 
were  to  be  provided,  which  we  did  without  loss  of 
time.  We  had  some  inclination  to  be  introduced 
to  Lord  Bute,  which  John  promised  to  do ;  and  for 
Robert  Adam  also,  who  could  derive  more  benefit  from 
it  than  any  of  us.  Robert  had  been  three  years  in 
Italy,  and,  with  a  first-rate  genius  for  his  profession, 


izecy  Google 


THE  ADAU8.  355 

had  seen  aod  studied  everything,  and  was  in  the  high- 
est esteem  among  foreign  artists.  From  the  time  of 
his  return — viz.  in  February  or  March  1758 — may  be 
dated  a  very  remarkable  improvement  iu  building  and 
furniture,  and  even  stoneware,  in  London  and  every 
part  of  England.*  As  John  put  off  the  time  of  our 
introduction  to  his  great  man,  we  yielded  to  a  request 
of  our  friend  Sir  David  Kinloch  to  accompany  him  on 
a  jaunt  he  wished  to  make  to  Portsmouth.  Home  had 
signified  his  design  to  Lord  Bute,  who  had  agreed  to 
his  absence  for  a  few  days ;  and  having  obtained  a 
letter  from  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  then  a  Lord  of  the  Ad- 
miralty, to  Lieutenant  Brett,  clerk  of  the  cheque  at 
Portsmouth,  we  set  out,  the  Baronet  and  his  doctor 
in  a  chaise,  and  we  three  on  horseback.  As  it  was 
towards  the  end  of  April,  and  the  weather  good,  we 
had  a  very  agreeable  journey.  We  were  much  pleased 
with  the  diversified  beauty  of  the  country,  though  not 
a  little  surprised  with  the  great  extent  of  uncultivated 
heath  which  we  went  through.  We  viewed  with  much 
pleasure  and  exultation  the  solid  foundation  of  the 
naval  glory  of  Great  Britain,  in  the  amazing  extent 
and  richness  of  the  dockyards  and  warehouses,  &c.,  and 
iu  the  grandeur  of  her  fleet  in  the  harbour  and  In  the 
Downs.  It  appeared  a  new  world  to  us,  and  our 
wonder  had  not  ceased  during  all  the  four  days  we 
remained  there.   We  had  good  mutton  and  good  wine 

•  It  it  gcaredy  necessary  to  say  that  the  two  Adams,  so  often  referred  to, 
were  the  architecbi  of  the  many  puUin  and  prirate  buildings,  of  some  of 
which  an  account  will  be  found  in  tbuir  work,  called  7%«  Worh  in  Archiiee- 
(ure  qfSobfrt  and  Jamea  Adam.— Ed. 


oy  Google 


356  MARITIME  ADVENTURES. 

(claret)  at  the  inn,  and,  above  all,  an  additional  com- 
panion, Mr  RicLard  Oswald  (he  who  had  ao  much 
hand  in  the  peace  of  Paris  long  after),  who  was  a  man 
of  great  knowledge  and  ready  conversation.  There 
was  a  fine  fleet  of  ten  ships  of  the  line  in  the  Downs, 
with  the  Royal  George  at  their  bead,  all  ready  for  sea, 
and  one  of  our  great  objects  was  to  get  on  board  that 
ship,  whicli  was  always  kept  in  the  highest  order  for 
the  admittance  of  visitors.  This  short  voyage  was 
proposed  every  night,  but  was  put  off  daily,  as  a  land- 
wind  came  on  soon  after  breakfast.  As  wo  were  only 
to  stay  one  day  longer,  Congalton  and  I  in  despair 
went  in  the  evening  to  Lieutenant  Brett  and  stated 
our  case  to  him.  He  said  there  was  but  one  remedy, 
which  was  for  him  to  ask  Sir  David  and  us  fJl  to 
breakfast  next  morning  at  eight ;  that  his  dockyard 
sloop,  in  wliich  he  could  sail  to  America,  should  be  at 
Iiand  and  ready  at  nine,  and  that  we  might  get  to  the 
Royal  George,  not  above  three  miles  off,  before  the 
mackerel  breeze  sprung  up. 

This  plan  was  accordingly  put  in  execution,  but  it 
being  half-past  nine  before  we  got  on  board,  the  breeze 
got  up  before  we  reached  the  fleet ;  and  the  moment  it 
arose,  fear  and  sickness  began  to  operate  on  our  friends, 
theit  countenances  grew  pale,  and  the  poet  grew  very 
vociferous  for  our  immediate  return.  Our  pilot,  how- 
ever, held  on  his  course,  and  assured  them  that  there 
was  not  the  smallest  danger,  and  that  the  moment 
they  set  their  feet  in  the  Royal  George,  their  sickneae 
would  leave  them.     Congalton  and  I  were  quite  dis- 


oy  Google 


MARITIME   ADVENTURES.  357 

concerted,  and  did  Dot  know  what  to  do.  Brett  con- 
tinued to  assert  that  we  might  board  with  the  greatest 
ease,  and  without  the  least  danger;  but  as  we  ap- 
proached the  ship  their  fears  became  so  noisy  and  so 
unmanly  that  Brett  yielded,  and  said  it  would  be 
better  to  sail  round  the  ship  and  return,  lest  the  breeze 
should  increase.  Dr  Congalton  and  I  were  much  dis- 
appointed, as  this  was  probably  the  only  opportunity 
we  should  have  of  seeing  so  hue  a  ship  a^in. 

We  behoved  to  yield,  however,  and,  what  was  re- 
markable, the  moment  we  set  our  heads  towards  land 
their  sickness  entirely  abated,  and  they  got  into  spi- 
rits— Robertson  was  the  only  one  of  them  who  had 
thrown  up  his  breakfast.  When  we  arrived  near  the 
harbour,  we  overtook  the  Eamihes,  a  ninety-gun  ship, 
just  entering  the  port.  Mr  Brett  proposed  that  we 
should  go  on  board  her,  when  we  should  see  her  rigging 
completely  manned,  a  sight  that  in  some  degree  would 
compensate  our  not  seeing  the  Royal  George.  Our 
friends  were  delighted  with  this  proposal,  and  John 
Home  exulted  provokingly  on  the  superiority  of  the 
sight  we  were  so  fortunately  going  to  have.  We  had 
no  sooner  set  foot  on  the  deck  than  an  officer  came  up 
tous,  bawUng,  "God  preserve  us!  what  has  brought  the 
Presbytery  of  Edinburgh  here  1  for,  damn  me,  if  there 
is  not  Willy  Robertson,  Sandie  Carlyle,  and  John  Home 
come  on  board."  This  turned  out  to  be  a  Lieutenant 
Neilson,  a  cousin  of  Robertson,  who  knew  us  all,  who 
gave  us  a  hearty  welcome,  and  carried  us  to  his  cabin, 
and  treated  ua  to  white  wine  and  salt  beef 


oy  Google 


358  LOBD  BUTE. 

The  remainder  of  this  day  we  passed  in  seeing  what 
we  had  omitted,  particularly  the  Point  after  it  was  dark, 
or  rather  towards  midnight — a  scene  of  wonder,  and 
even  horror,  to  the  civilised.  Nezt  day  we  took  our 
departure,  and  sleeping  a  night  by  the  way,  aa  we  had 
done  going  down,  we  arrived  in  London,  and  prepared 
in  good  earnest  to  set  out  on  our  journey  north.  The 
day  was  at  last  appointed  for  our  being  introduced  to 
the  great  man,  and  we  resolved  among  ourselves,  that  if 
he  gave  us  an  invitation  to  dine  with  bim  on  an  early 
day,  we  would  stay  for  it,  though  contrary  to  our  plan. 

John  Home's  tragedy  of  Agis  had  been  acted  this 
season  with  tolerably  good  success,  for  it  ran  the  nine 
nights,  and  the  author  made  some  hundreds  by  it.  Gar- 
rick  had  acted  the  part  of  Lysander,  as  he  did  a  year 
or  two  later  that  of  Emilius  in  the  Siege  of  Aquilna, 
which  I  think  superior  in  merit  to  Agis.  I  had  under- 
taken to  review  this  play  for  the  British  Magazine 
(Smollett's),  but  had  been  indolent ;  and  it  now  cost 
me  to  sit  up  all  night  to  write  it,  and  I  was  obliged  to 
give  it  to  the  press  blotted  and  interlined, — but  they 
are  accustomed  to  decypher  the  most  difBcult  hands. 

The  day  came  when  we  were  presented  to  Lord 
Bute,  but  our  reception  was  so  dry  and  cold  that 
when  he  asked  when  we  were  to  go  north,  one  of  us 
said  to-morrow.  He  received  us  booted  and  spurred, 
which  in  those  days  was  a  certain  signal  for  going 
a-riding,  and  an  apology  for  not  desiring  us  to  sit 
dowu.  We  very  soon  took  our  leave,  and  no  sooner 
were  we  out  of  hearing,  than  Robert  Adam,  who  was 


oy  Google 


LORD   BUTE,  359 

widi  U8,  fell  a-cursing  and  swearing.  "  What !  had  he 
been  presented  to  all  the  princes  in  Italy  and  France, 
and  most  graciously  received,  to  come  and  be  treated 
with  such  distance  and  pride  by  the  youngest  earl 
but  one  in  all  Scotland?"  They  were  better  friends 
afterwards,  and  Robert  found  him  a  kind  patron, 
when  bis  professional  merit  was  made  known  to  him. 
When  I  was  riding  with  Home  in  Hyde  Park  a  week 
before,  tr}'ing  the  horse  I  bought,  we  met  his  lordship, 
to  whom  Home  then  introduced  me,  and  we  rode  to- 
gether for  half  an  hour,  when  I  had  a  very  agreeable 
chat  with  his  lordship ;  but  he  was  a  different  man 
when  he  received  audience.  To  dismiss  the  subject, 
however,  I  believe  he  was  a  very  worthy  and  virtuous 
man — a  man  of  taste,  and  a  good  belles-lettres  scholar, 
and  that  he  trained  up  the  prince  in  true  patriotic 
principles  and  a  love  of  the  constitution,  though  hia 
own  mind  was  of  the  Tory  cast,  with  a  partiality  to  - 
the  family  of  Stuart,  of  whom  he  believed  he  was 
descended.  But  he  proved  himself  unfit  for  the  sta- 
tion he  had  assumed,  being  not  versatile  enough  for 
a  prime  minister ;  and,  though  personally  brave,  yet 
void  of  that  political  firmness  which  is  necessary  to 
stand  the  storms  of  state.  The  nobility  and  gentry 
of  England  had  paid  court  to  him  with  such  abject 
servility  when  the  accession  of  his-  pupil  drew  near, 
and  immediately  after  it  took  place,  that  it  was  no 
wonder  he  should  behave  to  them  with  haughtiness 
and  disdain,  and  with  a  spirit  of  domination.  As  soon, 
however,  as  he  was  tried  and  kno^-n,  and  the  disap- 


izecy  Google 


pointed  hopes  of  the  courtiers  had  restored  them  to 
the  exercise  of  their  manhood,  he  showed  a  wavering 
and  uncertain  disposition,  which  discovered  to  them 
that  he  could  be  overthrown.  The  misfortune  of  great 
men  in  such  circumstances  is,  that  they  have  few  or 
no  personal  friends  on  whose  counsels  they  can  rely. 
There  were  two  such  about  him,  who  enjoyed  his  con- 
fidence and  favour,  Sir  Harry  Erskine  and  John  Home. 
The  first,  I  believe,  was  a  truly  honest  man,  but  his 
views  were  not  extensive  nor  his  talents  great ;  the 
second  had  better  talents,  bat  they  were  not  at  all 
adapted  to  business.  Besides  ambition  and  pride  to 
a  high  degree,  Lord  Bute  had  an  insatiable  vanity, 
which  nothing  could  allay  but  Home's  incessant  flat- 
tery, which  being  ardent  and  sincere,  and  blind  and 
incessant,  like  that  of  a  passionate  lover,  pleased  the 
jealous  and  supercilious  mind  of  the  Thane.  He  knew 
John  to  be  a  man  of  honour  and  his  friend,  and 
though  his  discernment  pointed  out  the  excess  of 
John's  praises,  yet  his  ardour  and  sincerity  made  it 
all  take  place  on  a  temper  and  character  made  acces- 
sible by  vanity.  With  respect  to  John  himself,  his 
mind  and  manners  had  always  been  the  same.  He 
flattered  Lord  Milton,  and  even  Adam  Ferguson  and 
me,  as  much  as  he  did  Lord  Bute  in  the  zenith  of  his 
power.  What  demonstrates  the  artlessness  and  purity 
of  John's  mind  was,  that  he  never  asked  anything  for 
himself,  though  he  had  the  undisputed  ear  of  the  Prime 
Minister.  Even  those  who  envied  John  for  the  place 
of  favour  he  held,eidaimed  against  the  chief  for  doing 


izecy  Google 


so  little  for  the  man  of  his  right  hand ;  and  John 
might  have  starved  on  a  scanty  pension  (for  he  was 
required  to  be  in  attendance  in  London  for  more  than 
half  the  year),  had  not  Ferguson  and  I  taken  advan- 
tage of  a  vacancy  of  an  oflSce  in  Scotland,  and  pressed 
Lord  MUton  to  procure  the  Lord  Conservator's  place 
for  him,  which  more  than  donblfed  his  income.*  Bnt 
though  Home  was  careless  of  himself,  he  was  warm 
and  active  at  all  times  for  the  interest  of  his  friends, 
and  served  a  greater  number  of  people  eflFectually  than 
it  had  been  in  the  power  of  any  private  man  to  do 
before,  some  few  of  whom  proved  themselves  not 
worthy  of  his  friendship. 

We  now  were  to  leave  London,  and  made  all  suit- 
able preparations ;  and  finding  that  there  was  a  horse 
at  Donaldson's,  at  the  Orange  Tree  lun,  which  the 
owner  wished  to  have  down  to  Edinburgh,  we  under- 
took to  take  him  with  us,  and  hired  a  man  to  ride  him 
and  carry  our  baggage.  As  there  were  four  of  us,  we 
found  one  servant  too  few,  to  our  great  inconveniency. 
As  the  Adams  were  a  wonderfully  loving  family,  and 
their  youngest  brother  James  was  going  down  with 
us,  the  rest  of  the  sisters  and  brothers  wotdd  accom- 
pany us  as  far  as  Uxbridge  (a  very  needless  ceremony, 
some  of  us  thought)  ;  but  since  we  were  to  be  so 
numerous,  my  sister  thought  of  joining  the  party. 
We  passed  a  very  cheerful  evening  in  spite  of  the 
melancholy  parting  we  had   in  view.      We  parted, 

•  The  then  sinecure  office  of  ConBervator  of  Scota  Privileges  at  Camp- 


oy  Google 


S62  BAMBLE  IN  ENGLAND. 

however,  next  morning,  and  we  made  the  best  of  our 
■way  to  Oxford,  halting  for  an  hour  at  Bulstrode,  a 
Beat  of  the  Duke  of  Portland's,  where  we  viewed  the 
park,  the  house,  and  the  chapel,  which  pleased  us 
much,  especially  the  last,  which  was  ornamented  in 
true  taste  as  a  place  of  worship.  The  chapel,  which 
is  still  met  with  in  many  noblemen's  houses  in  Eng- 
land, was  a  mark  of  the  residence  of  a  great  family, 
which  was  striking  and  agreeable.  It  was  here  that 
we  discovered  the  truth  of  what  I  had  often  heard, 
that  most  of  the  head-gardeners  of  English  noblemen 
were  Scotch,  for  on  observing  to  this  man  that  his 
pease  seemed  late  on  the  4th  of  May,  not  being  then 
fully  in  bloom,  and  that  I  was  certain  there  were 
sundry  places  which  I  knew  in  Scotland  where  they 
were  further  advanced,  he  answered  that  he  was 
bred  in  a  place  that  I  perhaps  did  not  kuow  that 
answered  this  description.  This  was  Newhaills,  in 
my  own  parish  of  Inveresk.  This  man,  whose  name 
I  have  forgot,  if  it  was  not  Eoberfeon,  waa  not  only 
gardener  but  land-steward,  and  had  the  charge  of  the 
whole  park  a,nd  of  the  estate  around  it ; — such  advan- 
tage was  there  in  having  been  taught  writing,  arith- 
metic, and  the  mensuration  of  land,  the  rudiments  of 
which  were  taught  in  many  of  the  country  schools  of 
Scotland.  This  man  gave  us  a  note  to  the  gardener 
at  Blenheim,  who,  he  told  us,  was  our  countryman, 
and  would  furnish  us  with  notes  to  the  head-gardeners 
all  the  way  down. 

We  arrived  at  Oxford  before  dinner,  and  put  up  at 


oy  Google 


BAMBLE  IN  ENGLAND.  3G3 

the  Augcl  Iqd.  Kobertsou  and  Adam,  frho  had  never 
been  there  before,  had  everything  to  see  :  Home  and 
I  had  been  there  before.  John  Douglas,  who  knew 
we  were  coming,  was  passing  trials  for  his  degree  of 
D.D.,  and  that  very  day  was  in  the  act  of  one  of  his 
wall-lectures,  as  they  are  called,  for  there  is  no  audi- 
ence. At  that  university,  it  seems,  the  trial  is  strict 
when  one  takes  a  Master's  or  Bachelor's,  but  slack 
when  you  come  to  the  Doctor's  Degree  ;  and  vice 
versa  at  Cambridge.  However  that  be,  we  found 
Douglas  sitting  in  a  pulpit,  in  one  of  their  chapels, 
with  not  a  soul  to  hear  him  but  three  old  beggar- 
women,  who  came  to  try  if  they  might  get  some 
charity.  On  seeing  us  four  enter  the  chapel,  ho  talk- 
ed to  us  and  wished  us  away,  otherwise  he  would  be 
obliged  to  lecture.  We  would  not  go  away,  we  an- 
swered, as  we  wished  a  specimen  of  Oxford  learning  ; 
on  which  he  read  two  or  three  verses  out  of  the  Greek 
Testament,  and  began  to  expound  it  in  Latin.  We 
listened  for  five  minutes,  and  then,  telling  where  we 
were  to  dine,  we  left  him  to  walk  about.  Douglas 
came  to  dinner;  and  in  the  evening  Messrs  Foster  and 
Vivian,  of  Baliol  College,  came  to  us  to  ask  us  to  a  col- 
lation, to  be  given  us  by  that  society  next  day.  Tbey 
were  well-informed  and  liberal-minded  men,  but  from 
them  and  their  conversation  we  learned  that  this  was 
far  from  applying  to  the  generality  of  the  university. 
We  stayed  all  next  day,  and  passed  a  very  agreeable 
evening  at  Baliol  College,  where  several  more  Fellows 
were  a 


oy  Google 


361  BAMBLE  IN  EKOLAKD. 

Next  morning  we  set  out  early  for  Woodstock, 
where  we  breakfasted,  and  went  to  see  Blenheim,  a 
moat  magnificent  park  indeed.  We  narrowly  in- 
spected the  house  and  chapel,  which,  though  much 
cried  down  by  the  Tory  wits  of  Queen  Anne's  reign, 
appeared  to  us  very  magnificent,  and  worthy  of  the 
donors  and  of  the  occasion  on  which  it  was  given. 
Our  companion,  James  Adam,  had  seen  all  the  splen- 
did palaces  of  Italy,  and  though  he  did  not  say  that 
Sir  John  Vanburgh's  design  was  faultless,  yet  he  said 
it  ill  deserved  the  aspersions  laid  upon  it,  for  he  had 
seen  few  palaces  where  there  was  more  movement,  as 
he  called  it,  than  in  Blenheim.  The  extent  of  the 
park  and  the  beauty  of  the  water  (now  a  sea  almost, 
as  I  am  told)  struck  us  very  much. 

From  Blenheim  we  made  the  best  of  our  way  to 
Warwick,  where,  as  we  had  been  much  heated,  and 
were  very  dusty,  we  threw  off  our  boots,  and  washed 
and  dressed  ourselves  before  we  walked  out.  John 
Home  would  not  put  on  his  boots  again ;  but  in  clean 
stockings  and  shoes,  when  he  was  looking  at  himself 
in  the  glass,  and  prancing  about  the  room  in  a  truly 
poetical  style,  he  turned  short  upon  the  boot-catch  who 
had  brought  in  our  clean  boots,  and  finding  the  fellow 
staring  at  him  with  seeming  admiration,  "And  am  not  I 
a  pretty  fellow  ^ "  said  John.  "Ay,"  says  he,  "  sir,"  with 
half  a  smile.  "  And  who  do  you  take  me  for  ? "  said 
John.  "  If  you  binna  Jamy  Dunlop  the  Scotch  ped- 
lar, I  dinna  ken  wha  ye  are  ;  but  your  ways  are  very 
like  his."    This  reply  confounded  our  friend  not  a  little. 


izecy  Google 


RAMBLE   IN   ENGLAND.  365 

and  he  looked  still  more  foolish  than  Robertson,  when 
Jackson  told  at  Staines  that  the  Dissenting  minister 
took  him  for  a  Methodist. 

Warwick  we  found  to  be  a  very  pleasant  old  town, 
finely  situated,  with  a  handsome  old  church.  The 
Castle  of  Warwick,  the  seat  of  the  earl  of  that  name, 
with  the  park,  was  truly  magnificent,  and  the  priory 
on  the  way  to  it,  the  seat  of  Mr  Wise,  not  un- 
worthy of  being  viewed.  We  dined  here,  and  were 
rather  late  in  getting  to  Birmingham,  where  a  servant 
of  Mr  Garbett's  lay  in  wait  for  us  at  the  inn,  and 
conducted  us  to  his  house,  without  letting  us  enter 
it.  This  man,  of  singular  worth  and  very  uncommon 
ability,  with  whom  Robertson  and  I  were  intimately 
acquainted  in  Scotland,  had  anxiously  wished  us  to 
come  his  way,  with  which  we  complied,  not  merely  to 
see  the  wonders  of  the  place,  but  to  gratify  him.  Siz 
or  seven  years  before  this,  Dr  Roebuck  and  he  had 
established  a  vitriol  work  at  Preatonpans,  which  suc- 
ceeded well,  and  the  profits  of  which  encouraged  them 
to  undertake  the  grand  ironworks  at  Carron,  which 
had  commenced  not  long  before.  Garbett,  who  was 
a  man  of  sense  and  judgment,  was  much  against  that 
great  undertaking,  as,  independent  of  the  profits  of  the 
vitriol  works,  they  had  not  £3000  of  stock  between 
them.  But  the  ardent  mind  of  Roebuck  carried  Gar- 
bett away,  and  he  yielded — giving  up  to  his  superior 
genius  for  great  undertakings  the  dictates  of  prudence 
and  his  own  sober  judgment.  Roebuck,  having  been 
bred  in  the  medical  school  of  Edinburgh,  had  science, 


izecy  Google 


366  RAMBLE   IN   ENGLAND. 

and  particularly  the  skill  of  applying  chemistiy  to  the 
useful  arts. 

Ironworks  were  but  recent  in  Scotland,  and  Boe- 
buck  had  visited  them  all,  and  every  station  ■where 
they  could  be  erected,  and  had  found  that  Carron  was 
by  far  the  best,  which,  if  they  did  not  occupy  imme- 
diately, some  other  company  would,  and  they  must 
remain  in  the  background  for  ever.  This  idea  dazzled 
and  overpowered  the  judicious  mind  of  Garbett,  which 
had  been  contented  with  the  limited  project  of  avail- 
ing themselves  of  the  populations  of  Musselburgh  and 
Fisherrow,  and  with  the  aid  of  Lord  Milton,  to  whom 
I  had  introduced  him,  to  begin  an  ironwork  on  a 
small  scale  on  the  Magdalene  Burn,  and  introducing 
the  manufactures  of  Birmingham  at  Fisherrow.  This 
was  highly  gratifying  to  Milton,  who  would  have  lent 
his  credit,  and  given  the  labours  of  his  then  active 
mind,  to  bring  it  to  perfection. 

Samuel  Garbett  was  truly  a  very  extraordinary 
man.  He  had  been  an  ordinary  worker  in  brass 
at  Birmingham,  and  had  no  education  farther  than 
writing  and  accounts ;  but  ho  was  a  man  of  great 
acuteness  of  genius  and  extent  of  understanding.  He 
had  been  at  first  distinguished  from  the  common 
workmen  by  inventing  some  stamp  for  shortening 
labour.  He  was  soon  taken  notice  of  by  a  Mr  HoUis, 
a  great  merchant  in  London,  who  employed  him  as 
his  agent  for  purchasing  Birmingham  goods.  This 
brought  him  into  notice  and  rank  among  his  towns- 
men ;  and  the  more  he  was  known,  the  more  he  was 


izecy  Google 


RAMBLE  1»   ENGLAKD.  367 

esteemed.  Let  me  observe  once  for  all,  that  I  have 
known  no  person  but  one  more  of  such  strong  and 
lively  feelinga,  of  such  a  fair,  candid,  and  honourable 
heart,  and  of  such  quick  and  ardent  conceptions,  who 
still  retained  the  power  of  cool  and  deliberate  judg- 
ment before  execution.  I  had  been  much  in  his  way 
when  he  came  first  to  Prestonpans  about  the  year 
'51  or  '52,  and  had  distinguished  him  and  attracted 
his  notice.  Ue  knew  all  the  wise  methods  of  manag- 
ing mea,  and  was  sensible  that  he  could,  not  expect 
to  have  the  most  faithful  workmen  unless  he  con- 
sulted the  mimster.  To  obtain  this  aid  he  paid  all 
due  respect  to  my  father,  and,  though  of  the  Church 
of  England,  regularly  attended  the  church,  and  in- 
deed made  himself  agreeable  to  the  whole  parish,  high 
and  low.  Roebuck,  though  a  scholar  and  of  an  in- 
ventive genius,  was  vain  and  inconstant,  and  an  end- 
less projector,  so  that  the  real  executive  and  manag- 
ing power  lay  in  Garbett. 

He  received  us  with  open  hospitality,  and  we  were 
soon  convinced  we  were  welcome  by  the  cordiality  of 
his  wife  and  daughter  (afterwards  Mrs  Gascoign),  who 
lodged  the  whole  company  but  me,  who,  being  their 
oldest  acquaintance,  they  took  the  liberty  to  send  to 
a  friend's  house.  HithCTto  they  had  lived  in  a  very 
moderate  style,  but  for  his  Scotch  friends  Garbett  had 
provided  very  good  claret,  and  for  the  time  we  stayed 
his  table  was  excellent,  though  at  that  time  tboy 
had  only  one  maid  and  a  blind  lad  as  servants.  This 
last  was  a  wonder,  for  he  did  all  the  work  of  a  man. 


oy  Google 


368  BASKEKVILLE   THE   PRIKTER. 

and  even  brewed  the  ale,  (but)  that  of  serving  at 
table  ;  and  for  thia,  Garbett  [provided]  according  to 
the  custom  of  the  place,  where  no  man  was  then 
ashamed  of  frugality.  He  made  Patrick  Downy,  who 
was  then  an  apprentice,  stand  at  our  backs.  Patrick 
afterwards  married  the  maid,  who  was  the  mistress's 
cousin ;  was  sent  down  to  Preetonpans  as  an  overseer, 
and  was  at  last  taken  in  as  a  partner :  such  was  the 
primitive  state  of  Birmingham  and  other  manufactur- 
ing towns,  and  such  encouragement  did  they  then  give 
to  industry.  Sed  tandem  Iwcuria  inaibuit.  Few 
men  have  I  ever  known  who  united  together  more  of 
the  prime  qualities  of  head  and  heart. 

AVe  passed  the  next  day  after  our  arrival  in  visit- 
ing the  manufactures  at  Birmingham,  though  it  was 
with  difficulty  I  could  persuade  our  poet  to  stay,  by 
suggesting  to  him  how  uncivil  his  sudden  departure 
would  appear  to  our  kind  landlord.  I  got  him,  bow- 
ever,  to  go  through  the  tedious  detail,  tUl  at  last  he 
said  "  that  it  seemed  there  as  if  God  had  created  man 
only  for  making  buttons."  Next  morning,  after  break- 
fast. Home  set  out  for  Admiral  Smith's,  his  old  Mend, 
who,  being  a  natural  son  of  Sir  Thomas  Littleton,  had 
buUt  himself  a  good  house  in  the  village  close  by 
Hagley,  the  seat  of  Lord  Littleton.  We  who  were  left, 
passed  the  day  in  seeing  what  remained  unseen  at  Bir- 
mingham, particularly  the  BaskCTville  press,  and  Bas- 
kerville  himself  who  was  a  great  curiosity.  His  house 
was  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  town,  and,  in  its  way, 
handsome  and  elegant.    What  struck  us  most  was  his 


izecy  Google 


LITTLETON   AND   SHENSTONE.  369 

first  kitchen,  which  was  most  completely  furnished 
with  everything  that  could  be  wanted,  kept  as  clean 
and  bright  as  if  it  had  come  straight  from  the  shop, 
for  it  was  used,  and  the  fineness  of  the  kitchen  was 
a  great  point  in  the  family ;  for  they  received  their 
company,  and  there  were  we  entertained  with  coffee 
and  chocolate.  Baskcrville  was  on  hands  with  his 
folio  Bible  at  this  time,  and  Garbctt  insisted  on 
being  allowed  to  subscribe  for  Home  and  Eobertson. 
Home's  absence  afflicted  him,  for  he  had  seen  and 
heard  of  the  tragedy  ofDotiglas.  Robertson  hitherto 
had  no  name,  and  the  printer  said  bluntly  that  he 
would  rather  have  one  subscription  to  his  work  of  a 
man  like  Mr  Home,  than  an  hundred  ordinary  men.  He 
dined  with  us  that  day,  and  acquitted  himself  so  well 
that  Eobertson  pronotmced  him  a  man  of  g^iius,  while 
James  Adam  and  I  thought  him  but  a  prating  pedant. 
On  agreement  with  John  Home,  we  set  out  for 
Lord  Littleton's,  and  were  to  take  the  Leasowes, 
Shenstone's  place,  in  our  way.  Shenstone's  was  three 
or  four  miles  short  of  Littleton's.  "We  called  in  there 
on  our  way,  and  walked  over  all  the  grounds,  which 
were  findy  laid  out,  and  which  it  is  needless  to 
describe.  The  want  of  water  was  obvious,  but  the 
ornaments  and  mottoes,  and  names  of  the  groves, 
were  appropriata  Garbett  was  with  us,  and  we  had 
[seen]  most  of  the  place  before  Shenstone  was  dressed, 
who  was  going  to  dine  with  Admiral  Smith,  "We 
left  one  or  two  of  the  principal  walks  for  him  to 
show  us.  At  the  end  of  a  high  walk,  from  whence 
2  a 


izecy  Google 


370  LITTLETON  AND  8HEN8TONE. 

we  saw  far  into  Gloster  and  Shrop  shires,  I  met  with 
what  struck  me  most, — that  was  an  emaciated  pale 
young  woman,  evidently  in  the  last  stage  of  a  con- 
sumption. She  had  a  most  interesting  appearance, 
with  a  little  girl  of  nine  or  ten  years  old,  who  had  led 
her  there.  Shenstone  went  up  and  stood  for  some 
time  conversing  with  her,  till  we  went  to  the  end  of 
the  walk  and  returned :  on  some  of  us  taking  an 
interest  in  her  appearance,  he  said  she  was  a  very 
sickly  neighbour,  to  whom  he  had  lent  a  key  to  his 
walks,  as  she  delighted  in  them,  though  now  not  able 
to  use  it  much.  The  most  beautifid  inscription  he 
afterwards  wrote  to  the  memory  of  Maria  Dolman  put 
me  in  mind  of  this  young  woman ;  but,  if  I  remember 
right,  she  was  not  the  person.  It  is  to  me  the  most 
elegant  and  interesting  of  all  Shenstone's  works. 

We  set  all  out  for  Admiral  Smith's,  and  had  Mr 
Shenstone  to  ride  with  us.  His  appearance  surprised 
me,  for  he  was  a  large  heavy  fat  man,  dressed  in  white 
clothes  and  silver  lace,  with  his  grey  hairs  tied  be- 
hind and  much  powdered,  which,  added  to  his  shyness 
and  reserve,  was  not  at  first  prepossessing.  His  reserve 
and  melancholy  (for  I  could  not  call  it  pride)  abated 
as  we  rode  along,  and  by  the  time  we  left  him  at  the 
Admiral's,  he  became  good  company, — Garbett,  who 
knew  him  well,  having  whispered  him,  that  though  we 
had  no  great  name,  he  would  find  us  not  common  men. 

liord  Littleton's  we  found  superior  to  the  description 
we  had  heard  of  it,  and  the  day  being  favourable,  the 
prospect  from  the  high  ground,  of  more  than  thirty 


oy  Google 


LITTLETON  AND  SHENSTONE.  371 

miles  of  cultivated  country,  ending  in  the  celebrated 
hill,  the  Wrekin,  delighted  us  much.  On  our  return 
to  the  inn,  where  we  expected  but  an  ordinary  repast, 
we  found  a  pressing  invitation  from  the  Admiral  to  dine 
with  him,  which  we  could  not  resist.  Though  a  good 
deal  disabled  with  the  gout,  he  was  kind  and  hos- 
pitable, and  received  Qarbett,  who  was  backward  to 
go,  very  civilly.  We  intended  to  have  rode  back 
to  Birmingham  in  the  evening,  but  in  the  afternoon 
there  came  on  such  a  dreadful  storm  of  thunder,  ac- 
companied with  incessant  rain,  as  made  the  Admi- 
ral insist  on  our  lodging  all  night  with  him.  With 
this  we  complied ;  but  as  he  had  no  more  than  three 
spare  beds,  James  Adam  and  Garbett  were  to  go  to 
the  inn.  Finding  an  interval  of  fair  weather  by 
eight  o'clodf,  they  rode  to  Birmingham,  aa  Garbett 
was  obliged  to  be  home. 

After  supper,  the  Admiral  made  us  a  spacious  bowl 
of  punch  with  his  own  hand,  a  composition  on  which 
he  piqued  himself  not  a  little,  and  for  which  John 
Home  extolled  him  to  the  skies.  This  nectar  circu- 
lated fast,  and  with  the  usual  effect  of  opening  the 
hearts  of  the  company,  and  making  them  speak  out. 
It  was  on  this  occasion  that  Home  said  to  the  Ad- 
miral, that,  knowing  what  he  knew  by  conversing 
with  him  at  Leith,  he  was  very  much  surprised  when 
he  recommended  Byng  to  mercy.  "  You  should  have 
known,  John,  that  I  could  never  all  my  life  bear  the 
idea  of  being  accessory  to  blood,  and  th^efore  I  joined 
in  this  recommendation;  though  I  knew  that  by  doing 


izecy  Google 


372  A  RIDE  TO  SCOTLAMD. 

SO  I  should  run  the  risk  of  never  more  being  employed." 
This  was  a  fiill  confinnation  of  what  John  Home 
had  said  at  the  time  of  the  sea-fight  (p.  307).  This 
fine  punch  even  unlocked  Shenstone's  breast,  who  had 
hitherto  been  shy  and  reserved ;  for  besides  mixing 
freely  iu  the  conversation,  he  told  Home  apart,  that 
it  was  not  so  agreeable  as  he  thought  to  live  in 
the  neighbourhood  and  intimacy  of  Lord  Littleton, 
for  he  had  defects  which  the  benevolence  of  his  gene- 
ral manners  concealed,  which  made  him  often  wish 
that  he  had  lived  at  an  hundred  miles'  distance.  AVhen 
Home  told  me  this,  I  very  easily  conceived  that  the 
pride  of  a  patron,  joined  to  the  jealousy  of  a  rival 
poet,  must  often  produce  effects  that  might  prove 
intolerable.  We  returned  to  Birmingham  next  morn- 
ing, and,  with  the  most  affectionate  sense  of  the 
kindness  of  our  landlord  and  his  family,  we  set  out 
on  our  journey  north  next  morning.  I  have  forgot 
to  mention  that  we  supped  the  last  night  with  Dr 
Eoebuck,  who,  though  a  very  clever  and  ingenious 
man,  was  far  behind  our  friend  in  some  of  the  most 
respectable  qualities. 

"We  kept  on  through  a  middle  road  by  Lichfidd  and 
Burton-on-Trent,  where  we  could  get  no  drinkable 
ale,  though  we  threw  ourselves  there  on  purpose  ;  and 
next  day,  dining  at  Matlock,  we  were  delighted  with 
the  fine  ride  we  had  through  a  vale  similar  but  of 
more  amenity  than  any  we  had  seen  in  the  highlands. 
We  took  the  bath,  too.  which  pleased  and  refreshed 
us  much,  for  the  day  was  sultry.    We  went  at  night 


oy  Google 


A  EIDB  TO  SCOTLAND.  373 

to  Endsor  Inn,  opposite  Chatsworth,  the  Duke  of  De- 
vonshire's fine  house,  which  we  visited  in  the  morning, 
with  much  admiration  both  of  the  structure,  orna- 
ments, and  situation.  We  ascended  a  wild  moor,  and 
got  to  Sheffield  to  dinner,  where,  as  we  declined  visit- 
ing a  brother  of  Dr  Roebuck's,  on  whom  Garbett  had 
^ven  us  a  note  of  credit,  we  sent  his  letter  to  him 
and  went  on.  Next  day  we  saw  Rockingliam  or 
Wentworth  Castle  in  our  way,  and  became  satisfied 
with  sights,  so  that  we  turned  no  more  ofi*  our  road 
till  we  came  to  Ripon,  where  we  could  not  resist  the 
desire  of  visiting  Studley  Park,  then  a  great  object  of 
curiosity  to  all  people  from  our  country,  as  it  was 
then  the  nearest  fine  place.  Alnwick  Castle  had  not 
then  been  repaired  or  beautified.  After  we  had  left 
Sheffield,  where  we  might  have  got  money,  we  dis- 
covered that  we  were  like  to  run  short,  for  Dr  Robert- 
son, unlike  his  usual  prudence,  had  only  put  two 
guineas  in  his  pocket,  trusting  to  the  full  purse  of  his 
cousin,  James  Adam,  who  had  taken  no  more  than  he 
computed  would  pay  the  fourUi  part  of  our  expense. 
Home  and  I  had  done  the  same.  I  was  treasurer,  and 
at  Leeds,  I  believe,  I  demanded  a  contribution,  when 
it  was  found  that,  by  Robertson's  deficiency  and  our 
purchasing  some  goods  at  Birmingham  with  the  com- 
mon stock,  I  was  sensible  we  would  run  out  before 
we  came  to  Newcastla  This  led  ns  to  inferior  inns, 
which  cost  us  as  dear  for  much  inferior  entertainment. 
We  held  out  till  we  passed  Durham,  which  we  did 
by  keeping  to  the  west  of  that  city,  and  saving  two 


oy  Google 


374i  A  RIDE  TO  SCOTLAND. 

miles,  having  made  our  meal  at  [  ],  which  Home 
knew  to  be  a  good  house.  From  thence  we  might 
have  got  early  into  Newcastle,  had  we  not  been 
seduced  by  a  horse-race  we  met  with  near  Chester- 
le-Streefc.  This  we  could  not  resist,  as  some  of  us 
had  never  seen  John  Bull  at  his  favourite  amusement. 
There  was  a  great  crowd,  and  the  Mrs  and  Misses 
Bull  made  a  favourite  part  of  the  scene,  their  equi- 
pages being  single  and  double  horses,  sometimes  triple, 
and  many  of  them  ill  mounted,  and  yet  all  of  them 
with  a  keenness,  eagerness,  violence  of  motion  and 
loadness  of  vociferation,  that  appeared  like  madness 
to  us,  for  we  thought  them  in  extreme  danger,  by  their 
crossing  and  justling  in  all  directions  at  the  full  gal- 
lop, and  yet  none  of  them  fell  Having  tired  our 
horses  with  this  diversion,  we  were  obliged  to  halt  at" 
an  inn  to  give  them  a  little  com,  for  we  had  been  four 
hours  on  horseback,  and  we  had  nine  miles  to  New- 
castle. Besides  com  to  five  horses,  and  a  bottle  of 
porter  to  our  man  Anthony,  I  had  just  two  shillings 
remaining ;  but  I  could  only  spare  one  of  them,  for  we 
had  turnpikes  to  pay,  and  so  called  for  a  pint  of  port, 
which,  mixed  with  a  quart  of  water,  made  a  good 
drink  for  each  of  us.  Onr  horses  and  their  riders 
being  both  jaded,  it  was  ten  o'clock  before  we  arrived 
at  Newcastle  ;  there  we  got  an  excellent  supper,  &c, 
and  a  good  night's  sleep.  I  sent  for  Jack  Widdrington 
when  at  breakfest,  who  immediately  gave  us  what 
money  we  wanted  ;  and  we,  who  had  been  so  penurious 
for  three  days,  became  suddenly  extravagant.    Adam 


oy  Google 


A  EIDB  TO  SCOTLAND.  875 

bought  a  £20  horse,  and  the  rest  of  us  what  trinkets 
we  thought  we  wanted — ^Robertson  for  hia  wife  and 
children  at  Gladsmuir,  and  Home  and  I  for  the  chil- 
dren at  Polwarth  manse.  As  we  drew  nearer  home, 
our  motion  became  accelerated  and  our  conversation 
duller :  we  had  been  in  two  parties,  which  were  formed 
about  five  or  six  miles  from  London  ;  for  having  met 
with  a  cow,  with  a  piece  of  old  flannel  tied  about  one 
of  her  horns,  pasturing  on  a  very  wide  lane  on  the 
road,  Home  and  Eobertson  made  a  sudden  tack  to  the 
left,  to  be  out  of  reach  of  this  furious  wild  beast : 
I  jeered  them,  and  asked  of  what  they  were  afraid. 
They  s^d  a  mad  cow — did  I  observe  the  warning 
given  by  cloth  upon  her  horn  1  "  Yes,"  says  I,  "  but 
that  is  only  because  her  horn  was  hurt ;  did  you  not  see 
how  quiet  she  was  when  I  passed  her  ? "  Adam  took 
my  part,  and  the  controversy  lasted  all  the  way  down, 
when  we  had  nothing  else  to  talk  of.  There  were  so 
many  diverting  scenes  occurred  in  the  course  of  our 
journey,  that  we  often  regretted  since  that  we  had  not 
drawn  a  journal  of  it.  Our  debates  about  trifles  were 
infinitely  amusing.  Our  man  Anthony  was  at  once 
a  source  of  much  jangling  and  no  small  amusement 
He  was  never  ready  when  we  mounted,  and  went 
slowly  on,  but  he  was  generally  half  a  mile  behind 
us,  and  we  had  to  halt  when  we  wanted  anything.  I 
had  got  a  hickory  stick  from  Jackson,  not  worth  Is.  6d., 
which  I  would  have  left  at  the  first  stage  had  not 
Home  and  Robertson  insisted  on  my  not  doing  it ;  but 
as  I  had  less  baggage,  and  an  equal  right  in  Anthony 


izecy  Google 


376  A  RIDE  TO  SCOTLAND. 

and  bis  horse,  and  waS'  treasurer  withal,  which  they 
were  a&aid  I  would  throw  up,  I  carried  my  point ; 
and  this  stick  being  five  feet  long,  and  sometimes,  bj 
Ijing  across  the  clothes-bag,  entangled  with  hedges, 
furnished  him  with  a  ready  excuse.  It  was  very 
warm  weather  in  May,  and  we  rode  in  the  hottest 
of  the  day  :  we  seldom  got  on  horseback  before  ten 
o'clock,  for  there  was  no  getting  Eobertson  and  Home 
to  bed,  and  Jamie  Adam  coald  not  get  up,  and  had, 
besides,  a  very  tedious  toilet.  Our  two  friends 
wanted  sometimes  to  go  before  us,  but  I  would  not 
pay  the  bill  till  James  and  Anthony  were  both  ready, 
and  till  then  the  ostler  would  not  draw  or  lead  out 
the  horses  from  the  stable.  As  I  perceived  that 
Bobertson  and  Home  were  commenting  on  all  my 
actions,  I,  with  the  privacy  of  James  Adam,  did  odd 
things  on  purpose  to  astonish  them  :  as,  for  instancy 
at  the  inn  near  Studley,  where  we  breakfasted,  hav- 
ing felt  my  long  hair  intolerably  warm  about  my 
neck,  I  cut  off  five  or  six  inches  of  a  bit  of  ra^ed 
green  galloon  that  was  hanging  down  from  a  chair- 
back  in  the  room,  with  which  I  tied  my  hair  behind. 
This  made  a  very  motley  appearance.  But  when  we 
came  to  take  horse,  in  spite  of  the  heat  I  appeared 
with  my  greatcoat,  and  had  fastened  the  cape  of  it 
round  my  head;  and  in  this  guise  I  rode  through  the 
town  of  Ripon,  at  the  end  of  which  I  disengaged 
myself  from  my  greatcoat,  and  my  friends  saw  the 
reason  of  this  masquerade.  Another  day,  between 
twelve  and  one,  riding  through  very  close  hedges  near 


oy  Google 


A  EIDB  TO  SCOTLAND.  377 

Comhill,  we  were  all  like  to  die  of  heat,  and  were  aUe 
only  to  walk  our  horses.  I  fell  behind,  pulled  my 
greatcoat  from  Anthony,  put  it  on,  and  came  np  with 
my  friends  at  a  hard  trot.  They  then  thought  that  I 
had  certainly  gone  mad,  but  they  did  not  advert  to 
it,  that  the  chief  oppression  of  heat  is  before  the  per- 
spiration. My  receipt  had  relieved  my  frenzy,  and  I 
reined  in  my  horse  till  they  came  up  to  me.  Soon  after 
we  left  CornhUI,  we  separated.  Home  and  I  stopped  at 
Polwarth  manse  for  a  night,  and  Robertson  and  Adam 
went  on  by  Longformacus  to  Gladsmuir,  Robertson's 
abode.  James  Adam,  though  not  so  bold  and  superior 
an  artist  as  his  brother  Robert,  was  a  well-informed 
and  sensible  man,  and  furnished  me  with  excellent 
conversation,  as  we  generally  rode  together.  Thus 
ended  a  journey  of  eighteen  days,  which,  on  the  whole, 
had  proved  most  amusing  and  satisfactory. 

We  got  to  oar  respective  abodes  by  the  22d  of  May, 
and  were  in  time  for  the  business  week  of  the  General 
Assembly,  of  which  Robertson  and  I  were  members, 
and  where  we  came  in  time  to  assist  in  sending  Dr 
Bl^r  to  the  New  Church,  to  which  he  had  a  right, 
and  of  which  a  sentence  of  the  Sjotod  of  Lothian  and 
Tweeddale  unjustly  deprived  him.  This  was  the  only 
occasion  on  which  he  ever  spoke  in  the  General  As- 
sembly, which  he  did  remarkably  wdL 


izecy  Google 


CHAPTER  X. 

1758-1768 :  AGE,  88-37. 

VISIT  TO  INVERABr — PAMPHLET  IW  DEFENCE  OV  CHATHAM — CHABLEfl 

TOWHSHEND    AKD   THE   HOaPrrALITIBB    OF   DALKEITn A   8TORT 

OF  A  HAUNCH  OF  VENISON WILKIE  OF  THE   "  KPIQONIAD" A 

COKPORATION    ROW    IN    DUMFRIES ANDREW    CBOSBIE  —  OSBIAN 

HAOPBBRSON — THE  HILtlU  PAUPHLET. 

It  was  in  the  month  of  August  this  summer  that 
Eobertson  and  I  passed  two  days  at  Minto  with  Sir 
Gilbert  Elliot,  who  was  very  open  and  communicative. 
About  the  middle  of  October  I  rode  to  Inverary,  being 
invited  by  the  Milton  family,  *ho  always  were  with 
the  Duke  of  Argyle,  and  who  generally  remained 
there  till  near  the  end  of  the  year.  I  got  the  first 
night  to  my  friend  Robin  Boglp's,  at  Shettleston,  near 
Glasgow,  where  I  found  him  very  happy  with  his  wife 
and  family.  He  was  an  honest,  gentlemanly  man,  but 
had  been  very  dissipated  before  his  marriage.  From 
Glasgow  I  went  all  night  to  Roseneath,  where,  in  a 
small  house  near  the  castle,  lived  my  Mend,  Miss  Jean 
Campbell  of  Carrick,  with  her  mother,  who  was  a 
sister  of  General  John  Campbell  of  Mamore,  aftei^ 
wards  Duke  of  Argyle,  and  father  of  the  present  Duke. 
Next  day,  after  passing  Loch  Long,  I  went  over 


izecy  Google 


VISIT  TO  INTEEAET.  S79 

Argyle's  Bowling-Green,  called  bo  on  account  of  the 
ToughneBS  of  the  road.  Ab  my  horses  were  not 
frosted,  and  the  ice  was  strong  I  had  to  walk  about 
six  miles.  This  made  me  late  in  getting  to  St 
Catherine's,  directly  opposite  to  Inverary.  I  wished 
very  much  to  get  across  the  loch,  as  it  was  but  six  in 
the  evening ;  hut  the  mistress  of  the  house,  wishing  to 
detain  me  and  my  servant  and  horses  all  night,  pre- 
tended that  the  boatmen  were  out  of  the  way  and  the 
oars  a-seeking,  and  that  I  could  not  get  across  that 
night.  This  vexed  me,  as  it  was  a  miserable  house  to 
sleep  in ;  however,  I  called  for  a  mutchkin  of  whisky, 
and  prevailed  with  the  good  woman  to  taste  it  with- 
out water.  As  she  became  so  familiar  as  to  ask  where 
I  was  when  I  was  at  home,  I  told  her  I  was  a  school- 
fellow of  M'Callum  More,  and  was  much  disappointed 
at  not  crossing  the  lake,  as  I  had  letters  of  importance 
to  deliver  to  his  Grace.  She  stared,  and  said  I  was  a 
stalwart  carl  of  such  an  age  :  my  grisly  undressed  hair 
favoured  this  deception.  I  added  that,  if  I  could 
cross  the  loch,  I  intended  to  leave  my  servant  and 
horses  all  night  to  her  care,  to  come  round  by  the 
head  of  the  loch  in  the  morning ;  but  if  I  could  not 
cross,  I  must  venture  to  ride  the  nine  mUes  round, 
dark  as  it  was.  She  took  another  sip  of  the  whisky, 
and  then  left  the  room.  In  five  minutes  she  returned 
and  told  me  that  the  boatmen  had  appeared  and  were 
seeking  for  their  oars,  and  would  be  ready  in  a  few 
minutes.  This  was  good  news  to  me,  as  I  knew  the 
iuD  at  Inverary  to  be  pretty  good,  as  I  had  been  there 


oy  Google 


380  VISIT  TO  INTEEAEY. 

two  nights  when  I  went  to  their  country,  in  1754, 
with  Jamie  Cheap  of  Sauchie.  I  was  very  soon  sum- 
moned to  the  boat,  and  after  recommending  my  man, 
John  M'Lacblan,  to  the  care  of  the  landlady,  I  bid 
her  farewell.  "We  got  very  soon  over,  the  night  being 
calm,  and  the  distance  not  much  more  than  two 
miles. 

1  did  not  go  that  night  to  the  Duke's  house,  as  1 
knew  I  could  not  have  a  bed  there  (as  he  had  not  yet 
got  into  the  Castle),  but  I  went  in  the  morning,  and 
was  very  politely  received,  not  only  by  the  Milton 
family,  but  by  the  Duke  and  his  two  cousins,  the  pre- 
sent Duke,  and  his  brother  Lord  Frederick,  who  were 
there.  His  Grace  told  me  immediately  that  Miss 
Fletcher  had  made  him  expect  my  visit,  and  that  he 
was  Borry  he  could  not  offer  me  lodging,  but  that  he 
would  hope  to  see  me  every  day  to  breakfast,  dinner, 
and  supper. 

It  would  be  quite  superfluous  to  say  anything  here 
of  the  character  of  Archibald,  Duke  of  Argyle,  as  the 
character  of  that  illustrious  person,  both  as  a  states- 
man and  an  accomplished  gentleman  and  scholar,  is 
perfectly  known.  I  was  told  that  he  was  a  great 
humorist  at  Inverary,  and  that  you  could  neither 
drink  his  health  nor  ask  him  how  he  did  without  dis- 
obliging ;  but  this  was  exaggerated.  To  be  sure,  he 
waved  ceremony  very  much,  and  took  no  trouble  at 
table,  and  would  not  let  himself  be  waited  for,  and  came 
in  when  he  pleased,  and  sat  down  on  the  chair  that  was 
loft,  which  was  neither  at  the  head  nor  foot  of  the 


oy  Google 


VISIT  TO  INVEEAET.  381 

table.  But  he  cured  me  of  all  constraint  the  first 
day,  for  in  hia  first  or  second  glass  of  wine  he  drank 
my  health  and  welcomed  me  to  Inverary,  and  hoped 
that  as  long  as  I  stayed,  which  he  wished  to  be  all 
the  week  at  least,  I  would  think  myself  at  home. 
Though  he  never  drank  to  me  again,  I  was  much  more 
gratified  by  his  directing  much  of  his  conversation  to 
me.  His  colloquial  talent  was  very  remarkable,  for 
he  never  harangued  or  was  tedious,  but  listened  to 
you  in  your  turn.  We  sat  down  every  day  fifteen 
or  sixteen  to  dinner;  for  besides  his  two  cousins  and 
the  Fletcher  family,  there  were  always  seven  or  eight 
Argyleshire  gentlemen,  or  factors  on  the  estate,  at 
dinner.  The  Duke  had  the  talent  of  conversing  with 
his  guests  so  as  to  distinguish  men  of  knowledge  and 
talents  without  neglecting  those  who  valued  them- 
selves more  on  their  birth  and  their  rent-rolls  than  on 
personal  merit.  After  the  ladies  were  withdrawn  and 
he  had  drunk  his  bottle  of  claret,  he  retired  to  an  easy- 
chair  set  hard  by  the  fireplace  :  drawing  a  black  silk 
nightcap  over  his  eyes,  he  slept,  or  seemed  to  sleep, 
for  an  hour  and  a  half.  In  the  mean  time,  Sandie 
M'Millan,  who  was  toast-master,  pushed  about  the 
bottle,  and  a  more  noisy  or  regardless  company  could 
hardly  be.  Milton  retired  soon  after  the  ladies,  and 
about  sis  o'clock  M'MUlan  and  the  gentlemen  drew 
ofi"  (for  at  that  time  dinner  was  always  served  at  two 
o'clock),  when  the  ladies  returned,  and  his  Grace 
awoke  and  called  for  his  tea,  which  he  made  himself 
at  a  little  table  apart  from  that  of  the  company.    Tea 


izecy  Google 


382  VISIT   TO   INVERAET. 

being  over,  he  played  bwo  rubbera  at  sixpenny  whist, 
as  he  did  in  London.  He  had  alw^ays  some  of  the 
ladies  of  hie  party,  while  the  rest  amused  themselves 
at  another  table.  Supper  was  served  soon  after  nine, 
and  there  being  nobody  left  but  those  with  whom  he 
was  familiar,  he  drank  another  bottle  of  claret,  and 
could  not  be  got  to  go  to  bed  till  one  in  the  morning. 
Jack  Campbell  of  Stonefield,  who  had  lately  married 
his  niece,  Iiady  Grace  Stuart,  came  to  us  on  the 
second  day.  I  may  add  that  the  provisions  for  the 
table  were  at  least  equal  to  the  conversation ;  for  we 
had  sea  and  river  fish  in  perfection,  the  best  beef  and 
mutton  and  fowls  and  wild  game  and  venison  of  both 
kinds  in  abundance.    The  wines,  too,  were  excellent. 

I  stayed  over  Sunday  and  preached  to  his  Grace, 
who  always  attended  the  church  at  Inverary.  The 
ladies  told  me  that  I  had  pleased  his  Grace,  which 
gratified  me  not  a  little,  as  without  him  no  preferment 
could  be  obtained  in  Scotland. 

The  Duke  had  a  great  collection  of  fine  stories,  which 
he  told  BO  neatly,  and  so  frequently  repeated  them 
without  variation,  as  to  make  one  believe  that  he  had 
wrote  them  down.  He  had  been  in  the  battle  of  She- 
lifimuir,  and  was  slightly  wounded  in  his  foot,  which 
made  him  always  halt  a  little.  He  would  have  been 
an  admirable  soldier,  as  he  had  every  talent  and  quali- 
fication necessary  to  arrive  at  the  height  of  that  pro- 
fession; but  his  brother  John,  Duke  of  Argyle,  having 
gone  before  him  with  a  great  and  rising  reputation,  he 
was  advised  to  take  the  line  of  a  statesman.    I  may 


izecy  Google 


THE  PITT  PAMPHLET. 


add  here,  that  when  he  died  in  spring  1762,  it  was 
found  that  he  had  marked  my  name  down  in  his  pri- 
vate note-book  for  Principal  of  the  College  of  Glasgow, 
a  body  in  whose  prosperity  he  was  much  interested, 
as  he  had  been  educated  there,  and  had  said  to  Andrew 
Fletcher  junior,  to  whom  he  showed  the  note,  that  it 
would  be  very  hard  if  he  and  I  between  us  could  not 
manage  that  troublesome  society.  This  took  no  effect, 
for  the  Duke  died  a  year  or  two  before  Principal 
Campbell,  when  Lord  Bute  had  all  the  power;  so  that 
when  the  vacancy  happened  in  the  end  of  1761,  or 
beginning  of  '62,  Professor  Leechman  was  preferred 
to  it^  who  was  the  Mend,  and  had  been  the  tutor,  of 
Mr  Baron  Mure. 

I  slept  all  night  at  Levenside,  as  I  had  promised  to 
Stonefield,  and  got  home  the  second  day  after. 

In  the  end  of  this  year,  1 758, 1  was  tempted,  by  the 
illiberal  outcry  that  was  raised  against  the  Minister, 
William  Pitt,  on  the  £ulure  of  General  Bligh,  on  the 
affair  of  St  Cas,  on  the  French  coast,  to  write  the 
pamphlet,  "Plain  Reasons  for  Removing  the  Right 
Honourable  William  Pitt  from  his  Majesty's  Councils 
for  ever,  by  0.  M.  Haberdasher ; "  which  was  pub- 
lished in  London  in  the*  beginning  of  1 759,  and  had  a 
great  run.  I  had  wrote  it  in  the  ironical  style  of 
Dean  Swift,  like  that  about  burning  the  tragedy  of 
Douglas,  and  thought  I  had  succeeded  pretty  well 
Besides  panegyric  on  that  great  man,  who  had  raised 
MS  from  a  very  low  state  of  political  depression,  not 
only  in  the  eyes  of  all  Europe,  but  in  our  own  opinion, 


izecy  Google 


S8ii  A  TABI£D   YEAB. 

to  make  rapid  progress  to  the  highest  state  of  national 
glory  in  which  ever  we  had  been, — it  contained  like- 
wise much  satire  against  the  Minister  who  had  re- 
duced us  80  low. 

After  I  returned  from  Inverary,  I  visited  my  friend 
Mrs  Weddeibam,  whom,  to  my  great  grief,  I  found 
low  and  dejected.  The  Captain  had  been  obhged  to 
join  his  regiment  in  the  West  Indies  in  the  spring, 
where  there  was  much  fighting,  and  she  had  not  heard 
of  him  for  some  tima  She  was  brought  to  bed  of  a 
daughter  early  in  December,  and  died  of  a  fever  at 
that  time,  universally  regretted,  and  never  to  be 
forgotten  by  those  who  were  intimately  acquainted 
with  her. 

Thus  ended  a  year  of  greater  variety  than  any  in 
my  life ;  for  though  I  bad  been  in  London  before,  and 
had  rode  to  Edinburgh  likewise  on  horseback,  yet  I 
liad  not  till  then  seen  such  a  variety  of  characters,  nor 
had  I  acquired  such  a  talent  for  observation,  nor  pos- 
sessed a  line  for  sounding  the  depths  of  the  human 
character  commensurate  to  that  purpose  as  I  now  had. 
On  this  tour  I  had  seen  great  variety  of  characters, 
with  many  of  whom  having  been  very  intimate,  the 
defect  was  in  myself  if  I  had  not  been  able  to  sound 
all  the  depths  and  shallows  through  which  I  passed. 

In  this  year,  1 759,  in  the  beginning  of  which  I  en- 
joyed the  success  of  my  ironical  pamphlet  in  defence 
of  William  Pitt,  afterwards  Lord  Chatham,  I  was  en- 
couraged to  take  my  pen  again  occasionally,  when 
anything  should  occur  that  suited  it.    Two  or  thrco 


izecy  Google 


SKETCHES   OF   CHARACTBR.  385 

years  after  this  period,  our  neighbourhood  was  en- 
riched by  the  residence  of  a  very  valuable  man,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Robert  Campbell  of  Finab,  a  man  of 
the  first-rate  understanding  and  ability.  He  had  been 
in  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's  war,  and  was  captain  of 
grenadiers  in  the  42d  regiment,  but  had  been  much 
disgusted  with  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  and  not  hav- 
ing good  health,  he  left  the  army,  I  think,  with  major's 
rank ;  and  some  time  thereafter  having  bought  the 
estate  of  Drumore,  he  came  to  live  there  with  his 
family.  As  he  had  been  at  college  with  me,  and  in 
the  same  class,  and  having  had  a  boyish  intimacy  to- 
gether, it  was  not  difficult  to  renew  my  acquaintance, 
and  to  make  it  more  intimate.  He  was  very  sociable, 
and  liked  golf,  the  sport  in  which  I  excelled  and  took 
much  pleasure.  The  Colonel  had  read  very  little,  but 
he  had  takeu  a  more  comprehensive  view  of  men  and 
affairs  than  almost  any  person  I  ever  knew.  Adam 
Ferguson  and  he  had  been  very  intimate,  and  had  a 
mutual  regard  for  each  other.  This  gentleman  was 
truly  a  great  addition  to  our  society.  He  had  been 
member  of  Parliament  for  Argyleshire,  and  was  Re- 
ceiver-General of  the  Customs  for  many  years  before 
his  death.  He  left  no  son  but  Lieutenant-General 
Alexander  Campbell  of  Monzie,  the  heir  of  his  father's 
sagacity  and  talents,  with  more  experience  in  war. 

There  was  nothing  very  material  before  the  General 

Assembly  of  this  year,  unless  it  was  an  explanation 

and  extension  of  the  Act  against  simoniacal  practices, 

which  had  become  necessary  on  account  of  some  re- 

2  B 


oy  Google 


SUG  3E£TCHE8  OF  CHARADTEB. 

cent  transactions.  Dr  ^Robertson  had  been  translated 
to  Edinburgh  this  year,  but  did  not  yet  take  any  par- 
ticular charge  of  the  affairs  of  the  Church,  because, 
not  being  yet  Principal,  he  could  not  be  a  member  of 
Assembly  every  year,  as  he  afterwards  waa 

My  father  had  gone  to  London  in  the  month  of 
March,  to  visit  his  daughter,  Mrs  Dickson,  and  I 
had  rode  with  him  to  Berwick.  He  was  very  much 
pleased  and  amused  at  London,  where,  besides  his 
daughter  and  her  infant,  his  first  grandchild,  he  had 
his  sisters,  Paterson  and  Lyon,  still  alive,  which  gave 
him  great  satisfaction.  As  he  had  never  been  in 
London  before,  he  enjoyed  it  very  much,  though  now 
in  his  seventieth  year.  But  being  fresh  and  vigorous, 
and  remarkably  cheerful,  he  was  a  very  great  favour- 
ite with  all  his  new  acquaintances.  But  as  he  would 
needs  ride  down  in  midsummer,  and  had  been  unlucky 
in  the  purchase  of  a  horse,  which  was  very  hard  set,  and 
still  more  so  in  his  choice  of  a  companion — one  of  his 
daughter's  disappointed  lovers,  who  paid  no  regard  to 
his  age  in  the  length  of  his  day's  journey — he  was  so 
much  overheated,  that,  as  my  mother  alleged,  the  fever 
never  afterwards  left  him,  which  concluded  his  life  in 
the  year  1 765,  on  the  8th  of  March.  A  more  kind  and 
affectionate  parent  and  relation,  or  more  benevolent 
neighbour,  or  more  faithful  pastor,  never  existed. 

It  was  near  the  end  of  summer  this  year  that 
Charles  Townshend  and  Lady  Dalkeith,  with  her 
daughter.  Lady  Frances  Scott,  then  above  eight  years 
of  age  [came  to  Dalkeith],  and  remained  there  for  two 


izecy  Google 


CHAELES  TOWNSHEND.  387 

moDtbs.  As  they  had  two  public  days  in  the  week, 
according  to  the  ancient  mode  of  the  family,  they 
drew  a  great  deal  of  company  to  the  house  ;  and  as  I 
was  considered  as  chaplain  in  ordinary  to  the  family, 
the  minister  of  Dalkeith  for  the  time  not  being  much  in 
favour,  I  was  very  frequently  there.  Charles  Townshend 
was  a  rising  stateeman,  who  aspired  at  the  highest  of- 
fices. A  project  he  conceived  after  he  came  here  much 
increased  our  intimacy :  this  was  to  offer  himself  a 
candidate  for  the  seat  in  Parliament  for  the  city  of 
Edinburgh.  The  state  of  the  city  at  that  time  made 
it  not  improbable  that  he  might  succeed.  A  Mr  For- 
rester, a  connselloT-at'law,  of  Irish  birth,  and  quite  a 
stranger  here,  had  been  recommended  by  Baron  Maule 
to  the  Duke  of  Argyle,  to  whom  he  was  known,  and 
to  Lord  Milton.  Forrester  was  by  no  means  popular 
in  EdinbiiTgh,  and  Charles  Townshend  bad  bewitched 
Lord  Milton  with  his  seducing  tongue,  which  made 
him  more  sanguine  in  his  project.  He  discovered 
that  I  had  much  to  say  with  the  Baron  aud  his  lady, 
whom  he  cajoUed  and  flattered  excessively. 

He  took  me  for  his  confidant  and  adviser  in  this 
business.  I  had  many  conferences  with  him  on  the 
subject,  and  endeavoured  to  convince  him  that  if  he 
was  not  master  of  his  wife's  uncle,  the  Duke  of 
Argyle,  as  he  pretended  to  have  his  own  uncle,  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle,  he  would  never  succeed ;  for 
though  Milton  seemed  to  govern  Argyle  in  most 
things,  which  was  necessary  for  the  support  of  his 
credit  as  well  as  for  the  Duke's  ease,  yet  there  were 


izecy  Google 


388  CHABLES  TOWHSHEND. 

points  in  which  Milton  could  not  stir  a  step  without 
the  Dnke,  and  in  my  opinion  this  was  one  of  them. 
On  this  he  fell  into  a  passion,  and  exclaimed  that  I 
was  so  cruBtj  as  never  to  be  of  his  opinion,  and  to 
oppose  him  in  everything.  On  this  I  laughed  full  in 
his  face,  took  to  my  hat,  and  said  that  if  this  was  the 
way  in  which  he  chose  to  treat  his  friend  and  adviser, 
it  was  time  I  were  gone,  for  I  could  be  of  no  use  to 
him.  He  calmed  on  this,  and  asked  my  reason  for 
thinking  as  I  did.  I  answered  that  the  Member  of 
Parliament  for  the  city  of  Edinburgh  was  of  great 
consequence,  as  whoever  held  that  was  sure  of  the 
political  government  of  the  country,  and  without  it 
no  man  would  be  of  any  consequence ;  that  his  lady, 
being  the  Duke's  niece,  was  against  him ;  for  as  in 
political  business  no  regard  was  paid  to  blood,  that 
very  circumstance  was  hostile  to  his  design ;  for  it 
was  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  Duke  of  Argyle 
would  allow  a  young  nobleman  from  the  south,  who 
had  made  himself  a  man  of  importance  in  the  north 
by  having  obtained  the  guardianship  of  the  heir  of 
one  of  our  greatest  families  in  his  minority,  to  take 
the  capital  of  Scotland  by  a  coup-de-main,  and  thereby 
undermine  or  subvert  his  political  interest,  for  with- 
out his  viceroyaJty  in  Scotland,  Hja  Grace  was  of  no 
importance  in  the  State.  I  added  that  it  was  impos- 
sible to  conceive  that  the  Duke  would  be  so  blind  as 
not  to  see  that  a  young  man  of  his  aspiring  temper 
and  superior  talents  would  [not]  think  of  making  him- 
self member  for  Edinburgh,  merely  to  show  his  address 


oy  Google 


CHABLES  TOWNSHEITD.  389 

in  political  canvassing,  to  lay  himself  at  the  feet  of  his 
wife's  uncle.  This,  with  much  more  that  I  repre- 
sented to  him,  seemed  to  open  his  eyes ;  yet  he  still 
went  on,  for  he  could  not  desist  from  the  pleasure 
of  the  courtship,  though  he  had  little  prospect  of 


He  came  at  last  to  be  contented  with  the  glory  of 
driving  Forrester  off  the  field,  which  was  not  difficult 
to  do ;  for  when  Charles  had  the  freedom  of  the  city 
presented  to  him,  and  a  dinner  given  him  on  the 
occasion,  he  lessened  the  candidate  so  much  In  their 
eyes  by  his  fine  vein  of  ridicule,  that  the  dislike  of 
the  Town  Council  was  increased  to  aversion.  But 
Charles,  while  he  effected  one  part  of  his  purpose, 
failed  in  another ;  for  though  he  drove  away  his  rival, 
he  gained  no  ground  for  himself  He  was  imprudent 
and  loose- tongued  enough  to  ridicule  the  good  old 
King  George  II.,  which,  though  it  was  not  unusual 
among  young  noblemen,  and  indeed  wits  of  all  ranks, 
yet  could  not  be  endured  by  the  citizens  of  Edin- 
burgh, who,  seeing  their  King  far  off  and  darkly,  were 
shocked  with  the  freedoms  that  were  used  with  Mm. 
Besides  this,  Milton,  who  had  been  dazzled  at  first  by 
Charles's  shining  talents  and  el^ant  flattery,  began  to 
grow  cold,  and  drew  off.  He  had  sounded  the  uncle, 
and  found  in  him  a  strong  jealousy  of  the  nephew, 
mixed  with  some  contempt,  the  effect  of  which  dis- 
covery was  the  gradual  alienation  of  Milton,  who 
had  really  been  enamoured  of  Charles,  and  perhaps 
secretly  thought  he  could  manage  him,  if  he  had  suc- 


.0.V  Google 


390  CHARLES    TOWNSHEKD. 

cess,  with  more  absolute  sway  than  lie  did  the  Duke 
of  Argyla 

After  Charles  returned  to  England  he  did  not  for 
some  time  desist,  and  I  had  much  correspondence 
with  him  on  the  subject ;  some  of  his  letters  I  have 
still,  but  I  kept  no  copies  of  my  own,  whicli  I  have 
since  regretted,  as  they  were  wrote  with  anxiety  and 
exertion.  When  I  was  in  London  in  1770,  there  was 
a  gentleman  who  pressed  mo  to  pay  a  visit  to  Lady 
Townshend,  his  mother,  who  having  many  letters  of 
mine  to  her  son,  was  desirous  to  see  me ;  but  not 
choosing  to  be  introduced  anywhere  by  that  gentle- 
man, I  missed  the  opportunity  of  recovering  my 
letters,  which  I  have  since  understood  are  burnt,  with 
all  Charles's  correspondence.  The  end  of  all  was  that 
Forrester  having  retreated  from  the  field,  having  no 
friend  but  Baron  Maule,  and  a  caveat  being  entered 
against  Charles  Townshend,  the  good  town  of  Edin- 
burgh were  glad  to  take  an  insignificant  citizen  for 
their  member. 

While  Mr  Townshend  was  here,  we  had  him  chosen 
a  member  of  the  Select  Society  in  one  sitting  (against 
the  rules),  that  we  might  hear  him  speak,  which  he 
accordingly  did  at  the  next  meeting,  and  was  answered 
by  Lord  Elibank  and  Dr  Dick,  who  were  superior  to 
liim  in  argument  and  knowledge  of  the  subject  Like 
a  meteor,  Charles  dazzled  for  a  moment,  but  the  bril- 
liancy soon  faded  away,  and  left  no  very  strong  im- 
pression, so  that  when  he  returned  to  England  at  the 
end  of  two  months,  he  had  stayed  long  enough  here. 


oy  Google 


CHABLES   TOWNSHEND.  391 

I  must  not  forget,  however,  to  mention  an  anecdote 
or  two  of  him,  which  will  explain  his  character  mora 
Nothing  could  excel  the  livelioesa  of  his  parts,  nor 
the  facility  with  which  he  made  other  people's  thoughts 
his  own  in  a  moment. 

I  called  on  him  one  morning  at  Dalkeith,  when  he 
said  I  had  come  most  apropos,  if  not  engaged,  for 
that  he  was  going  to  ride  to  Edinburgh  to  make 
some  calls ;  and  his  wife  being  engaged  to  dine  with 
the  Duchess  of  Gordon,  he  would  be  very  glad  of  a 
small  party  in  a  tavern.  I  agreed,  and  we  rode  to 
Edinburgh  together.  When  we  drew  near  that  city, 
he  begged  me  to  ride  on  and  bespeak  a  small  dinner 
at  a  tavern,  and  get  a  friend  or  two  if  I  could  to  join 
us,  as  he  must  turn  to  the  left  to  call  on  some  people 
who  lived  in  that  direction.  I  went  to  town  directly, 
and  luckily  found  Home  and  Ferguson  in  Kincaid's 
shop,  and  secured  them,  and  sent  a  cady  to  Eobertson 
to  ask  him  to  meet  us  at  the  Cross  Keys  soon  after 
two  o'clock,  who  likewise  came.  During  dinner,  and 
for  almost  an  hour  after,  Charles,  who  seemed  to  be 
fatigued  with  his  morning  visits,  spoke  not  a  single 
word,  and  we  four  went  on  with  our  kind  of  con- 
versation, without  adverting  to  Mr  Townshend's  ab- 
sence. After  he  had  drunk  a  pint  of  claret,  he  seemed 
to  awaken  from  his  reverie,  and  then  silenced  us 
all  with  a  torrent  of  colloquial  eloquence,  which  was 
highly  entertaining,  for  he  gave  us  all  our  own  ideas 
over  again,  embodied  in  the  finest  language,  and  de- 
livered in  the  most  impressive  manner.     When  he 


oy  Google 


392  A  HADNCH  OF  VENISON. 

parted  from  us,  my  Mends  remarked  upon  his  excel- 
lence in  this  talent,  in  which  Robertson  agreed  with 
them,  without,  perhaps,  being  conscious  that  he  was 
the  most  able  proficient  in  that  art. 

It  was  in  the  second  week  of  August  when  the  school 
at  Musselburgh  was  publicly  examined,  and  when  the 
magistrates  gave  what  was  called  the  Solan  Goose  Feast 
1  took  this  opportunity  of  inviting  Mr  Townshend  to 
visit  the  school,  and  to  dine  with  the  magistrates,  as 
he  was  tutor  to  His  Grace  the  Duke  of  Buccleueh, 
the  lord  superior  of  the  town.  Mr  Townshend  sent 
them  a  fine  haunch  of  venison,  and  Mr  Cardonnel, 
who  was  magistrate  at  this  time,  took  care  to 
assemble  a  brilliant  company  of  men  of  letters  to 
meet  Mr  Townshend,  among  whom  were  Home, 
Robertson,  Ferguson,  and  William  Wilkie.*  There 
was  a  numerous  company,  and  the  best  dinner  they 
could  make.  Cardonnel,  in  bis  anxiety  to  have  the 
venison  properly  roasted,  had  directed  the  cook  to 
put  a  paste  round  it ;  but  she  not  having  given  it 
time  enough,  it  came  up  to  the  table  half  raw,  to  the 
great  disappointment  of  the  company,  but  chiefly  of 
a  Colonel  Parr,  whose  serious  affliction  made  the  rest 
of  the  company  quite  easy  on  the  occasion,  for  he 
literally  wept  and  shed  bitter  tears,  and  whined  out 
what  an  unfortunate  fellow  he  was,  that  the  only 
haunch  of  venison  he  bad  met  with  in  Scotland,  and 


*  Aa  to  Cudannel,  see  above,  p.  219.     la  the  Wilkia  who  figOK*  in  the 
scene  the  reader  will  recogniae  the  groat  Gi«ek  schdar,  and  author  of  &» 


oy  Google 


T0WN8HEND  AND  WILKIE.  393 

the  only  one  he  had  any  chance  of  seeing  while  here, 
should  he  served  ap  raw!  This  set  the  whole  table  in 
a  roar  of  laughter,  and  reconciled  them  to  their  fate. 
After  a  little  time,  the  Colonel  recovered  from  his 
disaster  by  the  use  of  the  gridiron  to  the  venison, 
and  having  got  up  his  spirits  with  half-a-dozen  glasses 
of  good  claret,  began  to  talk  away  with  some  effect ; 
for  excepting  his  effeminacy  about  venison,  he  was 
not  a  bad  fellow. 

He  was  unlucky,  however,  in  one  of  his  topics ;  for, 
Wilkie  having  begun  to  open.  Parr,  addressing  himself 
to  him,  said  something  rude  about  the  professors 
of  St  Andrews  (of  which  university  Wilkie  had  very 
recently  been  chosen  a  member),  and  wished  they 
would  keep  their  students  and  professors  within  their 
walls,  for  that  his  corps  had  lately  enlisted  one  of 
them,  who  was  not  only  the  most  awkward  beast,  but 
the  most  unruly  and  debauched  rascal  tiat  ever  wore 
a  red  coat.  Wilkie,  who  was  indignant  on  this  attack, 
and  a  very  great  master  of  horse-play  raillery,  and 
in  scolding  feared  neither  man  nor  woman,  replied 
with  witty  and  successfid  tartness,  which,  however,  did 
not  silence  the  Colonel ;  when  the  company  took  sides, 
and  there  ensued  a  brawling  conversation,  which  lasted 
too  long.  Mr  Townshend  had  interposed,  with  an 
intention  to  support  Wilkie  against  his  countryman ; 
but  Wilkie,  being  heated,  mistook  him,  and  after  two 
or  three  brushes  on  each  side,  silenced  him  as  he  had 
done  the  Colonel ;  and  the  report  afterwards  went  that 
Wilkie  had  completely  foiled  the  English  champion  at 


izecy  Google 


394  TOWNSHEND  AKD   WILKIB. 

hia  own  weapons — wit  and  raillery.  But  this  was  a 
mistake,  for  Mr  Townshend  had  not  the  least  desire 
to  enter  the  lists  with  Wilkie,  but  whispered  to  me, 
who  sat  next  to  him,  that  as  Wilkie  grew  brutal,  he 
would  put  an  end  to  the  contest  by  making  no  answer. 
A  silence  ensued,  which  Cardonnel,  one  of  the  best 
toast-masters,  took  advantage  of  by  giving  us  three 
bumpers  iu  less  than  two  minutes  ;  all  contest  for  vic- 
tory was  at  an  end,  and  the  company  united  again. 
Townshend  said  to  me  afterwards,  when  he  came  to 
take  his  carriage  at  my  house,  that  he  had  never  met 
with  a  man  who  approached  so  near  the  two  extremes 
of  a  god  and  a  brute  as  Wilkie  did. 

Soon  after  this,  Mr  Townshend,  and  the  Countess 
and  her  daughter  Lady  Frances  Scott,  set  out  for 
London.  This  was  a  very  clever  child,  whose  humour 
and  playfulness  Mr  Townshend's  good-nature  had 
to  encourage,  and  protect  against  maternal  discipUne 
carried  too  far.  He  continued  to  protect  and  instruct 
her,  and  frequently  employed  her  as  bis  amanuensis, 
as  she  has  frequently  told  me  since  ;  and  added,  that 
if  he  had  not  died  when  she  was.  only  sixteen,  he 
would  have  made  her  a  politician. 

In  the  middle  of  September  this  year  I  went  to  Dum- 
fries to  meet  my  friends,  as  I  usually  did,  and  to  accom- 
pany my  friend  Dr  Wight,  who  had  come  from  Dublin 
to  Dumfries,  and  forward  to  Musselburgh  to  visit  me. 
While  Wight  was  here,  we  supped  one  night  in  Edin- 
burgh with  the  celebrated  Dr  Franklin  at  Dr  Robert- 
son's  house,  then  at  the  head  of  the  Cowgate,  where 


oy  Google 


FBANKLIN. 


he  had  come  at  Whitsunday,  after  hia  being  translated 
to  Edinburgh.  Dr  Franklin  had  his  son  with  him ; 
and  besides  Wight  and  me,  there  were  David  Hume, 
Dr  CuUen,  Adam  Smith,  and  two  or  three  more.  Wight 
and  Franklin  had  met  and  breakfasted  together  in  the 
inn  at  [  ]  without  learning  one  another's  names, 

but  they  were  more  than  half  acquainted  when  they 
met  here.  Wight,  who  could  talk  at  random  on  all 
sciences  without  being  very  deeply  skilled  in  any, 
took  it  into  his  head  to  be  very  eloquent  on  chemis- 
try, a  course  of  which  he  had  attended  in  Dublin ;  and 
perceiving  that  he  diverted  the  company,  particularly 
Franklin,  who  was  a  silent  man,  he  kept  it  up  with 
CuUen,  then  professor  of  that  science,  who  had  im- 
prudently committed  himself  with  him,for  the  greatest 
part  of  the  evening,  to  the  infinite  diversion  of  the 
company,  who  took  great  delight  in  seeing  the  great 
Professor  foiled  in  his  own  science  by  a  novica  Frank- 
lin's son  was  open  and  communicative,  and  pleased 
the  company  better  than  his  father  ;  and  some  of  us 
observed  indications  of  that  decided  difference  of 
opinion  between  father  and  son  which,  in  the  American 
war,  alienated  them  altogether. 

On  our  journey  he  [Dr  Wight]  told  me  that  he  was 
heartily  tired  of  his  situation  as  a  dissenting  clergy- 
man, and  of  the  manner  of  life  in  Dublin,  which, 
though  social  and  convivial  to  the  last  degree,  yet  led 
to  nothing,  and  gave  him  no  heartfelt  satisfaction, 
there  being  but  a  very  few  indeed  with  whom  he  could 
unite  in  truly  confidential  friendship.    As  I  knew  that 


izecy  Google 


396  A   MDNICIPAL   OUTBREAK. 

the  University  of  Glasgow  were  resolved  to  vacate 
Mr  Kuat'e  professorship  if  he  remained  much  longer 
abroad,  and  as  I  happened  likewise  to  know  that  he 
would  not  return  during  the  life  of  Lord  Hope,  who 
was  in  a  slow  decline,  I  formed  the  plan  of  obtaining 
his  professorship,  which  was  that  of  History,  and  in 
the  gift  of  the  Crown,  for  Dr  Wight,  and  I  set  about 
to  secure  it  immediately.  This  was  easily  done,  for  I 
had  access  to  His  Grace  the  Duke  of  Queensberry,  not 
only  by  writing  to  him  myself,  but  by  interesting 
John  M'Kie  Koss  in  the  business,  with  whom  both 
Wight  and  I  were  related,  and  also  by  means  of  Sir 
Gilbert  Elliot  we  could  secure  Lord  Bute;  while  I, 
through  Lord  Milton,  could  gain  the  consent  of  the 
Duke  of  Argyle.  I  had  favourable  answers  from  every- 
body, and  had  no  doubt  of  getting  the  place  if  it  was 
vacated. 

Before  I  left  Dumfries,  I  was  witness  to  an  extra- 
ordinary riot  which  took  place  there  on  Michaelmas, 
the  day  of  the  election  of  their  magistrates.  Provost 
Bell  had  been  two  years  dead,  and  the  party  which  he 
had  established  in  power,  when  he  brought  them  over 
to  their  natural  protector,  the  good  Duke  of  Queens- 
berry,  being  desirous  to  preserve  their  influence,  did  not 
think  they  could  do  better  than  to  raise  John  Dickson, 
that  Provost's  nephew,  to  be  their  chief  magistrate.  As 
this  man  was  at  present  Convener  of  the  Trades,  who 
are  powerful  in  Dumfries,  and  was  popular  among 
them,  he  thought  his  ambition  would  be  easily  grati- 
fied. But  there  were  sundry  objections  to  this  measura 


izecy  Google 


A    MUNICIPAL   OUTBKEAK.  397 

Andrew  Crosbie,  advocate,  the  son  of  a  Provost  of 
that  name  who  had  been  a  private  supporter  of  Pro- 
vost Bell,  in  opposition  to  the  party  of  the  Tories, 
thought  this  a  proper  time  to  attempt  an  overturn  of 
the  present  magistrates  and  managers,  and  put  his 
own  friends  in  their  room,  who  would  either  be 
directed  by  Crosbie's  maternal  imcle,  Lord  Tinwald, 
then  Justice-Clerk,  and  far  advanced  in  years,  or  gain 
the  credit  and  advantage  of  governing  the  town  under 
the  Duke  of  Queensberry.  As  Crosbie  was  a  clever 
fellow,  and  young  and  adventurous,  and  a  good  in- 
flammatory speaker,  he  soon  raised  the  commons  of 
the  town  almost  to  a  pitch  of  madness  against  Dick- 
son.* On  the  day  of  election,  which  happened  to  be 
on  Saturday,  they  rose  in  a  tumultuous  manner,  and 
took  possession  of  the  stair  leading  up  to  the  Town 
Hall,  and  would  not  allow  the  election  to  proceed. 
But,  supposing  no  election  could  take  place  after 
the  day  was  elapsed,  when  twelve  o'clock  struck 
they  allowed  the  magistrates  and  Council  to  depart 
They  came  down  separately  and  by  backways  to  the 
Greorge  Inn,  where  Dr  Wight  and  I  were  waiting  to 
see  the  issue  of  this  day's  riot.  Dickson  had  married 
a  sister  of  Wight's  for  his  second  wifa  We  waited 
in  an  adjacent  room  till  the  election  was  over,  and 
then  joined  them  for  half  an  hour,  to  drink  the  health 
of  the  new  Provost 


*  Andreir  Crosbio  wu  a  diatiDguiiiheil  advocate,  in  great  practice ;  but 
Uttl«  ii  now  known  of  him  excejit  a  few  coaTivial  anecdotes.  Ea  is  lup- 
poned  to  be  the  prototyiie  of  Flcydel  in  Oity  Manneriag. — Eul 


D,  Google 


398  MACFHEilSON   AND  OSSIAN. 

The  Deputy-Sheriff  Kirkpatrick  had  come  down  from 
his  house,  tea  or  twelve  miles  off,  with  several  country 
gentlemen,  but  there  being  no  soldiers  in  the  town, 
had  not  attempted  to  disperse  the  mob  by  any  other 
method  than  remonstrance.  This  affair  ended  in  a 
very  expensive  lawsuit,  and  Dickson's  right  to  be 
provoBt  was  established.  Wight  was  on  his  return  to 
Dublin,  and  I  on  mine  home ;  so  I  took  leave  of  my 
friends  on  Monday,  that  I  might  see  our  grandfather, 
who  by  that  time  had  an  assistant. 

On  Tuesday  morning,  October  2,  on  my  return 
from  this  visit  to  Dumfries,  I  got  to  Moffat,  where  I 
knew  John  Home  was,  as  he  usually  passed  two  or 
three  weeks  every  season  there.  He  introduced  me 
to  M'Pherson  in  the  bowling-green,  as  I  have  nar- 
rated in  a  letter  to  the  Highland  Society.  He  was 
good-looking,  of  a  large  size,  with  very  thick  legs,  to 
hide  which  he  generally  wore  boots,  though  not  then 
the  fashion.  He  appeared  to  me  proud  and  reserved, 
and  shunned  dining  with  us  on  some  pretence.  I 
knew  him  intimately  afterwards.* 

The  Duke  of  Argyle  made  his  usual  visit  to  Argyle- 
shire  in  October,  and  stopped  for  a  week  or  two  at 
Brunstane,  Lord  Milton's,  as  he  now  seldom  occupied 
his  lodging  id  the  Abbey,  not  caring  to  be  troubled 

*  The  letter  referred  to  is  in  tiie  Heport  of  tiia  HigMand  Society  on  the 
authenticity  of  the  Poema  of  Oman,  [k  66.  He  states  th&t  Muphereon 
showed  some  unfinished  fragments,  and  continues — "Mr  Home  Imd  been 
highly  delighted  with  them ;  and  when  he  showed  them  to  me,  I  wm  per- 
fectly astonished  at  the  poetical  genius  displayed  in  them.  We  agi«ed  that 
it  was  a  precious  discovery,  and  that  aa  soon  as  possible  it  shoold  be  pnb- 
lished  to  the  world."— Ed. 


,1.0,  Google 


THE  HlLITtA.  399 

with  too  many  visitors  from  the  city  of  Edinburgh. 
I  was  sent  for  to  him,  and  passed  a  rery  agreeable 
day.  He  rallied  me  on  my  friend  Charles  Townshend'a 
attempt  to  steal  the  city  of  Edinburgh,  and  said  he 
was  not  a  very  dutiful  nephew.  His  Grace  knew 
perfectly  my  intimacy  with  him,  and  so  did  not  push 
the  conversation. 

It  was  after  this  that  I  was  persuaded  by  William 
Johnstone,  advocate,  now  Sir  William  Pulteney,  and 
Adam  Ferguson,  to  write  what  was  called  the  Mihtia 
Pamphlet,  under  the  signature  of  "A  Freeholder  of 
Ayrshire,"  which  I  chose,  because  that  was  said  to  be 
the  only  shire  in  Scotland  out  of  which  there  had  not 
issued  a  single  rebel  in  1 745.*  After  an  hour's  con- 
versation with  the  two  gentlemen  I  have  mentioned, 
I  undertook  to  write  the  pamphlet,  and  finished  it  in 
a  fortnight,  and  carried  it  to  Johnstone,  who  was 
highly  pleased  with  it,  and,  after  showing  it  to  Fer- 
guson, had  it  transcribed  by  his  own  clerk,  and  then 
shown  to  Robertson,  who  believed  it  to  be  of  John- 
stone's writing,  as  he  had  told  him  that  the  author's 
name  was  to   be  concealed.      Robertson  was  well 

■  The  pamphlet  here  referred  to  ia  called  "The  Question  relating  to  a 
Scoti  Militia  considered,  in  a  Letter  to  Uie  Lords  and  Gentlemen  -who  have 
concerted  the  form  of  law  for  that  establishment.  Bj  a  Freeholder."  The 
Act  which  placed  the  militia  of  England  nearly  in  ite  |a««ent  position,  had 
been  passed  by  the  exertions  of  the  auUior'a  friend,  CliuleB  Townshend,  in 
nS7.  When  a  proposal  for  extending  the  system  to  Scotland  waa  suggested, 
ministers  were  afraid  to  ann  the  people  unoDg  whom  the  insnrrection  of 
1746  had  occurred,  and  the  fend  between  Jacobite  and  Revohitionist  woa 
■till  fresh.  It  ia  curious  that,  for  a  reason  almost  identical,  Ireland  has  been 
excepted  from  the  Volonteer  organisation  of  a  century  later.  It  was  not 
nntU  1793  tbat  the  Militia  Acts  were  extended  to  Scotland.— Ed. 


izecy  Google 


400  THE  MILITIA. 

pleased,  though  he  took  no  great  concern  about  those 
kind  of  writings,  and  added  a  short  paragraph  in 
page  [  ],  which  he  laughingly  alleged  was  the  cause 
of  its  success,  for  great  and  unexpected  success  it 
certdnly  had ;  for  it  hit  the  tone  of  the  country  at 
that  time,  which  being  irritated  at  the  line  which  was 
drawn  between  Scotland  and  England  with  respect  to 
militia,  was  very  desirous  to  have  application  made 
for  it  in  the  approaching  session  of  Parliament.  Much 
honour  was  done  to  this  pamphlet,  for  the  Honourable 
Geoi^e,  now  Marquis  Townshend,  had  it  republished 
at  London,  with  a  preface  of  his  own  writing,  as  a 
Provost  Ferguson  of  Ayr  had  done  here.  I  had  like- 
wise a  very  flattering  note  from  Sir  GUbeit  Elliot, 
who  moved  for  the  Scotch  militia  in  the  next  session 
of  Parliament,  for  he  wrote  me  that  he  had  only 
spoken  the  substance  of  my  pamphlet  in  the  House, 
and  had  got  more  praise  for  it  from  friends  than  for 
any  speech  he  had  formerly  made ;  but  this  did  not 
happen  till  spring  1760,  when  a  bill  having  been 
ordered  and  brought  in,  was  rejected.  Eobert  Dun- 
das,  then  Lord  Advocate,  opposed  it  keenly,  and  it 
was  said  in  party  publications  that  this  speech  was  the 
price  paid  for  his  being  made  President  immediately 
after.  But  my  belief  is,  that  as  political  principles 
were  formed  in  the  school  of  the  disciples  and  fol- 
lowers of  Sir  Eobert  Walpole,  whose  ostensible  motive, 
if  not  his  governing  one,  was  a  fear  of  the  family 
of  Stuart,  Dundas  sincerely  thought  that  arming 
Scotland  was  dangerous,  though  he  rested  his  argu- 


fy Google 


THE   MILITIA.  401 

ment  chietiy  on  a  less  unpopular  topic — viz.  that  a 
militia  would  ruia  our  rising  manufactures,  Fer- 
guson had  published  a  very  superior  militia  pamphlet 
in  London  a  year  or  two  before,  in  which  all  the 
genuine  principles  of  that  kind  of  national  defence 
were  clearly  unfolded.  The  parties  here  were  so 
warm  at  this  time  that  it  was  necessary  to  conceal 
the  names  of  authors,  to  which  I  had  an  additional 
motive,  from  a  hint  of  Dr  Cullen's ;  for,  supping  one 
night  with  him,  Dr  Wight  being  only  in  company, 
after  praising  the  pamphlet,  he  added  that  he  did 
not  know  the  author,  and  was  glad  of  it,  for  he  who 
occasionally  saw  so  many  of  the  superior  orders,  could 
assure  us  that  those  pamphlets,  which  were  ascribed 
to  clergymen,  had  raised  a  spirit  of  envy  and  jealousy 
of  the  clergy,  which  it  would  not  be  easy  to  stand. 
As,  since  the  days  of  the  faction  about  the  tragedy  of 
Douglas,  three  or  four  of  us  were  supposed  to  be  the 
authors  of  all  the  pamphlets  which  raised  public 
attention,  we  sheltered  ourselves  in  the  crowd;  and  it 
was  a  good  while  before  the  real  writers  were  found 
out. 


izecy  Google 


CHAPTER  XI. 

1780-1783:  AGE,  Sfi-jl. 

HIS  UARRIAGB — BENTIUENTAL  RETR0BPECT8 — PRESENT  HAPPINESS — 
ADAM  FERQUSDN  AND  SISTER  PLQ  —  DEATH  OP  OEOROB  IL  AND 
TBB  DUEE   OF  ARGTLB — CHAKOB    IN    TDB    ADUINISTRATION    OP 

SCOTCH  AFFAIRS  —  NEWCASTLE    AMD   ITS  SOCIETY   IS  1780 THB 

EDINBURGH  POKER  CLUB — LORD  EUBAHK'S  SENTIMENTAL  ADVEN- 
TURES— SR  ROBERTSON  AND  THE  LEADERSHIP  OF  THE  CHURCH 
OF  SCOTLAND — HARROQATE  AND  THB  COMPANY  THERE— ANDREW 
MILLAR  THB  BOOKSELLER — BENJAMIN   FRANKLIN — LORD  CLIVE. 


This  year  [1760]  was  the  most  important  of  my  life, 
for  before  the  end  of  it  I  was  united  with  the  most 
valuable  friend  and  companion  that  any  mortal  ever 
possessed.  My  youth  had  been  spent  in  a  vain  pur- 
suit ;  for  my  first  love,  which  I  have  mentioned  as 
far  back  as  the  year  1735,  bad  kept  entire  posses- 
sion till  1753,  by  means  of  her  coquetry  and  my 
irresolution.  She  was  of  superior  understanding  as 
well  as  beauty.  In  this  last  she  would  have  excelled 
most  women  of  her  time,  had  she  not  been  the  worst 
dancer  in  the  world,  which  she  could  not  be  prevailed 
on  to  leave  off,  though  her  envious  rivals  laughed  and 
rejoiced  at  her  persevering  folly.  Though  she  had  a 
bad  voice  and  a  bad  ear,  she  was  a  great  mistress  of 
conversation,  having  both  wit  and  humour,  and,  with 


izecy  Google 


RETROSPECTS.  403 

an  air  of  haughty  prudery,  had  enough  of  coquetry 
both  to  attract  and  retain  her  lovera,  of  -whom  she 
bad  many. 

An  early  inclination  she  had  to  a  young  gentleman 
who  was  prevented  from  marrying  her,  and  was  soon 
after  killed  at  the  battle  of  Foiitenoy,  made  her  di£B- 
culc  to  please.  I  had  never  fairly  put  the  question 
to  her  till  about  the  year  1 752,  when  she  expressly 
refused  me.  This  made  me  lessen  the  number  of  my 
visits,  and  made  her  restrain  her  coquetrj'.  Soon 
after  another  came  In  my  way,  whose  beauty  and 
attractions  made  me  forget  the  former,  to  whom, 
though  she  was  inferior  in  sense  and  even  in  beauty, 
yet  being  ten  years  younger,  and  having  gaiety  of 
spirit,  I  became  deeply  enamoured,  and  was  in  full 
belief  that  I  had  gained  her  affections,  when  I  was 
informed  that  she  had  suddenly  given  her  hand  to  a 
young  man  in  every  respect,  except  in  birth  perhaps, 
beneath  her  notice.  In  both  those  ladies  I  believe 
their  vanity  prevailed  against  affection.  They  could 
not  think  of  being  wife  of  a  minister.  The  first 
attempted  after  this  to  ensnare  me  again,  but  I 
escaped.  To  have  done  with  her,  and  to  justify 
me — two  gentlemen  of  my  friends  addressed  her  ve- 
hemently, Adam  Ferguson,  and  Robert  Keith  the 
ambassador.  The  first,  who  pleased  her  much,  was 
rejected  for  the  same  reason  I  Wiis :  he  had  been  a 
clergyman,  and  though  in  a  more  lucrative  profession 
now,  it  was  not  higher.  Her  rejection  of  the  second, 
I  believe,  was  owing  chiefly  to  principle.     Though  he 


oy  Google 


40i  MARRIAGE. 

was  twenty-four  years  older  than  her,  his  rank  was 
an  attraction  which  balanced  that ;  but  she  could  not 
bear  the  idea  of  quarrelling  with  his  daughters,  some 
of  whom  were  her  companions,  and  not  much  younger 
than  herself.  At  last,  after  having  rejected  rich  and 
poor,  young  and  old,  to  the  number  of  half  a  score, 
she  gave  her  hand,  at  forty-five,  to  the  worst-tempered 
and  most  foolish  of  all  her  lovers,  who  had  a  bare 
competency,  and  which,  added  to  her  fortune,  hardly 
made  them  independent.  They  led  a  miserable  life, 
and  parted ;  soon  after  which  he  died,  and  she  then 
lived  respectably  to  an  advanced  age. 

I  owed  my  good  fortune  to  the  friendship  of  John 
Home,  who  pointed  out  the  young  lady  to  me  as  a 
proper  object  of  suit,  without  which  I  should  never 
have  attempted  it,  on  account  of  the  inequality  of  her 
age  and  mine,  for  she  was  then  j  ust  past  seventeen  when 
I  was  thirty-eight.  I  was  well  acquainted  with  her 
sister  and  her  as  children,  and  saw  that  they  were  very 
remarkable ;  the  eldest,  Sarah,  for  beauty  and  elegance, 
accompanied  with  good  sense  and  a  grave  and  reserved 
demeanour ;  the  second  for  an  expressive  and  lively 
countenance,  with  a  fine  bloom,  and  hair  of  a  dark  flaxen 
colour.  She  had  excellent  parts,  though  uncultivated 
and  uncommon,  and  a  striking  cheerfulness  and  viva- 
city of  manner.  After  nine  months'  courtship,  at  first 
by  silent  and  imperceptible  approaches,  and  for  three 
months  by  a  close  though  unwarlike  siege,  I  obtained 
her  heart  and  hand,  and  no  man  ever  made  a  happier 
conquest;   for,  with  a  supeiior  understanding  and 


oy  Google 


great  discernment  for  her  age,  she  had  an  ease  and 
propriety  of  manners  which  made  her  to  be  well  re- 
ceived, and  indeed  much  distinguished,  in  every  com- 
pany. Having  lost  her  father  and  mother  when  her 
sister  was  five  years  of  age  and  she  only  two — the 
father,  on  Christmas-day  1 744,  and  the  mother  on  the 
same  festival  in  1 745,  of  the  smallpox — each  of  their 
trustees  (for  they  were  co-heiresses  of  Heathpool  in 
Northumberland,  Kirknewton  parish,  then  only  X180 
per  annum),  Mr  Collingwood  of  Unthank,  cousin-ger- 
man  of  their  mother,  took  the  eldest  under  his  care ; 
and  Mr  William  Home,  minister  of  Polwarth,  who  had 
married  their  father's  sister,  Mary  Koddam,  had  the 
charge  of  the  youngest.  By  this  division,  Sarah,  the 
eldest,  had  seemingly  many  advantages  above  her 
sister,  for  she  lived  with  superior  people,  who  fre- 
quented, and  were  indeed  allied  to,  the  best  families  in 
their  county,  attended  the  best  schools  in  Newcastle, 
and  was  one  year  in  the  first  boarding-school  in  Edin- 
burgh ;  and  accordingly  turned  out  an  elegant  and 
well-bred  woman,  speaking  perfectly  good  English, 
without  the  roughness  peculiar  to  the  local  dialect, 
and  was  admired,  courted,  and  respected  wherever  she 
went.  Yet  Mary,  the  younger,  with  no  advantage 
but  that  of  living  with  an  aimt  of  superior  under- 
standing and  great  worth,  though  much  uneducated, 
and  having  only  one  year  of  the  Edinburgh  boarding- 
school,  soon  had  her  mind  enlarged  and  her  talents 
improved  by  some  instruction,  and  the  conversation 
of  those  who  frequented  ns,  insomuch  that  in  not 


izecy  Google 


406  MAKR1A.GE. 

more  than  oue  year  after  our  marriage,  ahe  appeared 
not  only  without  any  seeming  defect  in  her  educa- 
tion, but  like  a  person  of  high  endowments.  In- 
deed, the  quickness  of  her  parts  and  the  extent  of 
her  understanding  were  surprising,  and  her  talent 
both  in  speaking  and  writing,  and  in  delicacy  of  taste, 
truly  as  admirable  as  any  woman  I  ever  knew.  Add 
to  this  that  she  was  noble  and  generous  in  the  highest 
degree,  compassionate  even  to  weakness,  and,  if  her 
friends  were  in  distress,  totally  forgetful  and  negligent 
of  herself  I  do  not  think  it  is  possible  I  could  derive 
greater  satisfaction  from  any  circumstance  in  human 
life  than  I  did  from  the  high  approbation  wliich  was 
given  to  my  choice  by  the  very  superior  men  who 
were  my  closest  and  most  discerning  friends,  such  as 
Ferguson,  Eobertson,  Blair,  and  Bannatine,  not  merely 
by  words,  but  by  the  open,  respectful,  and  confidential 
manner  in  which  they  conversed  with  her. 

On  the  14th  of  October  was  made  the  important 
change  in  my  situation,  in  John  Home's  house,  in 
Alison's  Square,  when  he  was  absent  at  Lord  Eglin- 
toun's,  who  had  become  a  favourite  of  the  Earl  of 
Bute's,  very  much  by  John's  means.  He  was,  indeed, 
a  very  able  as  well  as  an  agreeable  man,  though  hia 
education  bad  been  sadly  neglected.  We  had  sundry 
visits  next  day,  and  among  the  foremost  came  Sir 
Harry  Erskine  and  Sfr  Alexander  Wedderbum.  I 
was  not  then  much  acquainted  with  the  first,  but 
as  he  was  older  than  mc  by  several  years,  and 
Fanny  Wedderburn,  of  whom  he  was  then  in  full 


izecDy  Google 


MARBIAQE. 


pursuit,  waa  as  much  older  than  my  young  wife,  I 
gueased  that  the  real  motive  of  thia  visit,  as  my  frieud 
"Wedderbum  seldom  did  anything  without  a  reason, 
was  to  see  how  such  an  unequal  couple  would  look  on 
the  day  after  their  marriaga 

We  remained  in  Edinburgh  till  Tuesday  the  2lBt 
of  October,  when  Baron  Grant's  lady  came  in  her 
coach  to  carry  us  to  Castlesteads,  some  necessary 
repairs  in  the  manse  not  being  yet  finished.  There  I 
had  the  pleasure  to  find  that  my  wife  could  acquit 
herself  equally  weU  in  all  companies,  and  had  nothing 
to  wish  for  in  the  article  of  behaviour.  We  went  home 
on  Saturday  morning,  and  the  Grants  followed  us  to 
dinner,  and  were  met  by  the  Cardonnels. 

While  I  was  busy  with  this  important  change  in 
my  domestic  state,  I  was  applied  to  by  a  friend  to 
write  a  satirical  pamphlet  in  my  ironical  style  against 
the  opposers  of  the  Scotch  Militia  BUI,  which  had  been 
rejected  in  the  preceding  session.  Being  too  much 
engaged  to  attempt  anything  of  that  kind  at  the  time, 
I  proposed  that  it  should  be  intrusted  to  Adam  Fer- 
guson, then  living  at  Inveresk,  preparing  his  aca- 
demical lectures.  My  Mend  answered  tiiat  he  was 
excellent  at  serious  works,  but  could  turn  nothing 
into  ridicule,  as  be  had  no  humour :  I  answered,  that 
he  did  not  know  him  sufficiently,  but  advised  him  to 
go  and  try  him,  as  he  would  undertake  nothing  that 
he  was  not  able  to  execute.  Tbia  happened  about  the 
month  of  August,  and  Ferguson  having  undertaken  it, 
executed  that  little  work  called  "Sister  Peg,"  in  t-ho 


oy  Google 


408  FERGUSON  AND  "SISTER  PEG. 

Style  of  Dr  Arbuthnot's  "  John  Bull,"  which  excited 
both  admiration  and  animosity.  The  real  author  was 
carefully  concealed,  though  it  was  generally  ascribed 
to  me,  as  I  had  written  two  small  pieces  in  the  same 
ironical  style.  The  public  had  no  doubt  but  that  it 
was  the  work  of  one  out  of  four  of  us,  if  not  the 
joint  work  of  us  all.  The  secret  was  well  kept  by  at 
least  ten  or  a  dozen  males  and  females.  This  pamph- 
let occasioned  a  ver)'  ludicrous  scene  between  David 
Hume  and  Dr  Jardine,  who  was  in  the  secret.  David 
was  a  great  blab,  and  could  conceal  nothing  that  he 
thought  for  the  honour  of  his  friends,  and  therefore  it 
had  been  agreed  to  tell  him  of  none  of  our  produc- 
tions, except  such  as  might  have  been  published  at 
the  Cross.  He  sent  for  Jardine,  whom  he  first  sus- 
pected of  beiug  the  author,  who  denyiug  his  capacity 
for  such  a  work,  he  fixed  on  me  (never  dreaming  of 
Ferguson) ;  and  when  Jardine  pretended  ignorance,  or 
refused  to  gratify  him,  he  told  him  he  had  written  it 
himself  in  an  idle  hour,  and  desired  Jardine  to  men- 
tion him  as  the  author  everywhere,  that  it  might  not 
fall  on  some  of  us,  who  were  not  so  able  to  bear  it. 
This  I  could  not  have  believed,  had  not  David  himself 
written  me  a  letter  to  that  purpose,  which  I  shall 
transcribe  in  the  margin.* 

His  Majesty  George  II.  died  on  the  25th  of  Octo- 
ber, which  put  the  whole  nation  in  moiiming.  John 
Home  came  to  town  for  a  night  or  two,  on  his  way  to 

*  31»e  letter  will  be  fonnd  in  the  hi}e  and  Corretpondcnet  of  Dasid 
Huihe,  iL  S8.— Ed. 


oy  Google 


THE  WIFE  8  C0NNECTI0M8.  409 

London,  with  Lord  Eglinton,  when  began  his  great- 
ness, for  he  might  really  have  been  said  to  have  been  « 
the  second  man  in  the  kingdom  while  Bute  remained 
in  power,  which  iniliience  he  used  not  to  his  own 
advancement  to  wealth  or  power — for  he  never  asked 
anything  for  himself,  and,  strange  to  tell,  never  was 
offered  anything  by  his  patron — but  for  the  service  of 
his  friends,  or  of  those  who,  by  flattery  and  appli- 
cation, acquired  the  title  of  such,  for  he  was  easily 
deluded  by  pretences,  especially  to  those  of  romantic 
valour.  The  celebrated  Colonel  Johnston,  afterwards 
Governor  of  Minorca,  owed  to  him  his  being  restored 
to  the  line  of  preferment  of  which  the  late  King  had 
deprived  him,  for  his  insolent  behaviour  to  a  country 
gentleman  in  the  playhouse ;  and  George  Johnstone 
likewise.* 

Towards  the  end  of  December  I  went  to  Folwarth 
with  Mr  Home,  my  wife's  uncle,  and  one  of  her 
guardians,  and  went  to  Unthank  to  visit  Mr  Colling- 
wood  the  other,  with  Forrester  the  attorney,  to  settle 
our  affairs — a  trusty  fellow,  who  had  already  made  a 
large  fortune,  and,  what  amused  me  much,  taken  the 
tone  of  a  discontented  patriot  so  strongly  against  the 
ministry  of  his  Grace,  that  they  were  obhged  in  a 
year  or  two  to  let  him  have  a  share  in  the  manage- 
ment. Al^ander  OoUingwood  of  Unthank,  Esq.,  the 
cousin-german  of  my  wife's  mother,  was  weak  and 

*  The  fonner,  Junea  Johnston,  became  luhaeqaeDtly  GoreniDr  of  Quebec. 
George  JohnttoDe  was  Goremor  of  Weet  Hlorido,  and  aatlior  of  ThaughU 


izecy  Google 


410  THE  WIFES   CONNECTIONS. 

vainglorious,  proud  of  his  family,  and  in  all,    and 
.  above  all,  of  his  wife,  whom  he  obliged  us  to  visit, 
and  whom  we  found  very  handsome  and  very  clever 
— too  much  80  for  the  squire. 

We  returned  by  Langton,  as  we  had  come,  where 
lived  Alexander  Davidson  and  his  wife — two  worthy 
people,  who  had  acquired  an  independent  estate  by 
farming,  which  had  not  been  frequently  done  at  that 
time.  [Heathpoolj,  our  estate,  lies  three  miles  from 
Langton,  south-west,  up  Beumont  Water,  and  is  a 
beautiful  highland  place.  I  had  not  been  absent 
above  five  or  six  days,  and  found  my  wife  at  my 
father's,  where  she  was  the  joy  and  delight  of  the  old 
folks.  At  that  time,  indeed,  she  was  irresistible  ;  for 
to  youth  and  beauty  she  added  a  cheerful  frankness 
and  cordiality  in  her  manner,  which,  joined  with  an 
agreeable  elocution  and  lively  wit,  attracted  all  who 
saw  her,  which  was  not  relished  by  my  old  flame, 
who,  in  the  midst  of  forced  praise,  attempted  a  species 
of  detraction,  which  was  completely  foiled  by  the 
good-humoured  indifference,  or  rather  contempt,  with 
which  it  was  received.  This  young  lady,  of  uncom- 
mon parts  and  understanding,  but  a  degree  of  vanity 
on  account  of  trifling  or'  imaginary  qualities,  ended 
her  career  at  last  in  a  very  exemplary  manner,  as  I 
have  before  stated. 

Early  in  this  year  (1761)  my  wife's  elder  sbter, 
Miss  Eoddam,  paid  us  a  visit,  and  remained  with  us 
till  she  was  married.  She  was  a  beautiful  and  elegant 
young  woman,  somewhat  taller  than  her  sister,  and 


oy  Google 


THE  WIFKS  CONNECTIONS.  411 

was  a  finer  woman  ;  but  she  was  grave  and  reserved ; 
and  though  she  had  good  sense,  and  was  perfectly 
hearty,  she  was  not  ouly  inferior  to  her  sister  in  point 
of  understanding,  but  in  that  lively  and  striking 
expression  of  feeling  and  sentiment  which  never  failed 
to  attract. 

They  were  knit  together  with  the  most  sisterly 
love,  in  which,  however,  the  younger  surpassed,  not 
having  one  selfish  corner  in  her  whole  soul,  and  being 
at  all  times  willing  to  sacrifice  her  life  for  those  she 
loved.  This  young  lady  soon  attracted  our  friend  Dr 
Adam  Ferguson's  warmest  addresses,  to  the  ardour  of 
which  she  put  an  end  as  soon  as  he  explained  himself, 
for,  with  a  frankness  and  dignity  becoming  her  ch&~ 
racter,  she  assured  him  that,  bad  she  not  been  invio- 
lably engaged  to  another  gentleman,  she  would  not 
have  hastily  rejected  his  addresses,  as  his  character 
and  manner  were  very  agreeable  to  her,  and  therefore 
prayed  him  to  discontinue  his  suit  to  her,  as  she  could 
not  listen  to  him  on  this  subject,  but  would  be  happy 
in  his  friendship,  and  the  continuance  of  a  society  so 
pleasing  to  her.  With  this  he  reluctantly  complied, 
but  frequented  our  house  as  much  as  ever  till  she  was 
maiTied. 

The  gentleman  she  was  engaged  to  was  John  Eras- 
mus Blackett,  Esq.,  the  youngest  brother  of  Sir 
Edward  Blackett,  Bart.,  of  Malfen,  in  Northumber- . 
land — a  man  of  large  fortune,  who  represented  the 
elder  branch  of  the  Blackett  family,  then  in  Sir 
Walter  Blackett  Coverley,  who  was  the  nephew  of 


oy  Google 


412  THE  WIFES  CONNECTIONS. 

the  late  Sir  William  Blackett  of  Newcaatle.  John  E. 
Blackett  wau  a  very  handsome  joxmg  man,  of  about 
thirty,  who  had  been  bred  at  Liverpool  with  Sir  [  ] 
Cunliffe,  and  was  now  settled  partner  with  Mr  Alder- 
man SimBon,  an  eminent  coal-dealer  in  Newcastle. 
John  Blackett  was  called  Erasmus  after  Erasmus  Lewis, 
who  was  secretary  to  Lord  Oxford  in  Queen  Anne's 
time,  and  an  intimate  friend  of  his  father's,  John 
Blackett,  Esq.  of  [  ],  in  Yorkshire,  who  never 

was  baronet,  having  died  before  his  uncle,  Sir  Edward 
Blackett.  John  Erasmus  was  at  this  time  a  captain 
and  paymaster  in  his  brother's  regiment  of  North- 
umberland Militia,  lately  raised,  and  quartered  at  Ber- 
wick since  March  or  April  1 760.  As  Miss  Boddam 
was  not  of  age  till  March,  the  marriage  was  delayed  tUl 
after  that  time,  when  she  could  dispose  of  her  moiety 
of  the  estate.  As  this  did  not  shake  Miss  Boddam, 
that  quieted  a  suspicion  which  some  of  her  friends  en- 
tertained that  he  meant  to  draw  off.  But  he  came  and 
visited  us  in  the  end  of  January,  when  every  shadow 
of  doubt  of  his  fulfilling  his  engagement  was  dissipated. 

I  was  only  afraid  that  a  man  so  imperfectly  edu- 
cated as  he  had  becD,  and  of  ordinary  talents,  could 
not  long  predominate  in  the  breast  of  a  young  lady 
who  had  sense  and  sensibility  enough  to  relish  the 
conversation  of  the  high-minded  and  enlightened  phil- 
osopher, who  had  enough  of  the  world,  however,  to  be 
entitled  to  the  name  of  the  Polite  Philosopher. 

I  returned  with  Mr  Blackett  in  the  b^inning  of 
Febniary  to  Berwick  and  Wooler,  where  I  met  the 


izecy  Google 


THE  WIPES  CONNECTIONS.  413 

trustees,  where  the  estate  was  let  to  Ralph  ComptOD, 
the  second  son  of  our  former  tenant,  for  the  usual 
term,  and  rose  from  X180  per  annum  to  £283.  Before 
we  parted,  Mr  Blackett  settled  with  me  that  he  would 
come  to  us  in  April,  and  complete  his  engagement.  He 
went  on  from  Alnwick,  and  I  to  the  roup  at  Wooler. 

He  came,  accordingly,  at  the  time  appointed,  from 
Berwick,  attended  by  a  brother  captain,  Edward 
Adams,  whose  mother  was  a  Collingwood,  a  grand- 
aunt  of  the  young  ladies.  They  came  first  to  my 
house  for  a  day,  and  went  to  Edinburgh,  where  we 
followed  tjiem  two  days  after,  where  the  young  couple 
were  married  by  Mr  Car  of  the  English  chapel,  as 
they  were  both  Episcopalians. 

The  day  after  the  marriage  Blackett  ^ve  us  a 
handsome  dinner  at  Fortune's,  for  which  he  only 
charged  half-a-crown  a-head,  and  said  he  then  never 
charged  more  for  the  best  dinner  of  two  courses  and 
a  dessert  which  he  could  set  down,  Mr  Ferguson 
dined  with  us.  Next  day  they  came  to  Musselburgh 
for  two  days,  and  then  departed  for  Newcastle  through 
Berwick,  where  the  regiment  still  was.  There  was 
one  thing  very  remarkable  of  that  regiment,  which, 
though  six  hundred  strong,  from  all  parts  of  the  county, 
yet  lost  not  one  man  for  one  je&c  and  four  months. 
So  much  for  the  healthiness  of  BerwidL 

My  youngest  sister,  Janet,  a  beautiful,  elegant,  and 
pleasing  young  woman,  was  married  at  London,  where 
she  had  gone  to  be  with  her  sister,  on  August  30th, 
1760,  with  Captain  Thomas  Bell,  a  nephew  of  Provost 


oy  Google 


414  THE  WIFES  CONMECTIONS. 

Bell's,  who  had  been  captain  of  a  trading  vesBel  in  the 
Mediterranean,  and  having  been  attacked  by  a  Spanish 
privateer,  took  her  after  a  short  engagement,  and  got 
;61000  as  his  share  of  the  prize.  He  was  a  very  aen- 
aible,  clever  man,  much  esteemed  by  his  companions, 
and  had  become  an  insurance  broker. 

On  the  first  of  July  this  year  my  wife  brought  me 
a  daughter,  and  my  sister  gave  a  son  to  Thomaii  Bell 
on  the  6th  of  the  same  month.  He  was  the  first  of 
eight  sons  she  had,  seven  of  whom  were  running,  of 
whom  Carlyle,  whom  we  took  in  1 782  at  two  years 
old,  ia  the  youngest,  who  are  all  alive  in  1 804,  and  eight 
daughters  all  well  married,  and  have  many  children. 

His  Grace  Archibald  Duke  of  Argyle  died  early  in 
spring,  as  suddenly  almost,  and  at  the  same  age  of 
seventy-seven,  as  His  Majesty,  George  11.,  had  done 
in  October  preceding.  On  this  occasion  Lord  Bute 
wrote  a  very  kind  letter  to  Lord  Milton,  the  friend 
and  Bub-minbter  of  Argyle,  lamenting  his  loss,  and 
assuring  him  that  there  should  be  no  change  in  respect 
to  him.  Adam  Ferguson  was  with  Milton  when  he 
received  this  letter,  to  whom  he  gave  it  after  reading 
it,  saying  "  Is  this  man  sincere  V  to  which  Ferguson, 
on  perusal,  "  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  was  so  when  he 
wrote  it."  Milton  declined  being  longer  employed ; 
and  it  was  well,  for  he  soon  fell  into  that  decline  of 
mental  powers  which  lasted  till  his  death  in  1766. 
Lord  Bute  tried  to  make  his  brother,  Stuart  M'Kenzie, 
succeed  Milton,  but  he  neither  had  talents  nor  incli- 
nation.    Baron  Mure,  who  was  a  man  of  business  and 


izecy  Google 


THE  WIFES  CONNECTIONS.  415 

of  sound  sense,  was  employed  while  Lord  Bute  was  in 
power. 

In  this  year  I  lost  my  grandfather  and  grandmother 
Robiaon,  truly  respectable  people  in  their  day.  He 
died  first,  at  the  age  of  eighty-six,  and  she,  who  was 
half  a  year  younger  than  him,  gave  way  to  fate  just 
six  months  after  him. 

When  my  wife  was  perfectly  recovered,  I  found 
myself  under  the  necessity  of  carrying  her  to  New- 
castle to  visit  her  sister,  to  whom  she  was  most 
tenderly  attached.  Mr  Blackett  was  then  living  in 
Pilgrim  Street,  a  small  but  very  pleasant  house  near 
the  gate.  This  was  in  the  beginning  of  October,  when 
the  judges  were  in  town,  and  a  great  crowd  of  com- 
pany. Mr  Blackett's  brother  Henry,  the  clergyman, 
was  then  with  him,  who  was  an  Oxonian,  a  good 
scholar,  and  a  very  agreeable  man  of  the  world.  Wo 
Were  visited  by  all  their  friends  in  Newcastle  and 
in  the  neighbourhood,  and  made  many  agreeable  ac- 
quaintance. Sir  Walter  Blackett  was  oue  who  lived 
in  a  fine  old  house,  directly  opposite  to  Mr  Blackett. 
He  was  a  very  genteel,  fine-looking  man,  turned  of 
forty,  who  had  not  been  happy  with  his  lady,  the 
daughter  (natural)  of  his  uncle.  Sir  William  Blackett, 
who  had  left  him  and  her  heira  of  his  estate,  provided 
they  intermarried.  He  fulfilled  the  will  most  cordi- 
ally, for  he  was  in  love  with  his  cousin ;  but  she 
i-eluctaotly,  because  she  did  not  care  for  htm.  By 
report  she  was  of  superior  understanding  to  him  ;  for 
he  was  not  a  man  of  remarkable  parts,  but  strong  in 


oy  Google 


416  THE  WIFES  CONNECTIONS. 

friendship,  libetality,  and  public  Bpirit ;  and  he  had  a 
great  fortune,  not  less  than  £20,000,  with  which  he 
amply  gratified  hia  own  disposition.  He  was  ostenta- 
tious, and  fond  of  popularity,  which  he  gained  by  his 
public  charities;  but  lived  to  lose  it  entirely.  He 
was  long  member  from  the  town  of  Newcastle,  but 
never  would  ask  any  favours  of  Ministers,  while  in 
the  mean  time  he  brought  in  a  clever  colleague,  a  Mr 
Ridley,  who  got  all  the  favours  from  Ministers,  having 
both  Sir  Walter's  interest  and  bis  own,  by  which  the 
credit  of  the  former  with  his  townsmen  waa  much 
shaken. 

Our  sister,  Mrs  Blackett,  luckily  proved  a  great 
favourite  of  Sir  Walter's,  as  his  cousin,  John  Erasmus, 
had  been  before,  to  whom  he  gave  the  payment  of  his 
lead  mines,  which  being  very  productive,  was  a  place 
of  profit. 

Mr  Collingwood  of  Chirton  was  another  valuable 
acquaintance :  he  was  Recorder  of  the  town,  and  a 
lawyer  of  great  ability.  Though  but  the  second 
brother,  he  had  acquired  the  family  estate  in  conse- 
quence of  the  dissipation  of  the  elder,  who  wa8  repre- 
sentative of  an  ancient  family,  and  whose  son  is  Vice- 
Admiral  Collmgwood,  the  husband  of  Mrs  Blackett's 
eldest  daughter.  The  Recorder  had  acquired  Chirton 
by  marriage ;  for  a  laird  of  Roddam,  one  of  the  five 
families  in  the  county  who  were  proprietors  before 
the  Conquest,  having  been  an  attorney  at  Newcastle, 
had  purchased  the  estate  of  Chirton,  which  he  left  to 
his  two  daughters,  Mary  and  Elizabeth,  one  of  whom 


izecy  Google 


THE  WTFES  CONNECTIONS.  *17 

married  a  Mr  Hilton  Lawson,  and  the  other  Mr  Col- 
lingwood,  while  the  ancient  manor  of  Roddam  went 
hy  entail  to  his  nephew,  Admiral  Roddam.  There 
were  two  houses  at  Chirton,  only  divided  from  each 
otiier  by  a  road ;  and  by  far  the  best  was  the  possession 
of  Mar}'',  the  eldest  eister,  and  her  husband  Lawson, 
which  had,  in  the  end  of  the  17th  century,  belonged 
to  Archibald,  the  first  Duke  of  Argyle,  who  had  built 
or  rep^red  it  as  a  convenient  place  between  London 
and  Inverary  on  his  journey  to  and  from  the  capital. 
It  was  at  this  house  that  he  died,  on  one  of  those 
journeys.  This  house  is  now  the  possession  of  Adam 
de  Cardonnel  Lawson,  Esq.,  whidi  was  left  to  his 
mother,  Ann  HUton,  by  her  cousin  Hilton  Lawson ; 
because  if  her  brother,  a  Key.  Mr  Hilton,  had  not 
died,  he  would  have  fallen  heir  to  that  and  several 
other  estates  of  Mr  liawson's.  This  gentleman  is  the 
son  and  heir  of  my  old  friend  Mansfield  de  Cardonnel, 
formerly  mentioned.* 

Those  families  adopted  our  two  wives  as  their  rela- 
tions, as  their  father  was  a  descendant  of  the  family 
of  Eoddam,  and  their  mother  of  that  of  Collingwood 
of  Unthank,  who  was  related  to  both. 

At  this  period  there  were  not  many  conversible 
gentlemen  in  Newcastle,  which  made  one  value  Mr 
Collingwood  the  more ;  for  the  men  were  in  general 
very  ill  educated,  while  the  ladies,  who  were  bred  in 
the  south,  by  their  appearance  and  manners,  seemed 
to  be  very  unequally   yoked.      ITie  clergy  at   the 

■  See  aboTO,  p.  219. 

2d 


izecy  Google 


418  THE   DESPOT    OF   TH£   NORTH. 

time  were  almost  all  underbred,  there  being  only 
one  -vicar  in  the  town,  and  the  rest  only  curates  or 
lecturers.  Sometimes  a  neighbouring  clergyman  of 
university  education  accepted  of  a  lectureship  for  the 
sake  of  living  in  town  in  the  winter,  though  the 
salaries  were  no  more  than  £100 ;  yet,  had  it  not 
been  for  the  ladies,  the  state  of  society  would  have 
then  been  disagreeable.  For  many  years  past  it  has 
been  totidly  different. 

At  a  grand  dancing  assembly  our  ladies  were  gra- 
tified as  much  as  they  could  be,  for  Mrs  Blackett  had 
the  honour  of  dancing  with  the  Duke  of  Portland, 
and  her  sister  with  Viscount  Torrington,  and  had  the 
approbation  of  a  very  numerous  company  for  their 
genteel  appearance  and  good  looks. 

His  Grace  had  come  down  to  take  care  of  his  par- 
liamentary interest,  having  great  estates  in  the  north- 
ern counties.  He  was  opposed  in  Cumberland  by  Sir 
James  Lowther,  who,  after  a  ten  years'  war,  drove  the 
beaten  Duke,  with  infinite  loss  of  money,  out  of  the 
north.  Lowther  went  off  conqueror,  but  more  de- 
tested than  any  man  alive,  as  a  shameless  political 
sharper,  a  domestic  bashaw,  and  an  intolerable  tyrant 
over  his  tenants  and  dependents.  John  Home  cried 
him  up  as  the  bravest  and  most  generous  of  men  ; 
and  he  flattered  and  obliged  John  because  he  had  the 
ear  of  Lord  Bute,  whose  eldest  daughter,  an  amiable 
and  patient  woman,  ho  had  married  and  abused.  Home 
prevailed  with  him  to  prefer  George  Johnstone,  the 
Governor  of  Florida,  to  Admiral  Elliot,  for  one  of  his 


izecy  Google 


THE   PORER    CLCB.  419 

Beats  Id  Parliament,  though  he  was  by  no  means  the 
best  man  of  the  two  ;  bat  what  was  still  more  flatter- 
ing to  John,  in  two  duels  he  was  involved  in  (neither 
of  which,  however,  took  place),  he  took  him  for  his 
second.  John  cried  him  up  for  every  good  quality, 
while  Ferguson,  who  had  seen  him  often,  said  he 
thought  him  a  very  stupid  man.  Bob  Hume,  who 
lived  nine  months  in  his  house  in  London,  attending 
his  cousin.  Sir  Michael  Fleming,  with  whom  he  went 
to  Groningen,  thought  him  a  capricious,  and  some- 
times a  brutal,  head  of  a  family.  Robert  Adam  told 
me  many  stories  of  him,  which  made  me  conclude 
that  he  was  truly  a  madman,  though  too  rich  to  be 
confined. 

As  Mrs  C.  had  never  been  in  that  country  before, 
we  made  several  excursions  in  the  neighbourhood, 
such  as  to  Tynemouth  and  Durham ;  and  on  our  return 
home  visited  the  Roddams,  though  there  were  only 
there  the  old  lady  and  her  two  daughters.  The  Ad- 
miral, who  succeeded  his  elder  brother  in  a  few  years, 
built  himself  a  handsome  house,  and  improved  the 
place.     He  had  three  wives,  but  no  children. 

In  the  beginning  of  1 762  was  instituted  the  famous 
dub  called  "  The  Poker,"  which  lasted  in  great  vigour 
down  to  the  year  1784.  About  the  third  or  fourth 
meeting,  we  thought  of  giving  it  a  name  that  would  be 
of  uncertain  meaning,  and  not  be  so  directly  ofieosive 
as  that  of  Militia  Club  to  the  enemies  of  that  insti- 
tution. Adam  Ferguson  fell  luckily  on  the  name  of 
"  Poker,"  which  we  perfectly  understood,  and  was  at 


izecDy  Google 


4gO  THE   POKER   CLUB. 

the  same  time  an  enigma  to  the  public*  This  club 
consisted  of  all  the  literati  of  Edinburgh  and  its 
neighbourhood,  moat  of  whom  had  been  members  of 
the  Select  Society,  except  very  few  indeed  who  ad- 
hered to  the  enemies  of  militia,  together  with  a  great 
many  country  gentlemen,  who,  though  not  always  re- 
sident in  town,  yet  were  zealous  friends  to  a  Scotch 
militia,  and  warm  in  their  resentment  on  its  being 
refused  to  us,  and  an  invidious  line  drawn  between 
Scotland  and  England.  The  establishment  was  frugal 
and  moderate,  as  that  of  all  clubs  for  a  public  purpose 
ought  to  be.  We  met  at  our  old  landlord's  of  the 
Diversorium,  now  near  the  Cross,  the  dinner  on  the 
table  soon  after  two  o'clock,  at  one  shilling  a-head, 
the  wine  to  be  confined  to  sheny  and  claret,  and  the 
reckoning  to  be  called  at  six  o'clock.  After  the  first 
fifteen,  who  were  chosen  by  nomination,  the  members 
were  to  be  chosen  by  ballot,  two  black  balls  to  exclude 
the  candidate.  There  was  to  be  a  new  preses  chosen 
at  every  meeting.  William  Johnstone,  Esq.,  now  Sir 
William  Piilteney,  was  chosen  secretary  of  the  dub, 
with  a  charge  of  all  publications  that  might  be  thought 
necessary  by  him,  and  two  other  members  with  whom 
he  was  to  consult.  In  a  laughing  humour,  Andrew 
Crosbie  was  chosen  Assassin,  in  case  any  officer  of  that 
sort  should  be  needed  ;  but  David  Hume  was  added 
as  his  Assessor,  without  whose  assent  nothing  should 
be  done,  so  that  between  plus  and  minus  there  was 
likely  to  be  no  bloodshed. 

*  An  instrument  for  stirnng  up  the  "'lit'*  question. — Ed, 


D,  Google 


THE  POKEE  CLUB.  421 

This  club  continued  to  be  in  great  perfection  for 
six  or  seven  years,  because  the  expense  was  moderate, 
wliile  every  member  was  pleased  with  the  entertain- 
ment as  well  as  the  company.  During  these  seven 
years,  a  very  constant  attendant  told  me  that  he  never 
observed  even  an  approach  to  inebriety  in  any  of  the. 
members.  At  the  end  of  that  period,  by  means  of  an 
unlucky  quarrel  between  one  or  two  of  the  members 
and  our  landlord,  who  was  an  absurd  fool,  the  club 
left  his  house  and  went  to  Fortune's,  the  most  fashion- 
able tavern  in  town,  where  the  dinners  were  more 
showy,  but  not  better,  and  the  wines  only  dearer;  but 
the  day's  expense  soon  came  to  three  times  as  much 
as  the  ordioary  bill  at  Thomas  Nicholson's,  which 
made  many  of  the  members,  not  the  least  conversible, 
lessen  the  number  of  days  of  attendance ;  and  what 
was  worse,  as  the  club  had  long  drawn  the  attention 
of  the  public,  many  members  were  admitted  whose 
minds  were  not  congenial  with  the  old  members. 
'When  this  change  seemed  to  be  in  danger  of  essen- 
tially hurting  the  club,  a  few  of  us  had  recourse  to  a 
plan  for  keeping  the  old  members  together,  which  was 
that  of  establishing  a  new  club,  to  be  called  the  "  Tues- 
day," to  meet  on  liat  day,  and  dine  together,  without 
deserting  the  Poker.  This  lasted  for  two  years  at  Som- 
mer's  tavern ;  for  we  did  not  go  to  Nicholson's,  for 
fear  of  giving  offence.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Poker 
dwindled  away  by  the  death  or  desertion  of  many  of 
the  members  who  had  lately  been  brought  in,  and 
then  we  broke  up  the  Tuesday,  and  frequented  the 


izecy  Google 


422  THE  POKER  CLUB. 

Poker.  I  found  in  the  hands  of  Ferguson  a  list  of  thLi 
club,  taken  in  1 774,  and  ■wrote  by  Commissioner  James 
Edgar,  to  which,  in  other  hands,  were  added  the  new 
members  as  they  were  elected.  I  have  seen  no  list  pre- 
vious to  this ;  but  from  1 762  to  '84,  sundry  members 
■must  have  died,  two  of  whom  I  remember — viz.,  Dr 
Jardine  and  Ambassador  Keith ;  Dr  Gregory,  too,  might 
be  added,  but  he  did  not  attend  above  once  or  twice. 
The  amount  of  the  whole  on  this  list  is  sixty-six.* 
When  James  Edgar  was  in  Paris  with  Sir  Laurence 
Dundas,  his  cousin,  during  the  flourishing  state  of  this 
club,  he  was  asked  by  D'Alembert  to  go  with  him  to 
their  club  of  literati  at  Paris;  to  which  he  answered 
that  he  had  no  curiosity  to  visit  them,  as  he  had  a 
club  at  Edinburgh,  with  whom  he  dined  weekly,  com- 
posed, he  believed,  of  the  ablest  men  in  Europe.  Simi- 
lar to  this  was  a  saying  of  Princess  Dashcoff,  when 
disputing  one  day  with  me  at  Buxton  about  the  supe- 
riority of  Edinburgh,  as  a  residence,  to  most  other 
cities  in  Europe,  when,  having  alleged  sundry  parti- 
culars in  which  I  thought  we  excelled,  none  of  which 
.  she  would  admit  of — "  No,"  says  she,  "  but  I  know  one 
article  which  you  have  not  mentioned,  in  which  I 
must  give  you  the  precedency ;  which  is,  that  of  all  the 
sensible  men  I  have  met  with  in  my  travels  through 
Europe,  yours  at  Edinburgh  are  the  most  sensibla" 

•  Tha  list  hna  been  alrendy  printed  in  the  Supplement  to  Tytlei^B  Li/k  <tf 
Kajiia,  with  iome  iiiatciimte  txtmcta  from  Carlylo'e  MS.  Thi*  b  the 
bcxt  cutaut  accuimt  of  thin  carious  inatitution,  and  nothing  of  value  could 
be  ulded  to  it  even  from  the  minutea  of  its  proceedings,  which  the  Editor 
«aw  in  the  h&ndB  of  the  kt*  Sir  Adam  Fergnnoo,— Ed. 


izecy  Google 


THE   POKER  CLUB.  428 

Let  me  add  one  testimony  more,  that  of  the  Honourable 
General  James  Murray,  Lord  Elibank's  brother,  a  man 
of  fashion  and  of  the  world.  Being  at  the  Cross  (the 
'Change)  one  day,  just  before  the  hour  of  dinner,  which 
1^  that  time  was  prolonged  to  three  o'clock,  he  came 
up  to  me,  and  asked  me  if  I  had  yet  met  with  his 
fcrother  Elibank.  I  answered,  "  No ;  was  he  expecting 
him  in  town  that  day?"  "Yes,"  said  he;  "he  promised 
to  come,  and  introduce  me  to  the  Poker,"  "  If  that  is 
all  your  business,"  replied  I,  "  and  you  will  accept  of 
me  as  your  introductor,  I  shall  be  glad  of  the  honour ; 
and  perhaps  your  brother  may  come  late,  as  he  some- 
times does."  He  accepted,  and  the  club  happened  to 
be  very  well  attended.  When  we  broke  up,  between 
seven  and  eight  o'clock,  it  being  summer,  and  I  was 
proceediog  down  street  to  take  my  horse  to  Mussel- 
burgh, he  came  up  with  me,  and  exclaimed, "  Ah,  Doc- 
tort  I  never  was  so  much  disappointed  in  all  my  life  as 
at  your  club,  for  I  expected  to  sit  silent  and  listen  to 
a  parcel  of  pedants  descanting  on  learued  subjects  out 
of  my  range  of  knowledge ;  but  instead  of  that,  I 
have  met  with  an  agreeable,  polite,  and  lively  com- 
pany of  gentlemen,  in  whose  conversation  I  have 
joined  and  partaken  with  the  greatest  delight."  Ajs 
Murray  was  a  very  acute  and  sensible  man,  I  took  this 
as  a  very  high  compliment  to  the  manners  as  well  as 
the  parts  of  our  club. 

In  April  this  year  Mrs  C.  went  to  Newcastle, 
to  attend  her  sister,  who  was  to  lie-in  of  her  first 
child.     I   went  with  her  to   Langton  in  Northum- 


izecy  Google 


421  LORD   ELIBANK'a   ADVENTURES. 

berland,  and  returned  home,  Mrs  B.  having  met  her 
there. 

I  attended  the  Assembly  of  which  I  was  a  member, 
for  the  first  time  out  of  my  course,  when  Dr  Trail  of 
Glasgow  was  Moderator.  He  put  upon  me  the  three 
addresses  which  were  sent  up  from  this  Assembly  to 
the  King,  the  Queen,  and  the  Princess-Dowager  of 
Wales,  on  the  marriage  of  their  Majesties,  which  were 
thought  to  be  weU  composed,  especially  that  to  His 
Majesty.  This  even  met  with  the  approbation  of  the 
Commissioner,  though  not  pleased  with  me,  when  on 
one  of  the  preceding  years  I  had  helped  to  raise  bad 
humour  against  him  for  inviting  Whitefield  to  dine 
at  his  table,  and  another  year  he  had  entertained  [a 
design]  of  dissolving  the  Assembly  before  the  second 
Sunday.  To  he  sure,  the  business  before  us  was  but 
slack,  yet  had  we  allowed  the  precedent  to  take  place, 
we  should  never  have  recovered  that  Sunday  more. 

On  the  last  day  of  this  Assembly  I  learned,  to  my 
great  joy,  that  my  friend  Dr  William  Wight  was 
presented  by  the  King  to  the  vacant  cliair  of  History 
at  Glasgow.  As  he  was  my  near  relation,  his  ad- 
vancement, in  which  I  had  a  chief  hand,  was  very 
pleasing ;  and  as  he  was  the  most  agreeable  of  all 
men,  his  coming  near  me  promised  much  enjoyment. 

Towards  the  end  of  June  I  was  earnestly  requested 
by  William  Johnstone,  Esq.,  now  Pulteney,  to  accom- 
pany his  uncle,  Lord  Elibank,  on  some  jaunt,  to  take 
him  from  home,  as  he  had  just  lost  his  lady,  and  was 
in  bad  spirits.     I  agreed,  on  condition  that  he  would 


oy  Google 


LOED  ELIBANKS  ADVENTCEE&  425 

take  the  road  which  I  wished  to  go,  which  was  to 
Newcastle,  to  luring  home  Mrs  Carlyle.  This  was 
agreed  to,  and  I  went  to  him  in  a  day  or  two,  and  we 
set  out  on  the  27th  of  June ;  and  as  he  travelled 
with  his  own  horses,  we  did  not  arrive  there  till  the 
29th  to  dinner.  My  fellow-traveller  was  gloomy,  and 
lamented  his  wife  very  much,  who  had  been  a  beauty 
in  her  youth,  and  was  a  Dutch  lady  of  fortune,  the 
widow  of  Lord  North  and  Grey.  He  himself  was  now 
turned  sixty,  and  she  was  ten  years  older.  She  was 
a  weak  woman,  but  very  observant  of  him,  and  seemed 
proud  of  his  wit  and  fine  parts,  and  had  no  uneasi- 
ness about  his  infidelities,  except  as  they  affected  his 
prospects  in  a  future  world.  She  had  a  large  jointure, 
which  he  lost,  which  added  to  his  a£Biction.  But  she 
had  brought  a  large  sum  besides,  and,  falling  in  with 
his  humour  of  saving,  from  being  a  very  poor  lord 
she  had  made  him  very  wealthy.  When  he  arrived 
at  Newcastle,  he  was  at  first  overcome  with  the  sight 
of  my  wife,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  his  lady ; 
but  her  sympathy,  and  the  gentle  manners  of  her  sister, 
attracted  his  notice.  He  had  by  nature  very  great 
sensibility-;  he  admired,  and  had  once  loved,  his  wife, 
whom  he  was  conr^ious  he  had  injured.  In  this 
tender  state  of  vexation,  mixed  with  grief  and  peni- 
tence, he  met  at  Newcastle  with  a  very  handsome 
young  lady.  Miss  Maria  Fielding,  a  niece  of  Sir  John 
Fielding,  whose  manners,  softened  by  his  recent  loss 
and  melancholy  appearance,  so  much  subdued  him, 
that  he  fell  suddenly  in  love,  and  was  ashamed  and 


izecy  Google 


426  THE   ROMAN   WALL. 

afficted  with  his  own  feelings,  falling  into  a  kind  of  a 
hysterical  fit.  Mrs  Carlyle  told  me .  afterwards  that 
she  had  made  him  confess  this,  which  he  said  he  did 
because  he  saw  she  bad  found  him  out.  Hearing 
that  some  of  his  friends  were  at  Harrogate,  he  left  ua 
on  the  fourth  or  fifth  day,  and  went  there :  at  this 
place  there  was  plenty  of  gay  company,  and  play,  and 
every  sort  of  amusement  for  an  afflicted  widower,  so 
that  bis  lordship  soon  forgot  his  lady  and  her  jointure, 
and  iblaria  Fielding,  and  all  bis  cares  and  sorrow,  and 
became  the  gayest  man  in  the  whole  house  before  the 
month  of  July  elapsed. 

As  we  were  to  go  round  by  Dumfries  to  visit  my 
sister  Dickson,  who  had  fallen  into  a  decline,  and  was 
drinking  goats'  whey  in  the  neighbonrhood,  we  pro- 
posed to  take  the  road  to  Carlisle  from  Newcastle; 
and  Mrs  Carlyle  not  being  very  strong,  we  got  Mr 
Blackett's  chaise  for  the  first  day's  journey.  After  you 
have  got  ten  or  twelve  miles  west  from  Newcastle,  the 
country  becomes  dreary  and  desolate,  without  a  single 
interesting  object  but  what  employs  the  curious  re- 
search  of  the  antiquarian — the  remains  of  that  Roman 
wall  which  was  constructed  to  prevent  the  inroads  of 
the  barbarians  on  the  Roman  provinces  or  the  de- 
fenceless natives.  The  wall  in  many  parts  is  wonder- 
fully entire ;  and  while  it  demonstrates  the  art  and 
industry  of  the  Romans,  brings  full  in  our  view  the 
peace  and  security  we  now  enjoy  under  a  government 
that  unites  the  interest  and  promotes  the  common 
prosperity  of  the  whole  island.   We  slept  at  Glenwhilt, 


oy  Google 


VISITS.  427 

ft  paltry  plac^  and  got  to  Brampon  early  next  day, 
but  had  to  send  to  Carlisle  for  a  chaise,  aa  I  did  not 
choose  to  carry  Mr  Blackett'a  any  further.  This  place, 
as  is  noted  in  an  account  of  Dr  "Wight,  is  remarkable 
for  the  birth  of  three  persons  in  the  same  year,  or 
nearly  so,  who  got  as  high  in  their  respective  profes- 
sions as  they  possibly  could — Dr  Thomas,  a  son  of 
the  rector  of  the  parish,  who  came  to  be  Bishop  of 
Rochester ;  Mr  Wallace,  a  son  of  the  attorney,  who 
arrived  at  the  dignity  of  Attorney-General,  and  would 
have  been  Chancellor  had  he  lived  ;  and  Dr  "William 
Wight,  the  son  of  the  dissenting  minister,  who  lived 
to  be  Professor  of  Divinity  in  Glasgow. 

It  was  late  in  the  afternoon  before  the  chaise  came 
from  Carlisle,  for  which  I  had  sent,  so  that  we  not 
only  breakfasted  but  dined  here,  when  the  cheapnesf^ 
not  less  than  the  goodness,  of  our  fare  was  surprising, 
as  45.  6d.  was  the  whole  expense  for  Mrs  Carlyle's 
dinner  and  mine,  and  Blackett's  servant,  and  two 
horses,  mine  having  gone  on  to  Carlisle.  The  en- 
virons of  Carlisle  are  beautiful,  and  Mrs  Carlyle  was 
much  pleased  with  them.  The  road  from  thence  to 
Dumfiies  is  through  a  level  country,  but  not  very 
interesting,  being  at  that  time  unimproved,  and  but 
thinly  inhabited.  The  approach  to  Dumfries  on  every 
side  is  pleasing. 

My  sister  Dickson  was  down  at  Newabbey,  ten 
miles  below  Dumfries,  on  the  west  side  of  the  Nith,  for 
the  sake  of  goats'  whey.  We  went  down  next  day, 
but  found  her  far  gone  in  a  decline,  a  disorder  which 


oy  Google 


428  CHURCH   POLITICS. 

bad  been  so  fatal  to  our  family.  She  was  well  ac- 
quainted with  Mrs  Carlyle's  character  before  she  met 
her,  which  she  did  with  the  moat  tender  and  cheerful 
affection.  Her  appearance,  she  told  me,  even  surpassed 
all  she  had  heard ;  and  for  the  two  days  they  remained 
together,  there  never  was  a  closer  union  of  two  supe- 
rior minds,  softened  by  tenderness  and  adorned  with 
every  female  virtue.  It  was  difficult  to  part  them, 
as  they  were  sure  they  would  meet  no  more :  many 
confident  promises  were  made,  however,  to  lighten  as 
much  as  possible  the  melancholy  parting,  which  my 
sister  performed  with  such  angelic  gaiety  as  led  Mrs 
Carlyle  into  the  belief  that  she  thought  herself  in  little 
danger.  I  knew  the  contrary.  One  thing  she  did — 
which  was,  to  confirm  me  in  the  opinion  of  what  an  ex- 
cellent mind  it  was  to  which  I  was  united ;  but  this 
needed  no  confirmation.  After  this  scene,  Dumfries  and 
the  company  of  our  other  frionda  was  irksome,  so  we 
made  baste  to  meetmy  mother,  who  had  taken  the  road 
home  from  Penrith,  having  been  so  long  absent  from 
my  father.  We  found  our  little  girl  in  perfect  health. 
It  was  this  year,  in  September,  that  on  the  death 
of  Hyndman  I  succeeded  him  in  the  place  of  Almoner 
to  the  Ring,  an  office  of  no  great  emolument,  bat  a 
mark  of  distinction,  and  very  convenient,  as  my  stipend 
was  small,  for  I  kept  my  resolution  to  defer  a  prosecu- 
tion for  an  augmentation  till  my  patron  was  of  age. 
I  had  reason  to  expect  this  office,  not  only  by  means 
of  John  Home,  now  having  much  of  Lord  Bute's 
ear,  but  from  the  friendship  of  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  and 


oy  Google 


CHURCH   POLITICS.  429 

Sir  Harry  Erakine,  who  were  friends  of  Lord  Bute. 
Charles  Townsheud,  too,  had  made  application  at  this 
time,  though  he  failed  me  before. 

The  death  of  Hyndman  was  a  disappointment  to 
Robertson  in  the  management  of  the  Church,  which  he 
had  now  in  view.  By  his  preference  of  Hyndman, 
he  had  provoked  Dick,  who  was  a  far  better  man,  and 
proved  a  very  formidable  and  vigorous  opponent ; 
for  he  joined  the  Wild  or  High-flying  party,  and  by 
moderating  their  councils  and  defending  their  mea- 
sures as  often  as  he  could,  made  them  more  embar- 
rassing than  if  they  had  been  allowed  to  follow  their 
own  measures.  Hyndman  was  a  clever  fellow,  a  good 
preacher,  and  a  good  debater  in  church  courts.  Cum- 
ing had  adopted  him  as  his  second,  and  had  helped 
to  bring  him  from  CoHnton  to  the  West  Church. 
Being  unfortunate  in  his  family,  he  had  taken  to 
tippling  and  high  politics.  He  finished  his  constitu- 
tion, and  became  apoplectic.  Cuming  and  he  had 
quarrelled,  and  Robertson,  without  adverting  to  his 
undone  constitution  * 

It  was  in  about  the  end  of  this  year  that  my  sister 
Bell,  and  her  two  children  then  bom — William  and 
Jessie — came  down  to  pay  my  father  and  mother  a 
visit,  and  stayed  between  their  houses  and  ours  till 
the  month  of  June  1763. 

*  The  aentence  is  left  unfiniihed :  the  mtentton  Becms  to  lutve  been  to 
t&y,  that  BobertBon  nude  him  second  in  commuid  to  hJmBelF  u  leader  i>f 
the  Church.  Hyndmim  ia  lefetred  to  in  Chsp.  IIL ,  and  on  Beveral  other 
occauoOiS.  A  notice  of  him  wiU  be  found  in  Morren's  AnnnU  qfthe  General 
AisemAlff,  ii.  402.— £i>. 


izecy  Google 


430  ADAM   SMITH    AND   FRANKLIN. 

1763. 

Thomas  Cheap,  consul  at  Madeira,  my  friend,  came 
to  Edinbui^h  in  the  beginning  of  the  year,  to  visit  his 
friends  and  look  out  for  a  wife.  After  having  been 
plied  by  two  or  three,  he  at  last  fixed  on  Grace  Stuart, 
a  very  pretty  girl,  and  carried  her.  This  pleased  his 
sister  well,  who  was  always  looking  after  quality ;  for 
her  mother.  Lady  Ann,  was  a  sister  of  the  Earl  of 
Murray.  This  courtship  occasioned  several  pleasant 
meetings  of  private  parties  at  Cbrystal's,  a  tavern  in 
the  parish,  where  Dr  Robert  Finlay,  now  possessor  of 
Drummore,  displayed  such  qualities  as  he  had;  for  he 
was  master  of  one  of  the  feasts,  having  lost  a  dinner 
and  a  ball  to  the  Consul's  sister.  Ann  CoUingwood 
made  a  good  figure  in  the  dance,  but  Grace  Colling- 
wood  surpassed  her. 

About  the  end  of  April,  my  sister,  and  my  wife,  and 
[I,  paid]  a  vUit  to  our  friends  in  Glasgow,  where  we 
were  most  cordially  received  by  my  old  friends,  Mr 
Dreghom  and  sundry  other  merchants,  who  were 
connected  with  Mr  BeU  in  Airdrie,  particularly  Robin 
Boyle  and  the  Dunlops.  Dr  Adam  Smith  and  Dr 
Black,  as  well  as  Dr  Wight,  were  now  here,  though 
the  last  had  not  yet  got  into  his  house.  We  bad 
many  agreeable  meetings  with  them,  as  well  as  with 
our  mercantile  friends.  It  was  there  that  I  saw  No. 
45,  when  just  published  by  Wilkes,  of  which  Smith 
said,  on  hearing  it  read,  "  Bravo !  this  fellow  will 
either  be  hanged  in  six  months,  or  he  will  get  Lord 


izecy  Google 


ADAM  SMITH   AND  FRANKLIN.  431 

Bute  impeached."  Supping  with  him  in  a  company  of 
twenty-two,  when  a  certain  young  peer  was  present, 
after  a  little  while  I  whispered  him  that  I  wondered 
they  had  set  up  this  man  so  high,  as  I  thought  him 
mighty  foolish.  "  We  know  that  perfectly,"  said  he ; 
"  but  he  ia  the  only  lord  at  our  college."  To  this  day 
there  were  not  above  two  or  three  gentlemen's  chaises 
in  Glasgow,  nor  hackney-coaches,  nor  men-servants 
to  attend  at  table;  but  they  were  not  the  worse 
served. 

Soon  after  we  returned  home  in  the  beginning  of 
May,  my  sister  and  her  children  returned  to  London; 
but  took  the  way  by  Dumfries  to  visit  their  friends 
there. 

Dr  Robertson  was  Moderator  of  the  Assembly  this 
year,  and  being  now  Principal  of  the  University  of 
Edinburgh,  had  it  in  his  power  to  be  member  of 
Assembly  every  year.  He  had  lost  Hyndman,  but  he 
had  now  adopted  Dr  John  Drj'sdale,  who  had  married 
his  cousin,  one  of  the  Adams,  a  far  better  man  in 
every  respect ;  for  he  had  good  talents  for  business, 
though  his  invincible  modesty  prevented  his  speak- 
ing in  public.  He  now  managed  the  Highland  corre- 
spondence, and  became  extremely  popular  in  that  divi- 
sion of  the  Church.  Robertson  had  now  Dr  Dick  as 
his  stated  opponent,  who  would  have  been  very  for- 
midable had  he  not  been  tied  up  by  his  own  principles, 
which  were  firm  in  support  of  presentations,  and  by 
his  not  having  it  in  his  power  to  be  a  member  of 
Assembly  more  than  once  in  four  or  five  years,  on 


oy  Google 


432  KOBEETSON  AND  CHURCH   POLITICS. 

account  of  the  strict  rotation  observed  by  the  Presby- 
tery of  Edinburgh. 

Andrew  Crosbie,  the  advocate,  was  another  constant 
and  able  opponent  of  Dr  Robertson  and  his  friends, 
though  hampered  a  little  by  the  law  of  patronage. 
His  maternal  uncle,  Lord  Tinwald,  the  Justice-Clerk, 
who  was  his  patron,  being  dead,  he  wished  to  gain 
employment  by  pleasing  the  popttlar  side.  Fairbaim, 
the  minister  of  Dumbarton,  was  another  opponent — 
brisk  and  foul-mouthed,  who  stuck  at  nothing,  and 
was  endowed  with  a  rude  popular  eloquence ;  but  he 
was  a  mere  hussar,  who  had  no  steady  views  to  direct 
him.  He  was  a  member  of  every  Assembly,  and  spoke 
in  every  cause,  but  chiefly  for  plunder — that  is,  ap- 
plause and  dinners — for  he  did  not  seem  to  care 
whether  he  lost  or  won.  Kobertson's  soothing  man- 
ner prevented  Iiis  being  hard-mouthed  with  him. 

Dr  Kobertson  had  for  his  assistants  [not  only]  all  the 
Moderate  party  in  Edinburgh  and  the  neighbourhood, 
but  many  clergymen  annually  from  the  most  distant 
Synods  and  Presbyteries ;  who,  now  that  the  debates 
of  the  Assembly  were  carried  on  with  freedom,  though 
still  with  great  order,  were  very  good  speakers  and  able 
debaters.  There  were  very  few  of  the  lay  elders  of 
much  consideration  who  opposed  him ;  and  Henry 
Dundas  (Lord  Melville),  who  was  in  himself  a  host, 
coming  next  year  to  our  aid,  [added  greatly  to  our 
strength,  and  made  the  business  fashionable,  for  till 
then]  many  of  the  superior  elders  deserted  the  Assem- 
bly, insomuch  that  I  remember  one  year,  that  when  a 


izecyGOOgle 


HAEEOGATE  IN   17C3.  433 

most  important  overture  was  debated  there  was  oeU 
ther  one  of  the  Judges  nor  of  the  Crown  lawyers  in 
the  Assembly.' 

In  May  this  year  we  had  a  visit  from  the  Blacketts, 
who  did  not  stay  long ;  and  having  an  appointment 
with  Dr  Wight  to  go  for  a  few  weeks  to  Harrogate, 
we  set  out  in  the  beginning  of  July,  and  on  our  way 
passed  some  days  in  Newcastle,  where  Wight,  who 
was  a  stranger,  made  his  usual  impression  as  one  of 
the  most  agreeable  men  they  had  ever  seen.  When 
we  arrived  at  the  Dragon,  in  Harrogate,  however, 
Wight's  vivacity  waa  alarmed  at  the  shyness  of  the 
English,  who  are  backward  to  make  up  to  strangers 
till  they  have  reconnoitred  them  a  while.  Wight  was 
much  enraged  at  this,  and  threatened  either  to  leave 
the  place,  or  to  breakfast  in  a  private  room.  I  pre- 
vailed with  him  to  have  his  table  set  in  the  long  room, 
where  our  demeanour  being  observed  by  the  company, 
we  were  soon  relieved  from  our  awkward  situation  by 
an  invitation  from  two  ladies,  who  had  no  men  with 
them,  to  come  to  their  breakfast-table,  according  to 
the  custom  of  the  place  at  this  time.  We  found  them 
very  agreeable,  and  were  envied  for  our  good-luck. 
When  we  entered  the  dining-room  at  two  o'clock,  we 
were  no  longer  strangers,  and  took  our  places  accord- 
ing to  the  custom  of  the  house.  There  were  two 
tables  in  the  dining-room,  which  held  between  thirty, 
and  forty  apiece,  and  our  places  were  at  the  bottom 
of  that  on  the  right  hand,  from  whence  we  were 

*  Thu  paaaoge  in  brackets  is  in  the  HS.,  but  not  in  the  Author's  hand. 
2  E 


oy  Google 


494  HABROQATE  IN    1763. 

gradually  to  rise  to  the  top  of  the  room  as  the  com- 
pany changed,  which  was  daily. 

Harrogate  at  this  time  was  very  pleasant,  for  there 
was  a  constant  succession  of  good  company,  and  the 
best  entertainment  of  any  watering-place  in  Britain, 
at  the  least  expense.  The  house  we  were  at  was  not 
only  frequented  by  the  Scotch  at  this  time,  but  was 
the  favourite  house  of  the  English  nobility  and  gentry. 
Breakfast  cost  gentlemen  only  2d.  apiece  for  their  muf- 
fins, as  it  waa  the  fashion  for  ladies  to  furnish  tea  and 
sugar  ;  dinner.  Is. ;  supper,  6d. ;  chambers,  nothing ; 
wine  and  other  extras  at  the  usual  price,  and  as  little 
as  you  please ;  horses  and  servants  at  a  reasonable  rate. 
We  had  two  haunches  of  venison  twice  a-week  during 
the  season.  The  ladies  gave  afternoon's  tea  and  coffee 
in  their  turns,  which,  coming  but  once  in  four  or  five 
weeks,  amounted  to  a  trifle.  The  estates  of  the  people 
at  our  table  did  not  amoimt  to  less  than  £50,000  or 
£60,000  per  annum,  among  whom  were  sever^  mem- 
bers of  Parliament ;  and  they  had  not  had  the  pre- 
caution to  order  one  newspaper  among  them  all, 
though  the  time  was  critical ;  but  Andrew  Millar,  the 
celebrated  bookseller,  supplied  that  defect,  for  he  had 
two  papers  sent  to  him  by  every  post,  so  that  all  the 
baronets  and  great  sqiiires^ — your  Sir  Thomas  Claver- 
ings,  and  Sir  Harry  Grays,  and  Dnunmond,  of  Blair- 
drummond — depended  upon  and  paid  him  civility 
accordin^y ;  and  yet  when  he  appeared  in  the  morn- 
ing, in  his  old  weU-wom  suit  of  clothea,  they  could  not 
help  calling  him  Peter  Pamphlet ;  for  the  generous 


oy  Google 


HABEOQATE  IN   1763.  435 

patron  of  Scotch  authors,  with  his  city  wife  and  her 
niece,  were  sufficiently  ridiculous  when  they  came  into 
good  company.  It  was  observed,  however,  that  she 
did  not  allow  him  to  go  down  to  the  well  with  her  in 
the  chariot  in  his  morning  dress,  though  she  owned  him 
at  dinner-time,  as  he  had  to  pay  the  extraordinaries. 

As  Wight  had  never  been  in  York,  we  went  down 
earJy  on  a  Sunday  morning,  when  we  heard  that  the 
Archbishop  and  the  Judges  were  to  be  in  the  Cathe- 
dral We  had  Dr  Hunter,  M.D.,  who  at  that  time 
frequented  Harrogate,  for  our  guide  ;  but  he  was  kept 
in  Buch  close  conversation  that  he  mistook  the  road, 
and  led  us  two  miles  out  of  otir  way,  so  that  we  had 
but  just  time  to  breakfast  before  we  went  to  church, 
when  the  service  being  begun,  we  entered  the  choir, 
where  it  was  crowded  to  the  door.  Our  eyes  were 
delighted  with  such  a  magnificent  show,  but  our  ears 
were  not  so  highly  pleased,  for  no  part  of  the  service 
seemed- to  us  to  suit  the  grandeur  of  the  scene.  We 
were  invited  to  dine  with  Mr  Scott  from  Madeira, 
Thomas  Cheap's  partner ;  but  Wight  had  engaged 
to  dine  with  the  Honourable  Archdeacon  Hamilton, 
whose  education  he  had  superintended  for  a  year  at 
Glasgow,  and  with  whom  he  was  well  acquainted  in 
Ireland,  where  his  preferment  lay.  His  beautiful  wife 
had  eloped  from  him  with  a  Sir  George  Warren,  and 
he  had  received  her  again,  and  was  living  privately  at 
York  till  the  story  became  stale.  Wight  extolled  her 
beauty  and  her  penitence — and,  if  I  remember  right, 
they  continued  to  live  together,  and  had  sons  and 


izecy  Google 


436  BENJAMIN  FEANELIK. 

daughters.  We  passed  the  evening  with  Mr  Scott,  wLo 
had  with  him  a  large  party  of  Americans — Mr  AJlcn, 
Justice-General  of  Pennsylvania,  and  his  two  sons  and 
daughters,  fine  young  people  indeed,  the  eldest  of 
them  not  yet  twenty  years  of  age  :  with  them  there  was 
also  a  Mr  Livingstone,  and,  I  think,  a  sister  of  his  also. 
Mr  Allen  was  a  man  very  open  and  communicative, 
and  as  be  was  of  Scottish  extraction,  his  grandfather 
having  fled  from  Stirlingshire  to  escape  the  cruel 
persecutions  of  the  Presbyterians  by  Lauderdale  and 
James  II.,  he  seemed  partial  to  us  as  clergymen  from 
Scotland.  He  said  he  intended  to  have  gone  as  far 
as  Edinburgh,  but  found  he  should  not  have  time 
at  present,  but  was  to  leave  his  sons  in  England  to 
complete  their  education.  He  wished  us  to  stay  all 
next  day,  and  come  an  hour  in  the  forenoon  to 
examine  his  lads,  to  judge  to  what  a  length  young 
men  could  now  be  brought  in  America.  This  we 
declined,  but  agreed  to  dine  next  day,  and  bring  on 
such  conversation  as  would  enable  us  to  judge  better 
of  the  young  men  than  any  formal  examination. 

There  was  a  circumstance  that  I  shall  never  forget, 
which  passed  in  one  of  our  conversations.  Dr  Wight 
and  I  had  seen  Dr  Franklin  at  Edinburgh,  as  I  have 
formerly  related :  we  mentioned  this  philosopher  to 
Mr  Allen  with  the  respect  we  thought  due,  and  he 
answered,  "Yes,  all  you  have  said  of  him  is  true,  and  I 
could  add  more  in  his  praise ;  but  though  I  have  now 
got  the  better  of  him,  he  has  cost  me  more  trouble 
since  he  came  to  reside  in  our  State  than  all  mankind 


oy  Google 


BENJAMIN  FEANKUN.  437 

besides ;  and  I  can  aBsure  you  that  he  is  a  man  so 
turbulent,  and  such  a  plotter,  as  to  be  able  to  embroil 
the  three  kingdoms,  if  he  ever  has  an  opportunity." 
Franklin  was  after  this  for  several  weeks  in  Edin- 
burgh with  David  Hume,  bub  I  did  not  see  him, 
having  been  &om  home  on  some  jaunt.  In  1769  or 
'70  I  met  him  at  an  invited  dinner  in  London,  at 
John  Stuart's,  the  Provost's  son  I  think  it  was,  where 
he  was  silent  and  inconversible,  but  this  was  after  he 
had  been  refused  the  office  of  Postmaster-General  of 
America,  and  had  got  a  severe  dressing  from  Wedder- 
bum,  then  Solicitor  or  Attorney-General.  We  returned 
to  Harrogate  in  the  evening,  where  Mr  Scott  and  his 
wife  joined  us  next  day. 

It  waa  my  good  fortune  at  dinner  to  sit  next  Mr 
Ann,  a  Roman  Catholic  gentleman  of  Yorkshire,  who 
was  very  agreeable,  and  knew  the  whole  company ; 
but  it  was  our  misfortune  to  lose  our  new  friends 
very  fast,  for  at  the  end  of  a  fortnight  I  was  at  the 
head  of  a  table,  above  thirty,  and,  I  remember,  had  to 
divide  a  haunch  of  venison  among  fifteen  of  them  with- 
out getting  any  portion  of  fat  for  myself — "  but  what 
signifies  that,  when  you  have  an  opportunity  of  oblig- 
ing your  friends  V  as  Sir  J.  Dalrymple  said  to  me 
one  day  when  we  had  a  haunch  at  the  Poker,  flatter- 
ing me  for  a  good  piece,  for  he  was  a  gourmand.  But 
it  was  wonderful  to  observe  how  easily  we  united 
with  our  new  friends  who  took  the  places  of  the 
deceased,  for  most  of  them  were  in  reality  so  to  us. 
We  fell  in  by  accident  with  a  very  agreeable  man,  a 


izecy  Google 


438  LOBD  CLTVE. 

Colonel  Roberts,  who  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  the 
Koyal  Irish,  and  had  been  in  that  country  for  three 
years,  and  had  so  completely  caught  the  brogue  that 
it  was  unpossible  at  first  to  think  him  an  Englishman 
bom  and  bred,  which  he  nevertheless  was,  and  nephew 
to  Lord  Egremont,  Secretary  of  State  at  the  time. 
This  gentleman,  by  ill-luck,  had  been  directed  to  the 
Salutation  Inn,  which  was  the  Quakers'  hons^  of 
excellent  entertainment,  but  indifferent  compaoy.  He 
took  much  to  Wight  and  me,  and  we  would  fain 
have  drawn  him  to  our  house,  but  he  would  not  for 
the  world  affront  the  good  people,  with  whom  he  had 
lived  a  week.  So  we  compromised  the  matter,  and 
went  sometimes  to  dine  at  his  house,  and  he  returned 
the  visit  and  came  to  ours.  He  was  truly  a  man  of 
sense,  and  of  much  reading,  and  a  great  master  of 
conversation :  he  was  the  first  whom  I  met  with  who 
struck  out  an  idea  that  has  been  followed  since ;  for, 
talking  much  of  Hume's  and  Eobertson's  Histories,  he 
said  that  Hume  appeared  to  him  to  be  the  Homer 
and  Kobertson  the  Virgil  of  British  historians, — a 
criticism  that  has  of  late  been  confirmed  by  Dugidd 
Stewart's  quotation. 

Our  friend  Captain  Francis  Lindsay  was  at  the 
Granby,  who  sometimes  dined  with  us,  as  we  did  one 
day  with  him,  when  we  understood  that  Lord  Clive  and 
his  train  were  to  dine  there ;  and  he  had  arrived  the 
evening  before,  of  which  Lindsay  informed  us,  and  we 
went  in  due  time  to  dinner.  Clive  was  an  ill-looking 
man,  with  the  two  sides  of  his  face  much  unlike,  one 


oy  Google 


LOftD  CLIVK  439 

of  them  seemiDg  distorted  as  with  the  palsy.  When 
we  entered  the  long  room,  he  was  sitting  at  a  taUe 
in  a  window  with  a  great  many  papers  before  him, 
which  he  had  received  with  that  day's  post.  It  was 
by  those  despatches  that  he  had  learned  that  his 
jagire  was  taken  from  him.  Lindsay  had  watohed  his 
conntenance  from  the  moment  he  got  them,  but  could 
perceive  no  change  in  the  muscles  of  his  face,  which 
were  Well  suited  to  bad  news.  But  he  must  have 
known  before  this  time  what  had  happened.  He  sat 
at  some  distance  from  me  on  the  opposite  side,  but  he 
seemed  to  converse  with  nobody  during  dinner,  and 
left  the  table  immediately  after.  There  were  balf-a- 
dozen  people  with  him,  among  whom  were  his  favourite 
secretariea,  both  joUy  fellows,  who  loved  a  glass  of 
claret,  which  Lindsay  recommended  to  them,  and 
which  was  truly  good. 

Thomas  Cheap,  my  friend  from  Madeira,  who  had 
been  married  at  Invereak  with  Grace  Stuart,  came  to 
Harrogate,  according  to  his  promise,  to  visit  Lind- 
say and  me.  He  came  to  the  Dragon,  and  remained 
four  days  with  us.  She  was  very  handsome  and 
spirited,  and  made  a  great  impression.  Robert  Berry 
and  his  beautiful  wife  were  there  at  the  same  time, 
and  it  could  not  be  doubted  that  she  was  the  finer 
woman  of  the  two ;  yet  our  fair  Caledonian  had  so 
much  frankness  and  spirit,  and  danced  so  exquisitely, 
that  she  carried  off  all  hearts,  insomuch  that  there  was 
a  sensible  degree  of  regret  and  gloominess  in  the  com- 
pany for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  at  least  after  she  left  it 


izecy  Google 


440  ENGLISH  WATBBING- PLACES. 

Wight  and  I  rode  one  day  to  Hackfell,  a  place  of 
the  Aislabiea,  a  few  miles  beyond  Ripon,  through 
a  most  delightful  country,  no  part  of  which  is  finer 
than  Ripley.  Hackfell  consists  of  a  few  wooded 
hills  on  both  sides  of  a  valley,  terminating  in  a  fine 
village- on  the  banks  of  a  small  river,  called  Ma- 
sham.  There  are  fine  walks  cut  through  the  woods, 
which  make  the  place  very  delightful  Many  such 
are  now  in  Scotland,  since  our  great  proprietors  have 
found  the  way  to  lay  open  the  secret  beauties  of  their 
romantic  domains  to  strangers.  Not  being  able  to 
reach  Harrogate  to  dinner,  we  tried  to  get  something 
at  Grewelthorpe,  the  adjacent  village ;  but  there  was 
no  fire  in  the  house,  nor  anything  indeed,  but  very  bad 
oat  bread  and  some  ordinary  cheese.  Rummaging 
about  in  the  awmry,  however,  I  found  at  last  about  two 
pounds'  weight  of  cold  roast-veal,  which  was  a  great 
prize,  especially  now  that  two  gentlemen  had  joined 
us,  an  Hanoverian  nobleman,  and  a  Dr  Dod  from 
London — not  he  of  infamous  memory,  but  another  of 
perfect  good  character  and  very  agreeable  manners. 
We  visited  many  fine  places  in  the  neighbourhood, 
and  particidarly  Harewood,  the  seat  of  Squire  Las- 
celles,  now  Lord  Harewood,  where  there  is  a  very  fine 
house  built  by  Robert  Adam,  and  then  not  inhabited. 
The  house  might  have  had  a  finer  site,  had  it  been  a 
quMter  of  a  mile  more  to  the  north,  where  there  is  a 
full  view  of  one  of  the  finest  vales  in  Yorkshire.  Neit 
year  I  visited  this  place  again  with  my  wife  and  the 
Blacketts,  and  having  been  rebuked  by  Sir  David 


izecy  Google 


ENGLISH  WATERING-PLACES,  441 

Dalrymple  for  having  omitted  it  before  {because  I 
was  ignorant  of  its  curiosity),  I  went  into  tbe  village 
cliurch,  and  saw  the  monument  of  the  Chief-Justice 
Gascoigne,  a  native  here,  who  had  arrested  Henry  V., 
when  Prince  of  Wales,  for  a  riot. 

Harrogate  abounded  with  half- pay  officers  and 
clergymen.  The  first  are  much  the  same  at  all  times, 
ill  educated,  but  well  bred ;  and  when  you  now  and 
then  meet  with  a  scholar  such  as  Colonel  Roberts,  or 
my  old  friend  whom  I  knew  when  Lieutenant  Ward 
at  Musselburgh — a  little  stuttering  fellow,  about  the 
year  1 749,  who  had  read  Polybius  and  Csesar  twice 
over,  and  who  rose  to  be  a  general  and  commander  of 
the  cavalry  in  Ireland — you  will  find  him  as  intelligent 
as  agreeable.  Of  the  clergy  I  had  never  seen  so  many 
together  before,  and  between  this  and  the  following 
year  I  was  able  to  form  a  true  judgment  of  them. 
They  are,  in  general — I  mean  the  lower  order — divided 
into  bucks  and  prigs ;  of  which  the  first,  though  in- 
conceivably ignorant,  and  sometimes  indecent  in  their 
morals,  yet  I  held  them  to  be  most  tolerable,  because 
they  were  unassuming,  and  had  no  other  affectation 
but  that  of  behaving  themselves  like  gentlemen.  The 
other  division  of  them,  the  pri^  are  truly  not  to  be 
endured,  for  they  are  but  half  learned,  are  ignorant  of 
the  world,  narrow-minded,  pedantic,  and  overbearing. 
And  now  and  then  you  meet  with  a  rara  avis  who  is 
accomplished  and  agreeable,  a  man  of  the  world  with- 
out licentiousness,  of  learning  without  pedantry,  and 
pious  without  sanctimony  ;  but  this  is  a  rara  avis. 


izecy  Google 


442  ENOUSH  WATERING-PLACES. 

This  was  the  first  time  I  bad  seen  John  Bull  at  any 
of  his  watering-places,  and  I  thought  it  not  difficult 
to  account  for  his  resort  to  them.  John  is  an  honest 
and  worthy  person  as  any  in  the  world,  but  he  is  sd- 
dom  happy  at  home.  He  has  in  bis  temper  a  shyness 
that  approaches  to  timidity,  and  a  deference  for  tbe 
opinion  of  his  servant  that  overawes  him,  and  keeps 
him  in  constraint  at  home,  while  he  is  led  into  unrea- 
sonable expense.  At  his  watering-places  he  is  free 
from  these  shackles ;  his  reserve  ia  overcome  by  the 
frankness  of  those  he  meets ;  he  is  master  of  his 
servants,  for  he  carries  only  two  with  him  ;  and  the 
man  of  £10,000  per  annum  can  spend  no  more  than 
the  man  of  £500,  so  that  the  honest  man  finds  him- 
self quite  unfettered,  and  is  ready  to  show  his  Mnd 
and  sociable  disposition ;  he  descends  from  his  ima- 
ginary dignity  by  mixing  with  those  who  are  richer 
than  himself,  and  soon  shows  you  what  he  really  is, 
viz.  the  very  best  sort  of  man  in  the  world.  The  late 
wars  have  been  very  favourable  to  the  improving  and 
disclosing  bis  character,  for  instead  of  going  into 
France,  where  lie  was  flattered,  laughed  at,  and  plun- 
dered, he  is  now  obliged  to  make  all  his  summer 
excursions  round  his  own  country,  where  his  heart 
expands ;  and,  being  treated  as  he  deserves,  returns 
home  for  the  winter  happy  and  much  improved. 

At  this  period  everything  was  cheap  and  good  at 
Harrogate,  except  wine,  which,  unless  it  was  their 
claret,  which  was  everywhere  good  and  reasonable, 
was  very  bad  indeed.    John  Bull,  however,  has  little 


oy  Google 


ENGLISH  WATEBING-FLACBS.  44S 

taste,  and  does  not  much  care ;  for  provided  he  goes  to 
bed  muzzy,  whether  it  be  with  his  own  native  drink, 
ale,  or  eophisticated  port,  he  is  perfectly  contented. 

As  I  designed  to  convey  Wight  to  Dumfries,  and 
Captain  Lindsay  was  going  by  Lochmaben  to  visit 
his  brother  James,  the  minister,  we  agreed  to  set  out 
together,  and  made  a  very  agreeable  journey.  Some 
part  of  the  road  was  dreary  after  we  passed  Sir 
Thomas  Eobertson's,  which  is  a  fine  place,  and  where 
there  is  an  inscription  fairly  acknowledging  that  the 
family  took  its  rise  from  a  Scotch  pedlar.  When  we 
approached  Appleby,  we  were  delighted  with  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  country,  which,  being  a  mixture  of 
hill  and  dale,  of  wood  and  water,  of  cultivated  and 
uncultivated,  is  far  more  pleasing  to  the  eye  and  the 
imagination  than  those  rich  plains  which  are  divided 
into  small  squares  or  parallelograms,  which  look  like 
bleach-fields  for  cotton,  on  the  banks  of  the  Clyde  or 
Leven.  At  Penrith  we  resolved  to  stop  a  day,  to  rest 
our  horses,  and  to  take  the  opportunity  of  going  to 
visit  the  lake  Keswick,  of  which  we  had  heard  so 
much.  Next  morning  we  took  a  post-chaise  and  four 
and  drove  thither,  over  a  rough  road,  through  a  bar- 
ren country,  to  the  village,  at  the  distance  of  eighteen 
miles.  We  were  unlucky,  for  it  proved  a  rainy  after- 
noon, so  that  we  could  not  sail  on  the  lake,  and  saw 
everything  to  great  disadvantage.  We  returned  to 
Penrith,  where  we  had  good  entertainment  and  ex- 
cellent claret. 

Next  moniing  we  set  out  northwards,  and  separated 


oy  Google 


Hi  ENGLISH  WAT£BINO-PLACES. 

from  Captain  Lindsay  when  we  came  to  Longtown, 
for  be  went  to  Lochmaben,  and  we  took  the  road  to 
Dumfries,  where,  after  staying  a  few  days,  I  took  the 
road  home  by  Moffat,  and  Wight  went  over  to  Ire- 
land, once  more  to  visit  his  friends  there.  I  foimd 
my  wife  and  little  daughter  in  good  health,  with  a 
fair  prospect  of  another  ere  long.  My  wife  had  sup- 
posed that  I  bad  some  scorbutic  symptoms,  which  had 
been  removed  by  Harrogate  waters. 

The  remainder  of  the  season  passed  on  aa  usuid, 
but  I  was  not  any  more  from  home,  except  now  and 
then  in  Edinburgh  at  the  Poker  Club,  which  ceased, 
to  meet  by  the  12th  of  August,  and,  reopened  on  the 
12th  of  November. 

Luke  Home,  our  aunt  Home's  youngest  son,  came 
to  us  to  be  at  the  school  a  year  or  two  before,  and 
remained  four  years.  Their  daughter,  Betty,  came 
after,  and  stayed  two  or  three  years.  On  the  first 
day  of  December  this  year  my  wife  brought  me  a 
second  daughter,  which,  after  trying  in  vain  to  nurse, 
she  gave  to  a  very  faithful  and  trusty  woman  in 
Fisherrow,  who,  after  remaining  one  quarter  with  us, 
we  allowed  to  take  the  child  to  her  own  house,  where 
she  continued  to  thrive  to  our  entire  satisfaction. 


oy  Google 


CHAPTEE  XII. 

1784-1766:  AGE,  42-i4. 

DOHEsnO    AFFAIRS HENRT    DUSDA8  —  HARROGATE    REVISITED  — 

ADVl^NTURBS    WITH    A    REICARKABLB     BORE — TBH:    AUTHOR    OF 
"CRAZT    tales" A1IBAB9AD0R    KEITH  —  EDUCATION    OP    TBC 

SCOTS    OBNTHY JOHN    aBEOORY MR8    MOSTAOUE    AND    HElt 

COTERIE — PEATH  OF  THE  AUTHOR'B  FATHEB — SUDDEN  DEATH  OP 
HIS  FRIEND  JARDIN&— C'HURCB  POUIICS. 

It  waa  in  February  this  year,  I  tbink,  that  Mrs  Car- 
lyle,  being  perfectly  recovered,  and  I  accompanied  her 
uncle  and  aunt,  Mr  and  Mrs  Home,  to  Glasgow,  to 
see  their  son  Walter,  who  was  in  quarters  there  with 
his  regiment,  the  7th  Foot.  Dr  Wight  bad  by  that 
time  got  into  his  house  in  the  College,  and  had 
got  his  youngest  sister  to  keep  his  house,  who  waa 
remarkably  handsome,  had  very  good  parts,  with  the 
irank  and  open  manner  of  the  Dnmfriesians.  Her 
brother  did  not  disappoint  her  turn  for  social  enter- 
tainment, for  be  loved  company,  and  the  boose  was 
not  without  them  almost  any  day.  Here  we  and  our 
friends  were  handsomely  entertained,  as  well  as  at 
MrsDregbom'a,  where  we  lodged;  and  at  her  brother's, 
Mr  Bogle's,  who  never  relaxed  in  his  attachment  to 
me.     Walter  Home,  then  only  a  lieutenant,  whose 


izecy  Google 


446  HENRY  DUNDAS. 

churn  was  a  Mr  Mainwarring,  a  very  agreeable  maa, 
had  made  himself  very  respectable  in  Glasgow,  to 
which  he  was  well  entitled,  as  much  from  his  superior 
sense  and  knowledge  as  from  his  social  turn.  John 
Home,  by  one  of  his  benevolent  mistakes,  had  put 
him  about  James  Stuart,  Lord  Bute's  second  son, 
whom  he  was  engaged  to  attend  daily  wbUe  he  lived 
with  Dr  Robertson  in  Edinburgh. 

At  t^is  time  Henry  Dundas,  the  most  strenuoos 
advocate  for  the  law  of  the  land  respecting  presenta- 
tions, and  the  ablest  and  steadiest  friend  to  Dr  Bobert- 
son  and  his  party  that  ever  appeared  in  my  time,  be- 
came a  member  of  Assembly.  He  constantly  attended 
the  Assembly  before  and  after  he  was  Solicitor- General, 
though  when  he  rose  to  be  Lord  Advocate  and  mem- 
ber of  Parliament  he  was  sometimes  detained  in  Lon- 
don till  after  the  meeting  of  Assembly.  He  was  more 
than  a  match  for  the  few  lawyers  who  took  the  op- 
posite side,  and  even  for  Crosbie,  who  was  playing  a 
game,  and  Dr  Dick,  who  was  by  far  the  ablest  cleigy- 
man  in  opposition.  I  am  not  certain  whether  Henry 
Dundas  did  not  excel  more  as  a  barrister  than  he  did 
as  a  judge  in  a  popular  assembly — in  the  first,  by  bis 
entering  so  warmly  into  the  interest  of  his  client  as 
totally  to  forget  himself,  and  to  adopt  all  the  feelings, 
sentiments,  and  interests  of  his  employer ;  in  the 
second,  by  a  fair  and  candid  statement  of  the  ques- 
tion, and  followed  it  by  strong  and  open  reasoning  in 
support  of  his  opinion.  For  a  few  years  at  this  period 
there  was  a  great  struggle  in  the  General  Assembly 


oy  Google 


THE  RELIEF  CHURCH.  447 

agfunst  the  measures  supported  and  carried  through 
by  Kobertsou  and  his  friends,  and  we  bad  to  combat 
the  last  exertions  of  the  party  who  had  supported 
popular  calls ;  and  it  must  be  confessed  that  their 
e£Fort8  were  vigorous.  They  contrived  to  bring  in 
overtures  from  year  to  year,  in  which  they  proposed 
to  consult  the  country,  in  the  belief  that  tbe  result 
would  be  such  a  general  opinion  over  the  kingdom  as 
would  oblige  the  Greneral  Assembly  to  renew  their 
application  for  the  abolition  of  patronage,  or  at  least 
for  some  more  lenient  exercise  of  it.  Those  endea- 
vours were  encouraged  by  a  new  schism  in  the 
Church,  which  was  laid  by  a  Mr  Baine,  minister  of 
Paisley,  which  in  a  few  years  produced  a  numerous 
body  of  new  seceders  called  the  Presbytery  of  Relief, 
who  had  no  fault  to  anything  but  preaentations.  This 
faction  was  supported  for  several  years  by  a  strange 
adventurer,  a  Mr  William  Alexander,  the  second  son 
of  the  provost  of  that  name,  who  of  all  the  men  I  have 
known  had  the  strongest  propensity  to  plotting,  with 
the  finest  talents  for  such  a  business.  As  his  attempts 
to  speak  in  the  Assembly  were  unsuccessful,  and  drew 
nothing  on  him  but  ridicule,  he  actually  wrote  to  Dr 
Blair  (I  have  seen  the  letter),  offering  him  a  thousand 
pounds  if  he  could  teach  him  the  art  of  speaking  in 
public.  As  Blair  was  Professor  of  Rhetoric  and  Belles- 
Lettres,  he  thought  he  was  the  most  likely  person  to 
comply  with  his  request ;  but  he  had  not  observed 
that  Dr  Blfur  never  spoke  in  public  himself,  but  from 
the  pulpit,  from  whence  he  might  have  gathered  that 


izecy  Google 


448  C0NTE0VEESIE3. 

tbe  knowledge  of  rhetoric  was  different  from  the 
practice. 

It  was  in  this  year  that  Dr  Drysdale  was  translated 
from  Kirkliston  to  Edinburgh  after  a  long  stra^le 
with  the  popular  body,  the  General  Session  of  Edin- 
burgh, who,  with  the  Town  Council,  had  for  many 
years  elected  all  the  ministers.  The  Magistrates  and 
Council  reassumed  their  right  of  presentation  in  this 
case,  and  after  much  litigation  established  it,  much 
for  the  peace  of  the  city.  During  the  contest,  which 
was  violent,  my  friend  Dr  Jardine  rode  out  to  me, 
and  requested  me  to  draw  up  a  paper  in  their  defence, 
which  I  did  on  his  furnishing  me  with  the  facts,  and 
published  under  the  title  of  Faction  Detected.  This  I 
mention,  because  Mr  Robertson,  the  Procurator,  asked 
me  once  if  it  was  not  of  his  father's  composing,  for  so 
it  had  been  said  to  him.  But  I  told  him  the  fact,  and 
at  the  same  time  gave  him  the  reasons  of  dissent  from 
a  sentence  of  the  Commission  in  1751  or '52,  which 
had  been  originally  drawn  by  Dr  Robertson,  though 
corrected  and  enlarged  by  a  committee.  This  pam- 
phlet had  so  much  effect  that  the  opposition  employed 
their  first  hand,  Dr  Dick,  to  write  an  answer  to  it ; 
and  yet  neither  the  provost,  nor  any  of  the  magis- 
trates, nor  Drysdale  himself,  ever  thanked  me  for  it. 
Dr  Jardine  perhaps  never  told  his  father-in-law, 
Drummond,  and  I  never  asked  him  about  it.  Lind- 
say, who  was  restless,  for  whom  John  Home  had  ob- 
tained Lochmaben,  now  got  Kirkliston,  and  Lord  Bute 
sent  Dicky  Bi-own  to  Lochmaben,  for  which  he  had 


izecy  Google 


CHANCELLOR  LOUOHBOBOUOU.  449 

no  thanks  from  the  neighbourhood,  for  though 
Lindsay's  temper  was  not  very  congruous  to  his 
brethren  and  neighbours,  yet  he  was  a  gentleman, 
whereas  the  other  was  the  contrary,  and  sometimes 
deranged. 

In  the  end  of  summer  I  went  again  with  Mrs  Car- 
lyle  to  Harrogate,  aa  her  health  was  not  good,  and  as 
the  [change],  if  not  the  waters,  might  be  good  for  her. 
I  got  an  open  chaise  with  two  horses — one  before  the 
other,  and  the  servant  on  the  first.  As  many  of  the 
roads  through  which  we  went  were  not  at  all  improved, 
we  found  this  an  excellent  way  of  travelling.  We 
visited  our  friends  in  the  Merse  and  in  the  north  of 
England  by  the  way,  and  stayed  some  days  at  New- 
castle. As  Mr  Blackett  and  his  lady  were  going  soon 
to  Eipon  to  visit  his  mother,  they  agreed  to  come  on 
for  a  week  to  Harrogate,  after  which  we  would  return 
with  them  by  York,  where  Mrs  Carlyle  had  never 
been. 

The  assizes  were  at  Newcaatle  while  we  were  there, 
and  Alexander  "Wedderburn  was  attending  as  a  coun- 
sellor.*    He  had  been  there  the  preceding  year,  but 

had  not  a  cause.    Mr ,  an  old  counsellor,  who 

had  left  London  and  settled  at  Leeds,  had  become  ac- 
quainted with  bim,  and  had  discovered  the  superiority 
of  his  talents.  He  got  him  two  or  three  briefs  this 
circuit,  and  his  appearances  were  such  as  insured  him 
future  success.    This  very  gentleman  pointed  out  his 

*  The  rcodiT  Deed  lurdl;  be  noniadcd  Oiat  the  Alciaoder  Wodderburn 
an  fraqnently  taentioneil  became  Lord  Cbancellur  Loiigbborough. — Ed. 


D,  Google 


450  A  CRIMIHAL  TRIAL. 

first  lady  to  him,  with  whom  he  got  XIO.OOO.  When 
the  assizes  were  over  he  dined  with  us  at  Mr  Blackett's, 
where  his  talent  for  convereation  not  being  equal  to 
that  at  the  bar,  being  stiff  and  pompons,  he  made  not 
such  an  impression  on  the  company  as  they  expected. 
The  appearance  of  self-conceit  always  disgusts  the 
ladies.  He  camS  to  Harrogate  daring  the  first  days  of 
our  residence  there,  and  stayed  two  nighta,  when  Mrs 
Carlyle  had  some  difficulty  in  getting  him  a  partner. 

It  will  not  be  improper  here  to  state,  that  on  a 
future  occasion  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  save  a  man 
for  that  time  from  the  gallows.  There  was  a  man  of 
the  name  of  Robertson,  who  lived  near  Belford,  who 
was  accused  of  having  stolen  a  heifer,  and  killed  it  at 
his  own  bouse.  The  heifer  had  belonged  to  a  person 
several  miles  distant  from  Belford,  and  was  killed  and 
skinned  before  it  was  seen  by.anybody ;  but  the  proof 
on  its  marks,  and  the  colour  of  its  skin,  made  it  very 
like  the  one  amissing.  The  man  had  no  advocate,  and 
being  put  on  the  boards,  was  asked  by  the  judge 
(Yates)  if  he  had  any  defence  to  maka  He  answered, 
that  he  was  in  use  of  going  annually  to  Dunse  fair, 
where  he  generally  bought  a  beast  oi  two  for  his  own 
use,  and  this  was  one  he  had  got  there.  The  judge 
summed  up  the  evidence  and  charged  the  jury,  ob- 
serving in  his  conclusion,  that  the  only  defence  the 
man  made  was,  that  he  bought  the  heifer  at  Dnnse 
fair.  Now  it  having  been  proved  that  tins  heifer  was 
of  English  breed,  which  could  not  be  bought  at  Dunae, 
that  defence  would  go  for  nothing.     I  was  amazed  at 


izecy  Google 


A   CRIMINAL   TRIAL.  451 

the  ignorance  of  the  judge,  and  the  carelessueBS  of  the 
grand  juiy,  and  said  to  Colonel  Dicksou  of  Belford 
that  the  judge  had  gone  quite  wrong  in  his  charge. 
He  answered  that  Robertson  was  a  great  rascal,  and 
deserved  to  be  hanged.  I  answered  that  might  be 
true,  but  that  he  ought  not  to  suffer  for  the  ignorance 
of  the  judge  or  jury,  for  he  knew  as  well  as  I  did 
that  cattle  of  Northumberland  were  to  be  bought  at 
Dunse  fair — nay,  that  half  the  cattle  in  Berwickshire 
were  of  that  breed,  so  that  if  he  would  not  explain 
this  to  the  judge,  I  would.  I  at  last  prevailed  with 
him  to  go  round  and  whisper  the  judge,  who,  calling 
in  the  jury,  retracted  what  he  had  said.  He  sent 
them  out  again,  and  in  a  few  minutes  they  returned 
and  gave  in  their  verdict,  "  Not  guilty."  I  am  afraid 
such  mistakes  must  frequently  happen  in  England,  in 
spite  of  the  perfection  of  their  laws. 

When  we  arrived  at  Harrogate,  the  Dragon  was  not 
full,  and  the  first  person  we  saw  was  the  late  General 
Clerk,  whom,  though  younger  by  at  least  a  year  than 
me,  I  had  known  at  college,  and  had  sometimes  met 
when  I  was  last  iu  London.  This  was  a  very  singular 
man,  of  a  very  ingenious  and  active  intellect,  though 
he  had  broke  short  in  his  education  by  entering  at  an 
early  age  into  the  army ;  and  having  by  nature  a 
copious  elocution,  he  threw  out  his  notions,  which  were 
often  new,  with  a  force  and  rapidity  which  stunned 
you  more  than  they  convinced.  He  applied  his  war- 
like ideas  to  colloquial  intercourse,  and  attacked  your 
opinions  as  he  would  do  a  redoubt  or  a  castle,  not  by 


izecy  Google 


452  A  OB&AT  BORE. 

Bap  and  mine,  but  by  open  storm.  I  most  confess, 
that  of  all  the  men  who  had  so  much  understaQdin^ 
he  was  the  most  disagreeable  pereoD  to  converse  with 
whom  I  ever  knew.  The  worst  of  him  was,  that  he 
was  not  contented  with  a  patient  hearing,  nor  even 
with  the  common  marks  of  assentation,  such  as  yes, 
or  certainly,  or  to  be  sure,  or  nodding  the  head,  as 
Charles  Townshend,  and  William  Robertson,  and  other 
great  talkers  were  ;  you  must  contradict  him,  and 
wrangle  with  him,  or  you  had  no  peace.  Elibank  had 
something  of  the  same  humour,  but  he  was  better 
bred.  Clerk  was  truly  the  greatest  siccatore  in  the 
world.  Like  some  of  the  locusts  that  blast  the  vege- 
table world,  and  shrivel  to  dust  everything  that  is 
green,  he  was  of  the  caterpillar  kind,  who  have  a  par- 
ticular species  of  food,  on  which  alone  they  fasten, 
aud  leave  the  rest  untouched.  I  unluckily  happened 
to  be  the  only  person  of  that  species  at  this  time  in 
the  Dragon  whom  he  knew,  and  he  fastened  on  me 
like  a  leech.  Mrs  Carlyle  and  I  breakfasted  at  a  table 
by  ourselves,  not  caring  to  join  with  anybody,  as  we 
expected  our  friends  from  Newcastle.  In  vain  I 
hinted  this  to  him  as  an  excuse  for  not  asking  him  to 
breakfast.  That,  he  said,  he  never  did,  as  he  wished 
to  be  independent.  On  the  third  day,  however,  after 
our  arrival,  having  been  much  taken  with  Mrs  Cai^ 
lyle's  manner  of  conveisiug,  and  her  not  being  alarmed 
at  his  paradoxes,  but  only  laughing  at  them,  he  or- 
dered his  tea-table  to  be  set  down  close  by  hers,  and 
kept  up  a  noisy  palaver  which  attracted  the  att-ention 


oy  Google 


HALL  AND  SAVAGE  LEE.  453 

of  the  whole  room  ;  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  kd/s 
entire  possession  of  herself,  and  her  being  a  general 
favourite  of  the  company  who  were  there,  might  have 
let  loose  the  tongue  of  scandal.  He  told  me  that 
he  expected  Adam  Ferguson  from  Edinburgh  imme- 
diately, who  was  to  take  the  two  brothers  of  Lord 
Grenville,  who  were  with  Dr  Eobertson  at  Edinburgh, 
under  his  care,  and  that  he  looked  every  day  for  his 
arrival.  Ferguson  had  told  me  this  before,  and  I  now 
ardently  wished  for  his  coining.  In  about  four  or 
five  days  Ferguson  came,  and  most  happily  relieved 
me  from  my  post  of  fatigue ;  for  when  everybody  went 
a  riding  or  walking  in  the  forenoon,  the  first  of  which 
he  could  not  do,  as  he  had  no  horse, — would  you  be- 
lieve it  1  he  patiently  walked  backwards  and  forwards 
within  sight  of  the  door,  so  that  I  could  not  possibly 
escape  him,  and  was  obliged  to  submit  to  my  destiny, 
which  was  to  walk  and  wrangle  with  bim  for  three 
hours  together.  About  the  fourth  evening  I  had  a 
little  relief  by  the  arrival  of  two  gentlemen,  whom  aa 
we  met  driving  to  the  inn  in  such  a  carriage  as  mine, 
as  we  were  walking  on  the  heath.  Clerk,  having 
stopped  and  spoken  to  them,  returned  to  me  and  said 
that  we  were  now  lucky,  for  those  were  hands  of  the 
first  water.     They  were  Hall,  Esq.,  the  author 

of  Crazy  Tales;  and  the  famous  Colonel  Lee,  com- 
monly called  Savage  Lee.*    As  Clerk  expected  Fer- 

*  Hie  Crazy  Taiei  were  publiihed  in  1TC2  uioDymously.  Hey  appear 
{1796)  ia  Uie  collected  warlcs  of  John  Hftll  SteveneoD,  who  died  in  17S5. 
Chkrios  Lee  was  afMrwarda  celebrated  u  the  rival  of  Washington  for  the 
commaiid  of  the  American  army.     He  wai  one  oE  the  reputed  anthoTs  of 


izecy  Google 


451  FEBGDSON   AND   THE   BORE. 

guson,  and  Charles,  and  Robert  Grenviile,  we  had 
agreed  to  keep  at  the  foot  of  one  of  the  tables  that 
we  might  have  them  near  us ;  and  he  requested  me  to 
remain  in  the  same  position,  as  the  two  newly-arrived 
would  be  glad  to  sit  by  us.  I  acquiesced,  and  found  the 
first  a  highly-accomplished  and  well-bred  gentleman ; 
not  so  the  second,  but  he  might  have  been  endured 
had  it  not  been  for  the  perpetual  jarringa  between 
Clerk  and  him,  which,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  mild 
and  courteous  manner  of  his  companion  Hall,  must 
have  ended  in  a  quarrel ;  for  the  moment  after  the 
ladies  rose  from  table,  which  was  very  soon,  the  two 
soldiers  fell  a  wrangling  and  fighting  like  pugilists, 
which  made  their  company  very  disagreeable. 

In  a  day  or  two  Ferguson  arrived,  which  eflfectually 
took  Clerk  oflF  me,  except  at  our  meal-time,  which  I 
could  now  endure,  as  his  fire  was  divided.  Before 
Ferguson  came,  the  house  began  to  be  crowded,  and 
he  was  put  into  a  very  bad  lodging-room,  near  where 
the  fiddlers  slept,  and  very  noisy.  On  the  third  day 
he  was  seized  with  a  fever,  of  which  he  was  very 
impatient,  and  said  it  was  entirely  owing  to  his  bad 
room.  I  brought  Mrs  Carlyle  to  him,  who  thought 
him  very  feverish.  I  went  to  the  landlady  to  procure 
him  a  better  room,  and  when  Kilrington,  the  M.D. 
from  Kippon,  who  attended  the  house  daily,  arrived 
before  dinner,  I  carried  him  to  him,  who  prescribed 
nothing  but  rest  and  sack  whey.  After  two  days 
more,  Kilrington,  who  saw  him  twice  a-day,  told  me 
to  go  to  him,  for  he  was  better.     I  sat  with  him  a 


oy  Google 


M'LEOD   OF   THAT   ILK.  455 

few  minutes,  and  as  the  dinner-beU  rang,  I  left  him, 
saying  I  would  send  C3erk  after  dinner.  "  God  for- 
bid," said  he,  in  a  voice  of  despair,  "  as  you  regard  my 
life."  This  explosion  left  me  no  room  to  doubt  what 
was  the  trae  cause  of  his  fever.  In  two  days  more 
he  was  able  to  join  us. 

Soon  after  this  there  was  a  party  made  out  which 
amused  us  much.  The  Laird  of  M'Leod,  with  his 
wife  and  daughter,  afterwards  Lady  Pringle,  arrived 
after  dinner  ;  and  as  we  were  their  only  acquaintance, 
and  they  had  arrived  after  dinner,  we  waited  on  them 
to  tea  in  their  parlonr,  when  they  asked  us  [to  a  concert] 
they  were  to  have  there  an  hour  or  two  later,  which 
was  to  be  private,  but  we  might  bring  one  or  two  of 
our  friends.  We  attended  accordingly,  and  took 
Messrs  Hall  and  Lee  and  two  ladies  with  ub.  Miss 
M'Leod  was  at  this  time  in  the  prime  of  her  beaxity, 
and  a  few  months  past  sixteen.  She  was  truly  very 
striking  and  attractive.  When  the  Savage  saw  her,  he 
seemed  astonished  with  her  beauty ;  when  she  sang 
a  Scottish  song,  he  was  delighted ;  but  when  she 
finished  with  an  Italian  song  of  the  first  order,  he 
was  ravished,  and  feU  into  a  silly  amazement,  how  a 
young  lady  from  the  barbarous  coast  of  the  Isle  of 
Skye  could  possibly  be  such  a  mistress  of  the  Italian 
music  and  Italian  tongue.  He  spake  not  another 
word  all  that  night  or  the  next  morning,  when  he 
had  several  opportunities  of  drinking  deeper  in  the 
Cyprian  goblet ;  but  when  he  saw  them  preparing 
to  leave  us  after  dinner,  the  conquered  hero  could  not 


izecy  Google 


456  GAIETIES  AT  HAEEOGATE. 

stand  the  mortifying  event,  but  retired  from  the  com- 
pany, and  was  seen  no  more  that  night.  The  fit 
lasted  for  several  days,  and  he  bore  the  raillery  of 
Hall  and  Clerk  with  a  meekness  "which  proved  the 
strength  of  bis  passion.  M'Leod  had  only  looked  in 
at  Harrogate  to  observe  the  state  of  gaming  there ; 
but  as  he  found  nothing  higher  than  a  guinea  whist- 
table,  he  thought  to  stay  would  be  losing  time,  and 
made  the  best  of  his  way  to  a  town  about  forty  miles 
off,  where  there  were  races  to  begin  next  day. 

Mrs  Carlyle  had  never  been  at  any  watering-place 
before,  and,  considering  that  she  was  only  twenty- 
four,  she  conducted  herself  with  surprising  propriety, 
many  proofs  of  which  I  had,  to  my  great  delight — one 
proof  was,  the  great  joy  that  appeared  when  she  won 
the  chief  prize  in  a  lottery  which  was  drawn  for  the 
amusement  of  the  company.  There  waa  another  lady 
from  the  south,  of  popular  manners,  a  Mrs  Maxwell, 
who  had  the  good  wishes  of  a  few  of  the  ladies ;  but 
our  party  beat  hers  both  in  numbers  and  sincere  at- 
tachment. 

Our  friends,  the  Blacketts,  had  now  been  for  some 
days  at  Ripon  with  his  mother,  a  fine  hospitable  old 
lady,  the'  daughter  of  Mr  Wise  of  the  Priory  at  "War- 
wick. By  a  message  they  invited  us  to  dine  there 
next  day,  and  desired  us  to  bespeak  their  lodging,  as 
they  were  to  come  to  Harrogate  with  us.  This  we 
accordingly  did,  and  passed  a  very  agreeable  day  with 
the  old  lady  and  our  friends.  She  had  a  fine  haunch  of 
venison  for  us  from  Studley  Park,  besides  many  other 


oy  Google 


GAIETIES  AT  HAKKOGATE.  457 

good  thiugs.  Eipon  is  a  delightful  village  to  live 
at,  not  merely  on  account  of  the  good  provisions  for 
the  table  and  a  plentiful  country,  but  because  there 
is  a  dean  and  chapter,  and  generally  excellent  musi- 
cians. The  dean  and  prebendary  are  well  endowed, 
and  they  and  their  families  famish  a  good  society. 
The  Blat^etts  returned  with  us  to  Harrogate,  and  we 
passed  our  time  very  pleasantly.  On  the  last  night 
Clerk  and  HaU  asked  me  in  the  evening  to  go  to  the 
Queen's  Head  to  see  some  of  oar  acquaintance  there, 
and  to  shun  our  own  ball.  We  went  accordingly, 
and  met  with  a  ball  there,  of  which  we  tired,  and, 
that  we  might  be  quiet,  went  to  the  Granby,  where 
there  was  no  ball,  and  where  there  was  excellent 
claret.  As  Lee  had  refused  to  come  abroad  that 
evening.  Hall  was  at  liberty,  and  so,  taking  Kilring- 
ton  the  doctor  with  us  as  a  fourth  hand,  we  went 
there  to  supper,  when  Hall  and  Clerk  fell  a-debating 
so  tediously  and  so  warmly  about  Lord  Bute's  char- 
acter and  fitness  for  the  place  of  minister,  that  we  did 
not  retnm  to  the  Dragon  till  six  in  the  morning.  I 
was  diverted  to  see  how  Clerk,  who  generally  took 
part  against  Lord  Bute,  that  night  became  his  zealous 
friend,  and  not  only  contended  that  his  being  a  Scotch- 
man was  no  bar,  but  that  his  talents  were  equal  to 
any  high  situation.  Hall  allowed  him  private  virtues, 
but  no  public  ability. 

This  conference  was  very  tiresome,  and  lasted  too 
late  for  me,  who  was  to  set  out  soon  next  morning. 
Ferguson's  young  gentlemen  were  not  yet  arrived. 


oy  Google 


458  THE  LAIBDS  IN   1765. 

and  he  remained  a  week  longer  without  being  able  to 
shake  off  his  dear  friend  Clerk,  who  had  procured  for 
him  the  charge  of  those  boyfl,  and  who,  through  his 
friendship  to  Lady  Warwick,  took  a  fatherly  charge 
of  them. 

Our  company  got  to  York  before  dinner,  where  we 
stayed  most  part  of  next  day,  and  got  to  Newcastle 
in  two  days,  and  in  a  few  days  more  arrived  at  home. 
Blackett's  horse  was  very  heavy,  and  my  tandem  far 
outran  them.  When  we  came  home,  we  found  our 
children  in  perfect  health,  which  was  a  great  delight 
to  us,  and  proved  the  fidelity  of  Jenny's  nurse,  with 
whom  we  had  trusted  them  both. 

Ambassador  Keith  had  returned  home,  and  having 
a  handsome  pension  settled  on  him,  he  lived  hand- 
somely for  some  time  in  Edinburgh,  and  after  a  while 
at  Hermitage,  on  Leith  Links.  He  was  a  man,  though 
without  wit  and  humour,  yet  of  good  sense  and  much 
knowledge  of  the  world.  He  had  been  absent  from 
Scotland  for  twenty-two  years  as  private  secretary  to 
Mareschal  Lord  Stair,  Envoy  at  Holland,  and  Ambas- 
sador at  Vienna  and  Petersburg.  He  complained 
that  the  society  of  Edinburgh  wag  altered  much  for 
the  worse.  Most  of  his  old  companions  were  dead. 
The  Scottish  lairds  did  not  now  make  it  a  part  of 
their  education  to  pass  two  years  at  least  abroad,  if 
they  had  but  £300  per  annum,  from  whence  they 
returned  polished  in  their  manners  ;  and  that  portion 
of  them  who  had  good  sense,  with  their  minds  en- 
larged  and  their  manners  improved.       They  found 


oy  Google 


THE  LAIKDS  IN   1765.  459 

themselves  now  better  employed  in  remaining  at  home, 
and  cultivating  their  fields  ;  but  they  were  less  quali- 
fied for  conveiBation,  and  could  talk  of  nothing  but 
of  dung  and  of  bullocks.  The  lawyers  had  contented 
themselves  with  studying  law  at  home.  The  medical 
tribe  had  now  the  best  school  of  physic  in  Europe 
established  in  Edinburgh,  and  a  rising  infirmary, 
which  promised  the  students  an  ample  field  of  prac- 
tice, so  tiiat  very  few  of  that  profession  went  now 
to  Leyden  or  Paris.  Keith  complained  of  the  dulnesa 
of  the  society,  in  which  he  was  confirmed  by  his  son, 
afterwards  Sir  Robert  Murray  Keith,  who  had  come 
down  to  stay  for  three  months,  but  returned  by  the 
end  of  one,  not  finding  the  state  of  society  to  his 
mind.  The  Ambassador  had  recourse  to  our  order, 
who  had,  till  lately,  never  been  thought  good  com- 
pany ;  so  that  finding  Blair  and  Bobertson  and  Jar- 
dine  and  myself,  to  whom  he  afterwards  added  Fer- 
guson, good  company  for  him,  he  appointed  us  am- 
bassador's chaplains,  and  required  an  attendance  at 
least  once  a-week  to  dinner  at  his  house,  and  was  to 
return  our  visits  when  we  asked  him.  He  was  soon 
chosen  a  member  of  the  Poker  Club,  which  was  en- 
tirely to  his  taste.  Baron  Mure  and  Lord  Elliock 
were  also  much  in  his  society,  especially  the  first,  wlio 
having  been  intimate  with  Lord  Bute  during  the  ten 
years  he  resided  in  Bute,  previous  to  1745,  was,  after 
serving  in  Parliament  for  some  years  for  Renfrew- 
shire, promoted  to  the  place  of  Baron  of  Exchequer. 
When  Milton's  infirmities  made  him  retire  from  busi- 


ly Google 


460  DR  GREGORY. 

ness.  Baron  Mure  was  the  man  who  waa  thought  fit  to 
supply  his  place,  after  Lord  Bute'a  brother,  who  tried 
it  for  one  eeaaon,  but  finding  his  being  aub-minister 
not  agreeable  to  the  country,  and  very  irksome  to 
himself,  he  prudently  declined  it,  when  Mure  became 
the  confidential  man  of  business,  for  which  he  was 
perfectly  well  qualified  ;  for  though  his  manner  was 
blunt  and  unattractive,  yet  as,  at  the  same  time,  he 
was  unassuming,  of  ezceUeDt  understanding  and  great 
ability  for  business,  he  continued  to  be  much  trusted 
and  advised  with  as  long  as  he  lived.^  Elliock  was 
an  excellent  scholar,  and  a  man  of  agreeable  conversa- 
tion, having  many  curious  anecdotes  in  his  store  ;  and 
to  his  other  fund,  had  the  good  fortune  to  be  well  ac- 
quainted with  Frederick  the  Great  of  Prussia,  when 
he  retired  into  Holland  from  his  father's  tyranny,  and 
visited  him  at  least  once  by  invitation,  after  he  came 
to  the  throne.t  , 

This  was  the  year,  too,  when  Dr  John  Gregory,  my 
Leyden  friend,  came  to  settle  in  Edinburgh,  a  widower, 
with  three  sons  and  three  daughters.^  He  soon  came 
to  be  perfectly  known  here,  and  got  into  very  good 
business.     Dr  Rutherford,  Professor  of  the  Practice  of 

*  WiUiam  More  of  Caldwell,  Baroh  of  tbo  Exchequer,  liald  a  high  aocial 
place  among  tiiemenof  letteraof  that  dayin  Scotland ;  ho  was  the  intimate 
triend  and  the  correspoadeat  of  David  Hume.  His  corrtepondence  ii  con- 
tained in  "  the  Caldwell  Papers,"  edit«d  for  the  BannatynG  Club  1^  big 
descendant,  the  late  ditrtiugiiiBhed  schcdar  and  author.  Colonel  Mni& — Ed. 

t  James  Veitcb,  advocate,  was  raised  to  tbe  bench  in  1760,  when  he  took 
the  title  of  Lord  Elliock.  He  enjoyed  a  reputation  in  bis  day,  from  the 
circtunstance,  alluded  to  in  the  text,  of  Frederic  the  Great  having  taken  a 
fancy  to  him,  and  conferred  on  him  the  lanb  of  Cfnrespondent — Ed> 

;  See  above,  p.  179. 


izecy  Google 


MRS  MONTAGUE.  461 

Physic,  beginiiiug  to  fail,  and  being  afraid  of  CuUen 
becoming  hig  successor,  whom  he  held  to  be  an  heretic, 
he  readily  entered  into  a  compact  witli  Gregory,  whom 
he  esteemed  orthodox  in  the  medical  faith,  and  re- 
signed his  class  to  him.  In  a  year  or  two  that  doctor 
died,  when  Cullen  and  Gregory,  agreeable  to  previous 
settlement,  taught  the  two  classes  the  theory  and 
practice  by  turns,  changing  every  sesBion.  I  got  Gre- 
gory elected  into  the  Poker,  but  though  very  desirous 
at  first,  yet  he  did  not  avail  himself  of  it,  but  desisted 
after  twice  attending,  afraid,  I  suppose,  of  disgusting 
some  of  the  ladies  he  paid  court  to  by  faUing  in  some- 
times there  with  David  Hume,  whom  they  did  not 
know  for  the  innocent  good  soul  which  he  really  was. 
Professor  Ferguson  told  me  not  long  ago  that  he  was 
present  the  second  time  Dr  Gregory  attended  the 
Poker,  when,  enlarging  on  his  favourite  topic,  the 
superiority  of  the  female  sex,  he  was  so  laughed  at 
and  run  down  that  he  never  returned. 

Gregory  had  met  with  Old  Montague  at  the  Royal 
Society  in  London,  who  was  fond  of  all  mathemati- 
cians, and  had  made  himself  master  of  his  mind. 
Montague  introduced  him  to  his  wife,  a  fine  woman, 
who  was  a  candidate  for  glory  in  every  branch  of 
literature  but  that  of  her  husband,  and  its  connec- 
tions and  dependencies.  She  was  a  faded  beauty,  a 
wit,  a  critic,  an  author  of  some  fame,  and  a  ^iend 
and  coadjutor  of  Lord  Littleton.  She  had  some  parts 
and  knowledge,  and  might  have  been  admired  by  the 
first  order  of  minds,  had  she  not  been  greedy  of  more 


oy  Google 


462  MBS   MONTAGUE — THOMAS  GRAY. 

praise  than  Bhe  was  entitled  to.  She  came  here  for  a 
fortnight,  from  her  residence  near  Newcastle,  to  visit 
Gregory,  who  took  care  to  show  her  off;  but  she  did 
not  take  here,  for  she  despised  the  women,  and  dis- 
gusted the  men  with  her  affectation.  Old  Edinburgh 
was  not  a  climate  for  the  success  of  impostures.  Lord 
Kames,  who  was  at  first  catched  with  her  Parnassian 
coquetry,  said  at  last  that  he  believed  she  had  as 
much  learning  as  a  well-educated  college  lad  here  of 
sixteen.  I  could  have  forgiven  her  for  her  pretensions 
to  literary  fame,  had  she  not  loudly  put  in  her  claim 
to  the  praise  and  true  devotion  of  the  heart,  which 
belongs  to  genuine  feelings  and  deeds,  in  which  she 
was  remarkably  deficient.  We  saw  her  often  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Newcastle,  and  in  that  town,  where 
there  was  no  audience  for  such  an  actress  as  she  was, 
her  natural  character  was  displayed,  which  was  that 
of  an  active  manager  of  her  affairs,  a  crafty  chaperon, 
and  a  keen  pursuer  of  her  interest,  not  to  be  outdone 
by  the  sharpest  coal-dealer  on  Tyne  ;  but  in  this  capa- 
city she  was  not  displeasing,  for  she  was  not  acting 
a  part.  Mrs  Montague  was  highly  delighted  with 
"  Sister  Peg,"  which  Ferguson  had  written,  and  con- 
gratulated Mrs  Carlyle  on  having  a  husband  whose 
conversation  must  be  a  constant  source  of  entertun- 
ment.  She  did  not  advert  to  it,  that  in  domestic  life 
the  scene  did  not  always  lie  in  the  drawing-room. 

We  had  a  sight  of  the  celebrated  poet  Gray  at  Dr 
Gregory's,  who  passing  through  Edinburgh  to  the 
Highlands  with  my  £deud  Major  Lyon  for  his  con- 


izecDy  Google 


FATHERS   DEATH.  468 

ductor,  six  or  seven  of  us  assembled  to  meet  him,  and 
were  disappointed.  But  this  eminent  poet  faa,d  not 
justice  done  him,  for  he  was  much  worn  out  with  his 
journey,  and,  by  retiring  soon  after  supper,  proved  that 
he  had  been  taken  at  a  time  when  he  was  not  fit  to 
be  shown  off. 

(1765.) — Early  in  March  this  year  I  lost  my  worthy 
father,  at  seventy-five  years  of  age.  He  had  been  for 
some  years  declining,  and  of  late  had  strong  symp- 
toms of  dropsy,  a  disease  of  worn-out  constitutions ; 
for  though  seemingly  robust  and  very  active,  he  had 
been  afBicted  all  his  Ufe  with  siindiy  disorders  of  an 
alarming  nature,  such  as  an  universal  rheumatism,  and 
spasms  in  his  stomach  at  regular  hours  every  night 
for  three  months  together.  He  died  with  the  utmost 
calmness  and  resignation,  and  ordered  all  his  afi^urs 
with  a  prudence  and  foresight  that  were  surprising, 
amidst  &equent  effusions  of  the  most  fervent  piety. 
Though  long  expected,  I  felt  this  a  severe  blow,  as 
every  man  of  common  feelings  must  do — the  loss  of 
a  respectable  parent.  The  sincere  grief  of  his  parish, 
and  the  unaffected  regret  of  all  who  knew  him,  raised 
pleasing  sensations  in  the  minds  of  hia  family.  I  had 
withdrawn  my  wife  from  this  aflBicting  scene,  by  let- 
tang  her  yield  to  the  importunity  of  her  sister,  and  go 
to  Newcastle  in  the  beginning  of  March.  This  as- 
cendance which  her  sister  had  on  her  affections  ac- 
counted perfectly  for  our  not  growing  rich,  as  some  of 
our  free-judging  neighbours  alleged  we  must  certainly 
be  doing ;  for  though  our  income  was  tolerable,  yet 


oy  Google 


461  THE   PATEONAGE   QUESTION. 

these  frequent  visits  to  the  south  —  not  less  than 
twice  in  a  year — put  it  only  in  our  power  to  pay  our 
accounts  at  the  end  of  the  year.  I  went  to  New- 
castle before  the  end  of  April  to  bring  my  wife  home, 
on  which  or  some  such  occasion  we  brought  with 
lis  Dr  Gregory's  two  daughters,  Dolly  and  Anne, 
very  fine  girls,  who  had  been  staying  with  Mrs  Mon- 
tague. As  there  were  none  of  my  father's  family  now 
alive  but  my  sister  NeU,  who  was  the  youngest,  and 
Sarah,  who  was  one  or  two  years  older,  and  unmar- 
ried, my  father  had  the  satisfaction  that  my  mother 
would  be  independent,  but  advised  her  to  come  close 
to  me,  which  she  did  at  the  Michaelmas  term. 

Lord  Prestongrange,  the  patron  of  the  parish,  who 
was  my  father's  friend  and  old  companion  at  college, 
was  generous  to  my  mother,  by  giving  her  a  grant  of 
the  glebe,  which  was  partly  sown,  and  a  considerable 
part  of  the  vacant  stipend,  to  which  she  was  not  en- 
titled. The  two  next  successors  to  my  father  died  in 
four  years,  so  that  his  place  was  not  well  filled  up,  nor 
the  regret  of  the  parishioners  lessened  for  his  loss,  till 
Dr  Joseph  M'Cormick  succeeded  in  1768  or '69. 

In  the  General  Assembly  this  year  there  was  a 
strong  push  made  to  bring  in  an  overture  to  all  the 
presbyteries  of  the  Church  to  inquire  into  the  causes 
of  schism,  kc,  from  whence  those  in  opposition  to 
patronages  believed  there  would  come  such  a  report 
as  would  found  and  justify  a  fresh  application  to  the 
Legislature  for  their  abolition.  It  was  thought  best 
on  our  side  not  directly  to  oppose  this  motion,  but  to 


oy  Google 


propose  a  committee  of  Assembly  rather  than  agree 
to  the  traDsmissioD,  which  was  agreed  to,  and  a  large 
committee  appointed,  who,  strange  to  tell,  in  spite  of  all 
their  zeal,  met  only  once,  and  did  nothing,  though  they 
had  full  power,  and  made  no  report  to  next  Assembly* 

It  was  in  the  months  of  August  and  September 
this  year  that  Dr  Wight  and  I  made  our  tour  round 
the  north,  where  neither  of  us  had  ever  been,  from 
whence  we  derived  much  amusement  and  satisfac- 
tion. We  went  on  horseback  by  Queenaferry,  Perth, 
Dundee,  Arbroath,  &c  We  stayed  four  days  and 
nights  at  Aberdeen  on  account  of  Dr  Wight's  horse 
having  been  lamed  in  crossing  the  ferry  at  Montrose ; 
but  we  passed  our  time  very  agreeably  between  the 
houses  of  our  friends  Drs  Campbell  and  Gerard. 

When  I  returned — for  Wight  went  to  Dumfries 
from  Edinburgh — I  found  the  children  well,  but  their 
mother  suffering  from  a  very  severe  rheumatism  in 
her  teeth,  owing  to  their  being  cleaned  too  much. 
A  fresh  call  from  Newcastle  carried  Mrs  Carlyle  there 
again  in  the  beginning  of  November.  I  did  not  go 
with  her,  but  went  for  her  at  the  end  of  the  year,  and 

*  The  reader  mil  recognise  in  tbeie  nod  subaaquent  passagea  some  ioter- 
«stiag  incidents  of  the  great  contest,  which,  beginning  vith  the  Fatron^e 
Act  o£  1710,  threw  off  two  dissenting  bodiia — theSeceesionand  the  Belief — 
in  the  eighteenth  ceDtury,  and  ended  in  the  construction  of  the  Free  Church 
in  1843.  The  njitnre  of  the  proceedings  will  be  undentood  by  keeping  in 
view  that  the  "orerture,"  or  opening  of  a  measure  (a  term  taken  b;  the  Par- 
liament of  Scotland  from  French  practice),  required,  in  conformity  with  ono 
of  the  fundamental  regulations  of  eccleeiaBtical  procedure  in  Scotland,  called 
the  "Barrier  Act,"  to  be  transmitted  to  the  local  presbyteries  for  adoption 
by  a  majority  before  being  passed  and  carried  into  effect  by  the  Gencial 
Aseembly.— Ed. 

2  Q 


izecy  Google 


466  TH£  PATBOKAOE  QUESTION. 

carried  a  MissWilkie  with  me  from  lDgram's,and  a  Rev. 
Mr  Forbes,  who  married  a  grand-aunt  of  Mrs  Cariyle'a. 

(1766.) — I  have  not  mentioned  some  visits  we  had 
from  our  friends  in  Newcastle,  nor  do  I  exactly  [remem- 
ber] the  dates  of  their  coming.  He  soon  tired,  and  had 
always  business  to  carry  him  back.  Not  bo  his  lady,  who 
loved  out  society  better  than  that  of  Newcastle.  In 
April  I  made  a  tour  with  Mary  to  Berwick,  Langton, 
and  Fogo,  for  her  health,  and  to  visit  our  friends. 

John  Home  was  now  always  in  London  from  October 
till  May,  when  Lord  Bute  parted  with  him,  for  most 
part  to  come  to  the  General  Assembly,  as,  being  Lord 
Conservator,  he  was  nowa  constant  member,  and,  though 
no  great  debater,  gave  us  a  speech  now  and  then. 

In  the  Assembly  this  year  there  was  the  last  grand 
effort  of  our  opponents  to  carry  through  their  Schism 
Overture,  as  it  was  called,  as  it  proposed  to  make  an 
inquiry  into  the  causes  and  growth  of  sdilsm.  On 
the  day  before  it  came  before  the  Assembly  we  had 
dined  at  Nicholson's.  Before  we  parted,  Jardine  told 
me  that  he  had  examined  the  list  of  the  Assembly 
with  care,  and  that  we  should  carry  the  question — ■ 
that  it  would  be  nearly  at  par  till  we  came  as  far  on 
the  roll  as  Lochmaben,  but  that  after  that  we  should 
have  it  hoUow.  I  have  mentioned  this  on  account  of 
what  happened  next  day,  which  was  Fiiday  the  29th. 

There  was  a  very  long  debate,  so  that  the  vote  was 
not  called  till  past  seven  o'clock.  Jardine,  who  had 
for  some  time  complained  of  breathlessness,  had  seated 
himself  on  a  high  bench  near  the  east  door  of  the  As- 


oy  Google 


THE  PATEONAOE  QUESTION.  467 

jienibly  House,  fhere  being  at  that  time  do  galleries 
erected.  He  had,  not  half  an  hour  before,  bad  a  com- 
munication with  some  ladies  near  him  in  the  church 
gallery,  who  had  sent  him  a  bottle  of  wine,  of  which 
he  took  one  glass.  The  calling  of  the  roll  began,  and 
when  it  had  passed  the  presbytery  of  Jjochmaben,  he 
gave  a  significant  loot  with  his  eye  to  me,  who  was 
sitting  below  the  throne,  as  much  as  to  say,  "Now  the 
day's  our  own."  1  had  turned  to  the  left  to  whisper 
to  John  Home,  who  was  next  me,  the  sign  I  had  got ; 
before  I  could  look  round  again,  Jardine  had  tumbled 
from  his  seat,  and,  being  a  man  of  six  feet  two  inches, 
and  of  large  bones,  had  borne  down  all  those  on  the 
two  benches  below  him,  and  fallen  to  the  ground.  He 
was  immediately  carried  out  to  the  passage,  and  the 
roll-calling  stopped.  Various  reports  came  from  the 
door,  but,  anxious  to  know  the  truth,  I  stepped  behind 
the  Moderatoi^s  chair  and  over  the  green  table,  and 
with  difficulty  made  the  door  through  a  very  crowded 
house.  When  I  came  there,  I  found  him  lying 
stretched  on  the  pavement  of  the  passage  with  many 
people  about  him,  among  the  rest  his  friend  and 
mine,  James  Russel  the  surgeon.  With  some  diffi- 
culty I  got  near  him,  and  whispered  was  it  not  a 
faint  1  "  No,  no,"  replied  he, "  it  is  all  over."  I  returned 
to  the  house,  and,  resuming  my-place,  gave  out  that 
there  woto  hopes  of  his  recovery.  This  composed  the 
house,  and  the  calling  of  the  roll  went  on,  when  it 
was  carried  to  reject  the  overture  by  a  great  majority. 
This  was  a  deadly  blow  to  the  enemies  of  presenta- 


oy  Google 


468  JABDINES  DEATH. 

tions,  for  they  had  mustered  all  their  strength,  and 
had  been  strenuous  in  debate.  Henry  Dundas,  how- 
ever, had  now  come  to  our  aid,  who  waa  himself  a 
match  for  all  their  lay  forces,  as  Robertson  and  a  few 
friends  were  for  all  the  bands  of  clergy.  1  was  not 
a  member.  A  party  of  us  had  been  engaged  to  dine 
with  Mr  Dundas,  but  could  not  now  go,  as  Dr  Jar- 
dine  waa  a  near  relation  of  his  lady,  who  waa  delivered 
of  her  first  child  that  night. 

Robertson  was  much  dejected,  as  he  had  good  rea^ 
son.  I  immediately  proposed  to  him  and  J.  Home  to 
send  for  a  post-chaise  and  carry  them  out  to  Mussel- 
burgh, which  was  done  directly,  and  which  relieved 
us  firom  all  troublesome  company.  This  death  of  Jar- 
dine  was  not  only  a  breach  in  our  society  which  we 
long  felt,  aa  John  Jardine  waa  one  of  the  pleaaantest 
of  the  whole,  who  played  delightfully  on  the  un- 
bounded curiosity  and  dupish  simplicity  of  David 
Hume,  but  was  a  great  support  to  Robertson  and  our 
fiiends  in  the  management  of  ecclesiastical  affairs,  as 
he  was  the  son-in-law  of  Provost  Drummond,  and 
kept  him  steady,  who  had  been  bred  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Highflyers.  And  having  had  the  management  of 
the  burgh  of  Lochmaben  for  Charles  Erskine  of  Tin- 
wald  at  twenty-nine  years  of  age,  he  acquired  early 
that  address  and  dexterity  in  managing  men  which 
could  easily  be  applied  to  Edinburgh  politics,  though 
they  were  on  a  much  greater  scal&  In  politics  he 
was  artful,  in  other  affairs  quite  trusty." 

*  Dt  John  Jordme,  tuinUter  of  the  Tron  Church  parish,  was  bom  {n 
Dumfrieuhjie  id  1716.     He  waa  an  active  leader  in  the  church  conita^  and 


,1.0,  Google 


JARDINE  a  DEATH.  469 

As  Jardine,  however,  had  one-third  of  the  deanery, 
Eobertson  aviuled  himself  of  the  vacancy  to  obtain  it 
for  Dr  Diysdale,  whose  wife  was  one  of  the  Adams' 
and  KohertsoDs'  cousin-german.  This  attached  Drys- 
dale  more  to  him,  and  made  him  apply  assiduously 
to  the  correspondence  with  the  distant  clergy,  which 
opened  up  to  him  a  view  of  the  derkahip  of  the 
Church,  which  he  afterwards  obtained. 

I  said  that  the  Schism  Overture  which  we  defeated 
was  the  last  blow  that  was  aimed  at  patronage,  for 
whatever  attempts  were  afterwards  made  were  feeble 
and  ineffective.  There  still  remained,  however,  in  the 
Assembly's  instructions  to  their  Commission,  an  article 
which  was  a  constant  reproach  to  the  General  Assem- 
bly— viz..  That  they  should  watch  for  a  convenient 
opportunity  of  applying  to  the  King  and  Parliament 
for  redress  from  the  grievance  of  patronage.  This 
was  too  much,  at  a  time  when  almost  every  clerical 
member  of  Assembly  had  been  settled  by  a  presenta- 
tion. This,  however,  was  not  left  out  till  Dr  Robert- 
son had  retired  from  the  conduct  of  our  affairs,  when, 
in  the  Assembly  1734, 1  got  it  proposed  by  some  of 
the  elders,  when,  after  some  debate,  it  was  carried  to 
leave  it  out  by  a  great  majority.  Next  year  there 
was  a  feeble  attempt  to  restore  the  article  in  the  In- 
structions, but  this  did  not  even  raise  a  debate,  and 
we  heard  no  more  of  it. 

intimate  with  the  great  literary  circle  of  Edinburgli ;  but  the  only  thiiigH 
he  is  known  to  have  written  are  coatributionB  to  the  ihort-livod  Sdinbargh 
■    [11763.— Ed, 


oy  Google 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

1766-1768:    AGE,  44-43. 


ViaiT  TO  LORD  aiiASOOT  WITH  B0DERT8OS OOKVirrALmKB — STKOD 

BUBIKES3 — DR  ARUSTRONO— AN  EXCURSION  TO   TWEEDDALB  AND 
ACROSS  THE  BORDER — ADVE.VTORES  IN   CARLIHLB — TDK  DUKB  OP 

BUCCLEUOH  AND  PG8T1VIHEB  AT  DALKBITH ADAM  SMITH  THERE 

— PROFESSOR  HtLLAB  ( 


It  was  this  year,  in  the  month  of  August,  that  Dr 
Robertson  having  solicited  me  strongly  to  be  of  a 
party  to  thq  west  country  with  him  and  the  Honour- 
able James  Stewart  Montague,  who  was  then  attend- 
ing the  College  of  Edinburgh,  and  lived  in  his  houses 
I  could  not  Bet  out  on  the  same  day  with  them,  but 
followed  in  the  end  of  the  week,  and  got  to  Dr  Wight's, 
at  Glasgow  College,  on  Saturday,  where  I  remained  all 
next  day,  having  got  a  little  cold.  He  had  now  been 
for  some  time  in  the  house  allotted  to  his  office,  which, 
though  one  of  the  old  ones,  was  convenient,  and  had 
several  apartments,  so  that  he  could  have  room  for 
two  or  three  boarders.  His  youngest  sister  had  now 
been  with  him  for  more  than  a  year,  and  they  lived 
very  comfortably,  which  she,  though  but  just  turned 
of  twenty,  managed  very  well.  I  remained  with  them 
all  Tuesday,  and  next  day  got  to  Caldwell  {Baron 
Mure'a)  before  dinner.     We  went  next  day  to  Lord 


izecy  Google 


LOED  GLASGOW.  471 

Glasgow's,  where  we  were  joined  by  Mr  Oliphant, 
afterwards  Postmaster,  who,  with  Baron  Mure  and 
AJezander  M'MOlan,  Esq.,  W.S.,  were  Lord  Bute's 
commiflsionera  or  trustees  for  the  management  of  his 
estate.  We  had  rode  through  a  very  hilly  part  of 
Kenfrewshire  to  Kelbum,  Lord  Glasgow's  seat,  finely 
situat-ed  on  the  Clyde,  almost  opposite  to  Bute,  about 
five  or  six  miles  distant,  where  the  expanse  of  water 
is  finely  broken  by  the  two  islands  of  Cumbray,  the 
first  of  which  is  not  more  than  a  mile  distant,  while 
the  channel  for  ships  sailing  up  or  down  the  Clyde 
lies  between  that  island  and  the  shore  of  Cunningham. 
We  were  very  late  of  dining  for  that  period,  when  the 
usual  hour  was  two  o'clock,  but  we  sat  long  enough 
after  dinner  to  loosen  our  landlord's  tongue,  who, 
being  in  general  a  reserved  and  silent  mail,  partly 
through  modesty  and  partly  through  flat  spirits,  yet, 
after  a  long  repast,  became  not  only  open  and  free, 
but  truly  eloquent.  Baron  Mure,  though  a  very  sen- 
sible man,  was  yet  too  great  a  friend  of  Lord  Bute's 
to  hear  William  Pitt  extolled  to  the  skies,  which  Lord 
Glasgow  had  casually  done ;  on  which  Mure  made 
some  tart  remarks.  This  fired  his  lordship,  who  gave 
us  a  panegyric  at  last  on  Mr  Pitt's  character  and 
administration,  with  as  much  force,  energy,  and  elo- 
quence as  that  great  man  himself  could  have  done, 
had  he  dealt  in  panegyric.  His  lordship  was  begin- 
ning to  flag,  and  his  audience  to  tire,  when  luckUy  we 
were  called  to  supper.  Robertson  whispered  me,  in 
going  to  the  dining-room,  that  his  powers  had  per- 


oy  Google 


472  LOED  GLASGOW. 

fectly  astonished  him.  The  presence  of  the  ladies  put 
aa  end  to  our  political  debate.  We  passed  next  day 
■with  hifl  lordship,  when  we  had  such  another  exhibi- 
tion in  the  evening.  We  agreed  among  ourselves, 
that  had  it  not  been  for  his  invincible  modesty,  which 
debarred  him  from  ever  entering  the  dra'wing-room  at 
St  James's,  where  he  was  sure  of  a  good  reception,  for 
he  had  been  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Fontenoy,  he 
might  have  made  a  very  conspicuous  appearance  in 
the  House  of  Lords.  He  was  now  the  Lord  High  Com- 
missioner to  the  Assembly,  and  was  a  great  favourite 
with  us,  not  merely  for  his  obliging  manners  and  im- 
proved entertainment  at  his  table,  but  for  his  attention 
to  the  business  of  the  house,  and  his  Ustening  to  and 
entering  into  the  spirit  of  every  debate.  His  lordship 
did  not  attend  us  to  Bute,  to  which  we  sailed  next  day.* 
We  remained  six  days  in  Bute,  and  passed  our  time 
very  agreeably.  Alexander  M'Millan  was  one  of  the 
best  landlords  for  a  large  company,  for  be  was  loud 
and  joyful,  and  made  the  wiue  flow  like  Bacchus  him- 
self We  passed  the  mornings  (which  were  not  so 
long  as  now,  for  they  extended  only  to  two  o'clock, 
when  dinner  was  on  the  table)  in  riding  about  the 
island,  which  we  found  very  beautiful,  though  but 
little  cultivated ;  for  besides  a  plantation  around  the 
house  of  Mount  Stuart,  of  very  fine  trees,  of  a  square 
mUe,  every  little  cottage  bad  a  dozen  of  trees  around 
it.     A  Lady  Bute,  while  a  widow,  had  got  them 

*  John  Boyle,  third  Earl  of  Glasgow,  of  whom  what  WM  heietofora 
known  ii  10  sciuitj  wto  give  mucli  Talus  to  this  Bketch. — £d. 


D,  Google 


CONVIVIALITIES  IN  BUTE.  473 

planted  in  every  kailyard,  as  their  little  gardens  are 
called,  and  they  make  a  pleasing  ornament.  There  is 
nothing  like  a  bill  but  on  Lord  Bannatyne's  estate  on 
the  north-east,  where  it  is  separated  by  a  narrow 
strait  called  the  Kyles  of  Bute.  Bothesay,  where  stand 
the  ruina  of  the  old  castle  which  gives  a  ducal  title 
to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  as  it  did  aDciently  to  the 
Prince  of  Scotland,  is  a  finely-situated  port,  and  has 
thriven  amazingly  since  that  period.  We  had  to  take 
an  early  dinner  one  day,  and  ride  down  there  to  be 
made  free  of  the  bui^h,  which  cost  us  a  hard  drink  of 
new  claret.  Mount  Stuart  is  truly  a  fine  place,  with 
a  charming  view  of  the  islands  and  opposite  coast. 
The  soil  everywhere  lies  on  sea-sheUs,  so  that  they 
have  the  means  of  improvement  at  hand ;  and  being  in 
shape  like  the  convex  of  a  Koman  shield,  where  the 
rain  cannot  lie,  seemed  everywhere  capable  of  tillage. 
What  was  done  about  Mount  Stuart  and  Eothesay 
gave  great  encouragement.  We  went  to  Kingarth 
Church  on  Sunday,  where  I  lectured  and  Robertson 
preached.  There  are  three  p^ishes  in  the  island, 
in  two  of  which  the  ministers  must  have  the  Erse 
language. 

Our  conversation  at  table  was  liberal  and  lively,  as 
might  be  expected  where  there  were  so  many  sensible 
men ;  for  besides  our  company  there  were  several 
other  very  able  men,  particularly  a  Mr  Dunlop,  a  son 
of  the  Greek  Professor's,  at  Glasgow,  who  was  remark- 
ably knowing  and  good-humoured.  The  wine  was 
excellent,  and  flowed  freely.      There  was  the  best 


izecy  Google 


474  CONVIVIALITIEB  IN  BUTE. 

Cyprus  I  ever  saw,  which  had  I^  there  sauce  Lord 
Bute  had  left  the  ifiland  in  1745.  The  claret  was  of 
the  same  age,  and  excellent. 

After  we  had  been  four  days  there,  Robertson  took 
me  into  a  window  before  dinner,  and  with  some 
Bolenmity  proposed  to  make  a  motion  to  shorten  the 
drinking,  if  I  would  second  him— "Because,"  added  he, 
"  although  you  and  I  may  go  through  it,  I  am  averse 
to  it  on  James  Stuart's  account"  I  answered  that  I 
would  willingly  second  whatever  measure  of  that 
kind  he  shoiUd  propose,  but  added  that  I  was  afraid 
it  would  not  do,  as  our  toastmaster  was  very  despotic, 
and,  besides,  might  throw  ridicule  upon  us,  as  we 
were  to  leave  the  island  the  day  after  the  next,  and 
that  we  had  not  proposed  any  abridgment  to  the  re- 
past tiU  the  old  claret  was  all  done,  the  last  of  which 
.we  had  drunk  yesterday.  "  Well,  well,"  replied  the 
Doctor,  "  be  it  so  then,  and  let  us  end  as  we  began." 

We  left  the  island  on  the  day  we  proposed,  I  in  a 
boat,  for  Port-Glasgow,  with  the  Postmaster,  Oli- 
phant,  as  we  could  not  join  the  rest  to  pass  two  days 
more  at  Lord  Glasgow's  (Kelbum)  on  their  return,  as 
they  had  promised.  We  got  very  rapidly  to  Port- 
Glasgow  in  the  customhouse  yacht,  and  to  Glasgow 
on  horseback  early  in  the  evening,  where  he  visited 
his  friends,  and  I  remained  with  mine  at  the  College 
that  night  and  all  next  day. 

I  was  Moderator  of  the  Synod  this  year.  Webster 
having  made  it  fashionable  for  even  the  Moderators 
of  that  court  to  give  handsome  suppers,  it  cost  me 


oy  Google 


THE  SCOTTS — AEENSIDB  THE  POET.  475 

five  guineas ;  but  there  being  very  few  who  cotiltt 
afford  8uch  expensive  repasts,  after  having  gone 
through  six  or  Beven  of  us,  this  entertainment  ceased, 
and  the  Moderators  of  the  Synods  were  contented  with 
small  committees  and  meagre  suppers,  as  they  had  been 
heretofore,  and  Webster,  of  course,  absented  from  them. 
In  December  this  year  we  made  another  journey  tp 
Newcastle,  Mrs  Carlyle  being  absolutely  necessary  to 
her  sister  when  she  lay  in,  or  was  at  all  ill.  Blackett 
was  but  a  dull  man,  and  his  cousin.  Sir  Walter  B^ 
no  better,  though  rich,  magnificent,  and  generous. 
The  company  about  them  were  not  very  agreeable ; 
some  of  their  bucks  had  humour,  but  they  wero 
illiterate  and  noisy.  Two  or  three  of  their  clergy 
could  be  endured,  for  they  played  well  at  cards,  and 
were  not  pedantic.  John  Withrington  was  then 
almost  the  only  man  who  had  any  literature.  Mr 
Moyse,  a  clergyman,  was  now  master  of  the  grammar- 
school,  and  being  able  and  diligent  in  his  profession; 
soon  made  a  great  change  on  the  young  natives  of 
Newcastle ;  insomuch,  that  soon  after  there  issued 
from  it  several  distinguished  characters,  such  as  Mr 
Chambers,  a  judge,  I  think,  in  India,  or  a  professor 
of  law  at  Oxford ;  and  the  two  Scotts,  Sir  William 
and  his  younger  brother,  the  Chancellor  of  England." 
Dr  Akenside  was  also  a  native  of  that  town,  and  had 
studied  physic  in  Edinburgh  in  the  years  1744-5. 
As  he  was  of  low  descent,  his  father  being  a  butcher, 
he  stole  through  his  native  town  incog,  as  often  as  he 

•  Viz.,  Lord  Stowell  aud  Lord  EUoiL— Elf. 


izecy  Google 


476  TOUR  ON  THE  BOEDEE. 

had  occasion  to  pasa,  and  never  acknowledged  his 
relation  to  it. 

(1 767.) — Thia  year  nothing  remwkable  happened  for 
several  months.  Jn  the  month  [of  August],  Mrs  Car- 
lyle  not  being  very  well,  we  went  in  our  open  chaise  to 
visit  our  friend  Mr  Alexander  Glen,  at  Galashiels,  with 
our  friend  Dr  Wight.  1  had  been  there  before,  but 
Mrs  Carlyle  never  had,  and  was  much  delighted  with 
the  amenity  of  the  place,  as  well  as  the  kindness  and 
hospitality  of  our  landlord,  who  was  not  yet  married. 
We  visited  Melrose  Abbey  to  gratify  Mrs  Carlyle. 
The  fine  pastoral  stream  of  Gala  falls  into  the  Tweed 
a  mile  below  the  church  and  village,  irom  whence 
four  miles  down  the  river  stands  the  famous  abbey 
of  Melrose,  the  exquisite  beauty  of  whose  ruins  is 
well  supported  by  the  romantic  scenery  around  it. 
About  a  week  before  we  arrived  here,  a  waterspout 
had  fallen  into  the  mountain  stream  Slitterick,  which 
joins  the  river  Teviot  at  Hawick,  which  occasioned  a 
great  alarm  there ;  had  broken  down  a  bridge  which 
joined  the  town  to  a  street  where  the  church  stands  ; 
had  mined  a  mill  on  the  rivulet,  and  drowned  one  of 
the  millers,  and  threatened  the  whole  town  with  inun- 
dation ;  but  as  it  had  come  down  in  the  night,  it  abated 
early  in  the  forenoon. 

This  phenomenon,  so  uncommon  in  this  country, 
excited  our  curiosity,  and  we  resolved  to  proceed  to 
Hawick  to  see  the  effects  of  it.  Mr  Glen  gladly  ac- 
companied us,  Wight  and  he  being  great  companions. 

We  set  out  in  the  morning,  after  an  early  breakfesl^ 


izecy  Google 


TOUR  ON  THE  BOEDEE.  477 

that  we  migbt  reach  Hawick  some  time  hefore  dinner. 
We  had  given  notice  to  Laurie,  the  minister  there, 
that  we  would  dine  with  him  and  Btay  all  night; 
which  information  was  necessary,  as  there  were  so 
many  of  as,  although  the  fashion  of  men's  sleeping  iu 
the  same  bed  together  was  not  yet  at  an  end.  After 
we  passed  the  Tweed,  near  Selkirk,  where  the  delight- 
ful streams  of  Ettrlck  and  Yarrow  fall  into  it  from 
the  fioe  pastoral  valleys  or  glens  which  run  parallel 
to  each  other  to  the  summit  of  the  country,  the 
scenery  was  by  no  means  interesting.  Selkirk  was 
then  a  very  paltry  town,  and  the  fields  around  it  very 
poorly  cultivated,  though  now  there  is  a  very  different 
face  on  both.  Hawick  is  beautifully  situated,  and, 
though  but  an  ill-built  town,  very  much  resembles 
the  famous  city  of  Bath  in  its  situation,  being  a  close 
warm-looking  nest  in  the  midst  of  surrounding  hills, 
all  but  the  openings  made  to  the  south  and  north  of 
the  town  by  the  beautiful  river  Teviot,  which  runs 
within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  it,  and  whose  clear  un- 
troubled stream,  except  when  great  rains  descend, 
glides  gently  by,  and  like  a  mirror  reflects  the  adjacent 
pastoral  scenery.  We  visited  the  devastations  made  by 
Slitterick,  which  falls  from  the  mouDtain  in  a  tremen- 
dous torrent  into  Teviot,  which  was  quite  unmoved, 
as  the  two  channels  lay  at  right  angles  from  each  other. 
We  passed  the  day  very  pleasantly  with  Laurie  and 
his  wife,  who  was  an  old  acquaintance  of  Jfra  Carlyle's 
when  they  lived  at  Lanton,  the  next  parish  to  Pol- 
waxth,  where  she  passed  her  infant  years.    Wight 


oy  Google 


478  A  CHAEACTBE — AEMSTRONG  THE  POET. 

rallied  Laurie  not  a  UtUe  for  his  having  delayed  call- 
ing the  people  to  prayers  on  the  morning  of  the  inun- 
dation, till  he  saw  from  his  garden  the  flood  a  little 
abating ;  and  then  continuing  so  long  in  prayer  (for 
a  full  hour),  when  it  had  fallen  bo  much  that  a  man 
on  horseback  could  pass  below  the  mill,  which  the 
good  people  ascribed  to  the  fervency  of  their  pastor, 
and  would  have  continued  to  believe  in  the  efficacy  of 
hia  prayer,  had  not  the  surviving  miller  assured  them 
that  the  inundation  had  fallen  six  inches  before  the 
church-bell  rang.  Laurie  was  perfectly  pleased  with 
BO  much  address  being  ascribed  to  him.  though  he  lost 
a  little  in  the  article  of  interest  in  heaven  which  was 
imputed  to  him. 

Laurie  was  an  uncommon  character.  Dr  John 
Armstrong  and  he  were  at  coll^o  together,  and  one 
year,  during  the  vacation,  they  joined  a  band  of 
gypsies,  who  in  those  days  much  infested  the  Border. 
This  expedition,  which  really  took  place,  as  Armstrohg 
informed  me  in  London,  furnished  Laurie  with  a  fine 
field  for  fiction  and  rhodomontade,  which  was  so 
closely  united  to  the  groundwork,  which  might  be 
true,  that  it  was  impossible  to  discompound  them. 
After  Armstrong  had  settled  in  London  for  some 
time,  Laurie  went  to  visit  him  about  1 739  or  '40 ;  on 
that  he  founded  many  marvellous  stories  of  his  inti-* 
macy  with  secretaries  of  state  and  courtiers,  with  whom 
he  pretended  he  had  been  quite  familiar.  When  Ee 
fdleged  that  he  had  been  quite  at  his  ease  with  the 
Chancellor  and  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Ckimmona 


oy  Google 


TOUE  ON  THE  BORDEE.  479 

at  that  time,  and  could  call  on  them  at  any  hour,  and 
remjun  to  dinner  or  supper  without  being  invited,  we 
used  to  call  to  him,  "Halt  there,  Laurie ;  if  you  don't 
know  the  boundary  between  truth  and  falsehood,  you 
should  draw  the  line  between  what  is  probable  and 
what  is  not  so."  Aa,  like  a  snowball,  we  gathered  as 
we  rolled  along,  he  fixed  himself  upon  us  for  the  rest 
of  the  journey. 

We  set  out  in  the  morning  after  breakfast,  that  we 
might  reach  Langholm,  twenty-two  miles  off,  in  time 
for  dinner,  and  travelled  over  a  beautiful  pastoral 
country,  eleven  miles  to  the  top  of  the  ridge  beyond 
which  the  waters  run  south,  whereas  before  their 
course  is  north  and  east.  The  road  had  been  finished 
some  time  before,  and  was  so  perfectly  good  and  well 
laid  out  that  in  my  open  chaise  I  could  keep  at  the 
trot  both  down  and  up  the  whole  way.  The  first 
place  we  passed  was  the  seat  of  Dr  Lan^ands,  M.B., 
a  very  pleasing  place,  about  a  mile  above  Hawick  on 
the  Teviot ;  of  late  it  was  in  possession  of  Lord  Napier, 
and  much  improved  by  him,  and  is  now  bought  by 
James  Anderson,  Esq.,  a  younger  brother  of  St  Ger- 
mains.  In  a  mile  or  two  further  wo  reached  the  fine 
seat  of  the  family  of  Buccleuch,  the  Castle  of  Brans- 
holm,  which  an  ancestor  of  that  family  exchanged. 
When  we  got  to  the  top  of  the  ridge,  we  stopped  to 
feed  our  horses  at  a  rural  inn,  kept  by  a  curious  fellow 
called  Rob  Achison,  with  whom  wc  had  not  conversed 
many  minutes  when  we  discovered  the  cause  of  his 
being  reduced  from  the  condition  of  an  opident  far^ 


oy  Google 


480  TOUR  ON  THE  BORDER. 

mer  to  that  of  the  keeper  of  a  mere  halting-place  to 
divide  a  long  stage.  Robert  had  been  a  Border  r^e 
or  buck  of  the  first  head  in  his  younger  days,  and  to 
wit  and  humour,  of  which  he  had  abundance,  he  added 
a  sufficient  portion  of  address  and  impudence,  which 
he  carried  with  an  air  of  careless  indifference.  He 
had  eloquence  enough,  however,  to  make  us  both  eat 
and  drink  in  his  house,  for  the  first  of  which  he  was 
but  ill  provided ;  but  he  soon  made  us  understand, 
by  the  scurrility  which  he  poured  out  against  those 
who  had  passed  his  house  without  calling  for  some- 
thing besides  corn  for  their  horses,  how  we  should  be 
treated  for  the  entertainment  of  the  next  who  came, 
so  we  took  a  sorry  repast  with  Robert,  and  drank  of 
his  liquors. 

The  slope  from  this  to  Langholm  is  just  eleven  miles, 
and  the  road  excellent ;  the  country  was  exceedingly 
picturesque,  though  then  without  trees,  and  full  of 
sheep,  which,  as  the  young  Duke  of  Buccleuch  and  his 
Duchess  were  daily  expected,  had  been  taught  to  Hdc 
the  road  daily  through  which  they  were  to  pass,  that 
they  might  see  wherein  the  riches  of  the  land  consisted. 
As  it  was  now  in  the  beginning  of  August,  the  fields 
had  a  fine  variegated  cloak  of  verdure ;  for  as  the  ferns, 
or  brackens,  as  they  are  called  here,  were  now  in  per- 
fection, and  of  a  different  shade  from  the  grass,  they 
looked  hke  a  large  curtain  or  mantle  of  green  silk 
damask. 

We  arrived  in  the  evening  at  Langholm,  where  the 
village  is  situated  at  the  confluence  of  the  two  streams 


oy  Google 


TOUR  ON  THE   BOEDEfi.  +81 

of  Ewes  and  Wauchope  with  the  Esk,  which  from 
thence  flows,  after  being  almost  doubled  by  the  Lid- 
del,  through  delightful  scenery,  to  the  Solway  Firth, 
which  with  it  makes  the  western  boundary  between 
England  and  Scotland. 

It  was  too  late  to  attempt  to  see  the  castle,  so  we 
sent  immediately  for  John  Dickie  the  minister,  who 
was  an  old  bachelor,  and  who  had  such  a  mixture  of 
odd  qualities  in  bis  composition,  such  as  priggism  and 
pedantry,  with  the  affectation  of  being  a  finished 
gentleman  ;  very  sanctimonious  in  his  manners,  with 
a  desire  of  being  thought  free  and  liberal  in  his  senti- 
ments; not  without  a  portion  of  knowledge,  but  more 
proud  of  it  than  Dr  Bentley,  or  Purdie  the  school- 
master. As  Mrs  Carlyle  had  never  seen  him  before, 
she  was  highly  diverted  with  him ;  and  having  in  a 
moment  discovered  all  his  weaknesses,  she  met  them 
in  so  caressing  and  encouraging  a  manner  that  he 
would  have  leapt  over  the  house  to  serve  her ;  and 
before  he  left  us  at  twelve  to  go  home,  he  became  her 
sworn  knight-errant.  To  make  her  conquest  complete 
over  the  little  man,  she  would  not  let  him  go  till  a 
horse  was  got  ready  for  an  ostler  to  conduct  him 
through  the  water.  Laurie  and  Glen  thought  this 
carrying  her  coquetry  too  far,  but  Wight  and  I  knew 
better  ;  for  she  was  of  that  turn  of  mind,  that  if  any- 
thing had  befallen  the  little  man,  as  he  had  got 
enough  of  wine,  and  had  no  better  seat  than  a  clue  on 
a  horse,  she  would  never  have  forgiven  herself.  With 
all  his  imperfections  he  was  good-natured  and  social, 


izecy  Google 


482  TOUR   ON   THE   BOEDER. 

which  after  a  banquet  never  failed  to  appear.  He  bad 
a  young  mare  wbicb  he  wished  to  sell,  and  was  going 
to  send  it  to  be  sold  at  Hawick  or  Jedburgh,  when, 
hearing  there  was  to  be  a  fair  at  Carlisle  next  day, 
and  that  we  were  deliberating  about  going  or  not, 
when  somebody  happened  to  say  that  Carlisle  was 
the  best  place,  and  that  we  would  all  go  there  ; — Mrs 
Carlyle  immediately  said,  "  I  wUl  consent  to  go  if  you 
will  be  so  good  as  accompany  us."  The  honest  soul 
inatEBitly  yielded,  and  we  tdl  resolved  to  go,  now 
amounting  to  five  gentlemen  and  a  lady,  with  only 
one  servant. 

We  set  out  next  morning,  and  had  a  very  agree- 
able ride  down  the  river  Esk  for  seven  or  eight  miles, 
through  a  valley  finely  covered  with  young  planta- 
tions. We  stopped  at  Longtown,  where  there  is  a  fine 
bridge  over  the  Esk,  which,  has  saved  many  a  life 
which  was  annually  lost  in  passing  very  dangerous 
fords  of  the  river  a  mile  or  two  lower  down-;  and, 
crossing  some  sands  in  the  channel  of  the  Frith  of 
Solway,  where  the  traveller  was  frequently  overtaken 
by  the  rapidity  of  the  tide,  we  arrived  at  Carlisle 
before  dinner,  and  found  the  town  as  much  crowded 
as  curious  travellers  could  wish,  as  there  was  not 
only  a  great  fair  holding  on  this  day,  but  the  Judges 
were  in  town,  and  a  set  of  players  to  entertain  the 
company.  The  King's  Arms  was  so  much  crowded 
that  we  were  obliged  to  resort  to  the  large  dining- 
room,  which  was  crowded  like  a  cofieehouse.  But  as 
the  company,  consisting  chiefly  of  country  lads  and 


izecDy  Google 


CHANCELLOK  WEDDEEBUBN.  483 

lasses,  were  all  to  disperse  in  the  eveniDg,  we  were  able 
to  secure  beds,  which  was  the  chief  point  in  view. 

After  strolling  about  the  town  a  while  I  attempted 
to  go  into  the  court-house,  which  was  so  much 
crowded  and  so  hot  that  I  only  remained  a  few 
minutes  in  the  outskirts,  where  I  heard  my  friend 
Wedderbiim  pleading  as  well  as  he  could  under  a 
severe  hoarseness.  AVe  returned  to  the  inn,  where  we 
found  Governor  Johnstone,  and  John  Scotland,  min- 
ister of  Weaterkirk,  with  our  friends.  Johnstone  was 
employed  in  canvassing  the  citizens,  and  Scotland 
had  come  with  a  Dunfermline  friend  on  purpose  to 
see  Mr  Wedderbum.  The  Governor  told  us  of  the 
players,  and  we  all  set  out  immediately  to  try  for 
places,  but  it  was  so  much  crowded  that  we  were  dis- 
appointed, and  obliged  to  return.  Laurie,  however, 
remained  after  the  rest,  when  he  had  a  quarrel  with  a 
very  drunken  squire  of  the  name  of  Dacres,  who  had 
insulted  him  with  foul  language,  which  Laurie  re- 
turned with  a  blow,  forgetting  that  he  was  now  in  a 
country  where  a  breach  of  the  peace  is  much  more 
dangerous.  Dacres  attempted  to  have  him  committed, 
but  Laurie  made  his  escape,  and  Johnstone  having  in- 
terfered and  said  it  was  only  a  drunken  Scotch  parson 
who  bad  been  riotous,  and  was  ignorant  of  English 
laws,  who  had  broken  the  peace,  he  got  Dacres  paci- 
fied, and  we  heard  no  more  of  it. 

The  Governor  had  promised  to  sup  with  us,  and  I 
proposed  sending  to  Mr  Wedderbum ;  but  Scotland 
said  it  was  needless,  as  he  had  seen  him,  and  found 


oy  Google 


*84  CHANCELLOB  WEDDERBURN. 

,  him  preparing  to  go  to  bed,  as  he  was  very  hoarse.  I 
wrote  him  a  note,  however,  telling  him  that  Mrs  Car- 
lyle  and  Wight  and  I  were  there,  and  that  Governor 
Johnstone  had  promised  to  sup  with  us,  and  that  I 
would  infallibly  ciire  his  hoarseness  before  to-morrow 
morning.  His  answer  was  that  he  would  be  with  us 
in  half  an  hour.  He  was  as  good  as  his  word,  but 
was  very  hoarse.  The  supper  was  good  enough,  but 
the  liquors  were  execrable — the  wine  and  porter  were 
not  drinkable.  We  then  made  a  bowl  of  the  worst 
punch  I  ever  tasted,  Wedderburn  said,  if  we  would 
mix  it  with  a  bottle  of  the  bad  porter,  it  would  be 
improved.  We  did  as  he  directed,  and  to  our  surprise 
it  became  drinkable,  and  we  were  a  jolly  company. 
The  counsellor  did  not  forget  the  receipt  to  cure  his 
hoarseness.  This  was  nothing  more  than  some  cas- 
tile  soap  shaven  into  a  spoon  and  mixed  with  some 
white  wine  or  water,  so  that  it  could  be  swallowed. 
This  he  took,  and  returned  to  us  at  nine  next  morn- 
ing perfectly  cured,  and  as  sound  as  a  belL 

Bickie  having  sold  his  mare,  we  returned  by  the 
road  we  came,  and,  passing  one  night  at  Hawick,  and 
one  at  Galashiels,  arrived  at  home  with  Wight  next 

■  night,  and  found  all  well  It  is  remarkable  that  I  re- 
member very  exactly  most  of  the  circumstances  on 
going  from  home  even  on  a  long  journey,  but  that 
on  returning  I  can  seldom  find  any  trace  of  them  on 
my  memory,  and  all  seems  a  blank.  Is  this  owing 
to  the  imagination  being  fully  occupied  with  the 
thoughts  of  home,  which  are  always  agreeable?    Or  is 


izecDy  Google 


THE  BUCCLEUCH    FAMILY. 


it  owing  to  tbe  eagerness  and  curiosity  with  which 
one  begins  a  journey,  and  the  rising  hopes  of  new 
pleasures  and  amusements,  and  the  drowsy  and  in- 
active Btate  of  the  imagination  as  you  return  1 

The  young  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Buccleiich  were 
expected  at  this  time  to  arrive  in  Scotland  to  take 
possession  of  their  fine  estate  in  the  south,  and  their 
palace  at  Dalkeith  as  their  chief  residence.  They 
were  eagerly  expected  over  all  the  country  where  we 
had  been,  great  part  of  which,  from  Tweedside  to  the 
borders  of  Cumberland,  was  the  property  of  that  noble 
family.  There  had  been  a  long  minority,  for  this 
duke's  grandfather  had  died  in  1752,  and  his  son. 
Lord  Dalkeith,  two  years  before  him.  The  family 
had  been  kind  to  their  tenants,  and  the  hopes  of  the 
country  were  high  that  this  new  possessor  of  so  large 
a  property  might  inherit  the  good  temper  and  bene- 
volence of  his  progenitors.  I  may  anticipate  what 
was  at  first  only  guessed,  but  came  soon  to  be  known, 
that  he  surpassed  them  all  as  much  in  justice  and 
humanity  as  he  did  in  superiority  of  understanding 
and  good  sense. 

The  Duke  and  Duchess,  with  Lady  Frances  Scott, 
the  Duke's  sister,  ariived  at  Dalkeith  in  the  beginning 
of  September,  where  his  Grace  had  never  been  before, 
being  withheld  by  Charles  Townshend,  his  father-in- 
law,  lest  he  should  become  too  fond  of  Scotland.  This 
stratagem  was  defeated  by  the  Duke's  sagacity,  for  he 
discovered  on  hia  journey  through  his  own  great 
estate,  from  the  marked  attention  of  the  people,  that 


izecy  Google 


486        GBEGOEY   AND  THE  BCCCLEUCH   FAMILY. 

he  would  be  a  much  greater  man  in  tliis  country,  and 
would  have  a  much  more  extensive  range  for  his 
benevolence  than  he  could  posaibly  have  in  the  south, 
where  his  own  estates  -were  small,  and  where  there 
was  such  a  number  of  more  opulent  lords,  his  rivals 
in  all  the  attributes  of  true  nobility. 

In  order  to  make  the  Duke  and  Duchess  feel  more 
impressively  the  attachment  of  their  vassals  and 
tenants  in  the  south,  I  wrote  a  copy  of  verses  on  the 
birthday  of  the  former,  which  I  had  copied  in  another 
hand,  and  sent  on  the  morning  of  that  day.  It  was 
some  time  before  they  could  guess  that  I  was  the 
author ;  and  one  of  their  tenants  bad  for  a  while  the 
credit  of  it.  I  had  by  good-luek  truly  predicted,  by 
way  of  advice,  what  her  Grace  became,  but  no  pre- 
di(;tioD  could  then  reach  the  extent  of  her  merit 
The  verses  were  sent  to  the  Scots  Magazine,  where 
Dr  Gregory  read  them,  and  suspected  me  for  the 
aiithor.  When  I  next  saw  bim,  he  asked  me,  and  I 
owned  them,  when  he  said  they  were  very  good — too 
good  for  tlie  subject,  for  they  would  never  act  up  to 
the  strain  of  praise  in  that  poem.  "  Do  you  know 
them.  Doctor  1 "  "  No,"  answered  he, "  but  Mrs  Mon- 
tague does ;  and  she  says  that,  though  very  good 
young  people,  they  have  no  energy  of  character,  and 
will  remain  obscure  and  insignificant."  "Mrs  Mon- 
tague's line,  then,  is  too  short,  my  good  Doctor :  you 
may  trust  me  to  measure  their  depth,  and  you  will 
live  to  see  tliat  her  discernment  on  this  occasion  has 
failed  her."    Gregoiy,  with  many  good  qualities,  had 


oy  Google 


THE  BDCCLEUCH  FAMILY.  487 

SO  much  of  the  apothecary  about  him,  that  he  did  not 
think  much  of  anybody  who  was  not  likely  to  fre- 
quent his  shop.  Ho  knew  that  Smith  would  recom- 
mend both  Collen  and  Black  to  be  their  physician  in 
ordinary  rather  than  him.* 

Between  their  arrival  at  Dalkeith  and  his  Grace's 
birthday,  the  13th  of  September,  the  Right  Honour- 
able Charles  Townshcnd  died,  after  an  illness  of  a  few 
days,  of  an  inflammation  in  his  bowels.  This  event 
obliged  them  to  postpone  the  celebration  of  the  birth- 
day, when  they  vere  to  have  had  an  entertainment 
for  all  their  friends.  This  sudden  death  affected  the 
Duke  and  his  sister  very  difierently.  She,  who  had 
been  bred  up  under  him  from  the  fourth  or  fifth  year 
of  her  age,  and  had  found  in  him  an  enlightened 
iostructor  and  a  kind  protector,  felt  all  the  grief  which 
a  dutiful  child  feels  for  an  indulgent  parent ;  but  the 
Duke,  who  had  been  very  little  at  home  during  Mr 
TowDshend's  marriage  with  his  mother,  and  whose 
more  ripened  discernment  had  probably  disclosed  to 
him  his  father-in-law's  defects  as  well  as  his  shining 
qualities,  was  much  less  afflicted  on  this  melancholy 
occasion,  and  was  heard  to  say,  a  few  days  after  the 
news,  that  though  he  sincerely  regretted  Mr  Town- 
shend's  premature  death,  yet  to  him  it  was  attended 
with  the  consolation  that  it  left  him  at  liberty  to 
choose  his  own  line  of  life,  for  had  Mr  Townahend 

*  Fur  iofonnation  B]>out  Ciillen,  BUck,  and  the  other  eminent  mm  o(  the 
medical  school  of  Scotland  often  mentioned  in  theee  pages,  it  U  fortnnat« 
that  the  Lift  of  Cutkn,  begun  by  Dr  John  ThomBon,  and  contintied  by  his 
uni,  has  now  been  cotnpleteil  by  I)r  C'nugie,  2  vols.  Svo,  1859.— Ki>. 


izecy  Google 


488      ADAM  SMITH  AND  THE  BUCCLEDCH  FAMILY. 

Burvived,  he  might  have  been  drawn  into  the  vortex  of 
politics  much  against  his  will.  Such  was  the  sound- 
ness of  this  young  nobleman's  mind  at  an  early  age, 
from  whence  a  discerning  observer  might  predict  the 
excellence  of  that  character  which  gradually  evolved 
on  his  admiring  countrymen. 

In  two  or  three  weeks  the  day  came  when  they 
were  to  see  company,  and  when  they  assembled  by 
cards  about  fifty  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  their  friends 
and  the  neighbourhood,  of  whom  few  indeed  were 
ladies,  as  they  were  hardly  yet  acquainted  with  any- 
body. The  fare  was  sumptuous,  but  the  company  was 
formal  and  dull.  Adam  Smith,  their  only  familiar  at 
table,  was  but  ill  qualified  to  promote  the  jollity  of  a 
birthday,  and  their  Graces  were  quite  inexperienced. 
The  Duke,  indeed,  had  been  more  than  two  years  in 
France,  and  four  months  in  London  since  he  came 
home,  but  he  was  backward  at  that  time  to  set  him- 
self forward,  and  showed  a  coldness  and  reserve  which 
often  in  our  superiors  is  thought  to  be  pride.  Had  it 
not  been  for  Alexander  M'Millan,  W.S.,  and  myself, 
the  meeting  would  have  been  very  dull,  and  might 
have  been  dissolved  without  even  drinking  the  health 
of  the  day.  After  that  health  and  a  few  more  toasts 
had  gone  round,  and  the  ladies  had  moved,  and 
M'JUillan  and  his  companions  at  a  by-table  had  got 
into  the  circle,  we  got  into  spirits  that  better  suited 
the  occasion.  The  Duchess  at  that  time  was  ex- 
tremely beautiful ;  her  features  were  regular,  her  com- 
plexion good,  her  black  eyes  of  an  impressive  lustre. 


izecDy  Google 


ADAM  SMITH  AND  THE  BUCCLECCH  FAMILY.        489 

and  her  mouth,  when  she  spok^,  uncommonly  grace- 
ful. The  expression  of  her  coimtenaDce  was  that  of 
good  sense  and  'serenity ;  she  had  been  bred  in  too 
private  a  way,  which  made  her  shy  and  backward, 
and  it  was  some  time  before  she  acquired  ease  in  com- 
pany, which  at  last  enabled  her  to  display  that  supe- 
riority of  understanding  which  led  all  the  female 
virtues  in  its  train,  accompanied  with  the  love  of 
mirth,  and  all  the  graces  of  colloquial  intercourse. 
Her  person  was  light,  though  above  the  common 
height,  but  active  and  elegant. 

Smith  remained  with  them  for  two  months,  and 
then  returned  to  Kirkcaldy  to  his  mother  and  his 
studies.  I  have  often  thought  since,  that  if  they  had 
brought  down  a  man  of  more  address  than  be  was, 
how  much  sooner  their  first  appearance  might  have 
been ;  their  own  good  sense  and  discernment  enabled 
them  sooner  to  draw  round  them  as  familiars  a  better 
set  of  people  of  their  own  choosing,  than  could  have 
been  picked  out  for  them  by  the  assistance  of  an  aide- 
de-camp. 

By  means  of  an  established  custom  of  their  prede- 
cessors, they  had  two  public  days  in  the  week,  when 
everybody  who  pleased  came  to  dine  with  them.  But 
that  on  Thursday  was  soon  cut  off,  and  Saturday  was 
their  only  public  day.  But  it  would  have  been  far 
better  if  that  day  had  been  also  abolished,  and  if,  in 
place  of  that,  they  had  taken  to  invited  companies, 
which  might  have  been  well  assorted,  and  might  have 
prevented  all  that  dulness,  and  even  solemnity,  which 


oy  Google 


490  THE  BUCCLEUCH   FAMILY. 

overclouded  large  companies  little  acquainted,  and  sel- 
dom capable  of  makiug  a  company  of  a  score  tolerably 
agreeable.  I  must  aver,  however,  without  pretending 
to  uncommon  discernmept,  that  I  soon  discovered  in 
both  that  superior  understanding,  and  that  uncommon 
degree  of  humanity,  as  well  as  the  highest  sense  of 
probity  and  virtue,  which  have  made  them  a  blessing 
and  honour  to  their  country  for  many  years  past. 
For  the  Duke's  uncommon  abilities,  as  well  as  his 
public  spirit,  became  ere  long  as  conspicuous  in  the 
exercise  of  more  honourable  oflBces  of  trust,  which  fell 
on  him  unsought,  as  his  unassuming  and  familiar 
manuers  made  him  appear  a  complete  gentleman  in 
all  the  intercourse  of  private  life.  The  family,  though 
rich  and  great,  had  long  been  in  a  state  of  obscurity 
through  want  of  talents  and  long  minorities.  In  this 
Duke  was  revived  the  character  which  Sir  James  Mel- 
ville gave  his  renowned  predecessor  in  Queen  Mary's 
reign — *'  Walter  Scot  of  Buccleugh,  wise  and  true, 
stout  and  modest."  • 

No  two  characters  I  ever  have  known  are  so  free 
of  defects  as  that  noble  pair,  while  each  in  their  de- 
partment displayed  such  talents  and  virtues  as  made 
tbeir  numerous  descendants  not  only  happy  in  them- 
selves, but  also  trained  them  up  in  the  habitual  dispo- 
sition to  become  blessings  to  all  their  own  connections 
to  the  latest  posterity. 

The  Duke's  sister,  I^y  Frances,  though  far  from 

*-  "Quliilk  Lard  of  Baoloiich  was  a  man  of  rare  quaUtea>  wyee,  trew, 
Bton^  Bad  modeit"— Mklville's  Mtnutira,  240. — £d 


oy  Google 


THE   BUCCLEUCH    FAMILY.  491 

handsome,  or  in  any  respect  attractive  in  her  person, 
though  then  only  seventeen,  showed  the  opening  of 
that  character  which  she  has  since  so  fully  displayed 
as  Lady  Douglas.  She  had  taste  and  knowledge  in 
the  belles-lettres,  a  pleasant  vein  of  ridicule,  without 
the  least  grain  of  malignity;  for  she,  like  her  brother, 
was  the  very  milk  of  human-kindness. 

As  I  had  been  intimately  acquainted  with  Charles 
Townshend,  her  father-in-law,  who  protected  her  from 
domestic  tyranny,  and  had  even  opened  her  mind  by  his 
instructions,  she  took  readily  to  me,  and  I  soon  became 
intimate  with  her,  and  kept  up  a  correspondence  with 
her,  both  in  prose  and  verse,  which  conduced  to  our 
amitsement.  The  prosperity  and  happiness  of  Lord 
Douglas's  family,  which  consisted  of  three  sons  and 
one  daughter,  demonstrated  the  excellence  of  her  do- 
mestic character.  It  was  remarkable  that  she  was  the 
first  female  descendant  of  the  Duchess  of  Monmouth 
and  Buccleuch  who  was  married. 

I  had  been  Moderator  of  the  Synod  in  November 
1766,  and  opened  the  Synod  in  May  1767  with  a 
sermon,  which  was  printed.  The  window-tax  was 
now  levied,  which  gave  a  serious  alarm  to  the  clergy  : 
there  was  a  standing  committee  of  Assembly,  which 
had  hitherto  done  nothing  effectual.  As  I  had  been 
the  champion  for  resisting  payment  of  the  tax,  I  was 
obligetl  to  bestir  myself  very  much  about  it ;  and  as 
Dr  Robertson  was  of  opinion  we  ought  to  submit  to 
it,  1  had  uphill  work  with  it. 

(1768.) — Towardstheendof  January  this  year  it  was 


oy  Google 


492  PROFBSSOB  MILLAB  OF  GLASGOW. 

that  Mrs  Carlisle  and  I  accompanied  her  aunt  and  unde 
to  visit  their  son  Walter  Home,  then  a  lieutenant  in 
the  7th  Begimeut,  and  lying  at  Glasgow.  Walter  had 
a  chum  of  the  name  of  Mainwaring,  a  very  agreeable 
young  man.  As  Dr  Wight  was  now  fuDy  established 
in  Glasgow,  and  had  one  of  bis  sisters  for  his  house- 
keeper, he  was  very  hospitable  and  popular,  and  we 
met  daily  several  of  the  Professors,  who  were  able 
men,  and  had  agreeable  conversation, — such  as  Alex- 
ander Stevenson  and  John  Millar.  This  last  had 
even  begun  to  distinguish  himself  by  his  democratical 
principles,  and  that  sceptical  philosophy  which  young 
noblemen  and  gentlemen  of  legislative  rank  carried 
into  the  world  with  them  from  his  law-class,  and, 
many  years  afterwards,  particularly  at  the  period  of 
the  French  Revolution,  displayed  with  popular  zeal,  to 
the  no  small  danger  of  perversion  to  all  those  under 
their  influence.  I  had  a  hint  of  this  from  Dr  Wight 
before  1782,  when  he  died,  who  added,  that  though 
some  sound  heads  might  find  antidotes  to  this  poison 
before  they  went  into  the  world,  and  see  in  the  British 
constitution  all  that  is  valuable  in  a  democracy,  with- 
out its  defects  and  faults,  yet,  as  it  was  connected 
with  lax  principles  in  religion,  there  might  be  not  a 
few  of  such  a  contexture  of  imderstanding  as  could 
not  be  cured.  Millar  lived  to  the  end  of  the  century,* 
I  met  with  astrong  proof  of  what  is  contained  in 
the  above  paragraph  respecting  Professor  Millar  a  long 

*  Author  of  the  once  very  celebrated  HUtorical   Vim  of  the  Sngliah 
Qmtrnmtnl,  ood  of  ObMrvationt  Concerning  Ihe  Dutmction  (ffRankt.  -  £d. 


izecy  Google 


PiiOFESSOB  MILLAR  OF  GLASQOW.  493 

time  afterwards,  when  dining  with  Robert  Colt,  Esq., 
then  residing  at  Inveresk.  I  don't  exactly  remember 
the  year,  but  I  think  it  was  before  the  war  of  1798. 
There  was  nobody  with  Mr  Colt  but  a  brother-in-law 
of  his,  when  we  were  joined  by  the  late  Sir  Hew  Dal- 
rjTnple  of  North  Berwick,  who  had  dined  in  Edin- 
burgh, After  consenting  to  stay  alt  night.  Sir  Hew 
said,  "Colt,  was  not  you  a  student  of  law  for  two 
years  with  MUlar  at  Glasgow?"  "Yes,!  was,"  an- 
swered Mr  Colt.  "Then,"  replied  Sir  Hew,  "I  find  I 
am  right ;  and  as  my  Hew  has  been  four  years  at  St 
Andrews,  and  seems  now  desirous  of  following  the 
law,  I  have  been  advised  to  send  him  to  Millar,  and 
have  come  to  consult  you  about  it."  "We'll  talk 
about  that  coolly  to-morrow  morning.  Sir  Hew ;  in 
the  mean  time,  give  me  your  toast."  I  knew  well  the 
meaning  of  this  reserve ;  and  a  few  days  afterwards 
meeting  Mr  Colt,  "  Well,"  said  I,  "  did  you  settle  your 
friend  Sir  How's  mind  about  sending  his  son  to  Glas- 
gow 1"  "  Yes,"  answered  he,  "  and  you'll  hear  no  more 
of  that  project."  This  Mr  Colt  was  an  able  and  a 
worthy  man.  but  he  was  shy  and  .reserved,  and  died, 
unknown  but  to  a  few,  in  the  year  1797.  He  had 
overcome  many  disadvantages  of  his  education,  for 
he  had  been  sent  to  a  Jacobite  seminary  of  one 
Elphinstone  at  Kensington,  where  his  body  was 
starved,  and  his  mind  also.  He  returned  to  Edin- 
burgh to  college.  He  had  hardly  a  word  of  Latin, 
and  was  obliged  to  work  hard  with  a  private  tutor. 
At  Glasgow,  to  be  sure,  he  learned  public  law,  but 


izecy  Google 


491  BLAIK   AND    ROBERTSON. 

took  in  poison  with  it,  which  he  had  strength  of  un- 
derstandiug  to  expel,  as  well  as  to  overcome  many 
other  disadvantages. 

I-ieutenant  Walter  Home,  before  the  end  of  the 
American  war,  was  major  of  the  42d  Regiment,  was 
an  able  man  and  an  excellent  officer ;  he  waa  the 
ablest  of  all  the  family,  except  Hubert  the  clergyman, 
although  his  third  brother  Koddam,  the  admiral,  got 
to  a  higher  raak.  By  means  of  my  old  connections 
at  Glasgow  and  Dr  Wight's  friends,  we  were  feasted 
and  every  way  well  entertained  there.  Nothing  could 
surpass  the  satisfaction  Mr  and  Mrs  Home  had  in 
seeing  their  son  so  well  received  in  the  best  society 
in  Glasgow.  In  those  days  the  members  of  the  minis- 
try, excepting  a  very  few  indeed,  were  the  only  people 
of  liberal  conversation  in  that  city. 

Drs  Blair  and  Bobertson  were  at  London  this  year 
during  tlie  time  of  the  Assembly — the  first  to  visit 
Ifondon  for  the  first  and  only  time  in  Lis  life ;  the 
second  to  transact  with  his  bookseller  for  his  History 
of  Charies  V.,  Emperor  of  Germany  and  King  of  Spain, 
and  to  enjoy  the  fame  of  his  former  publication.  Dr 
Robertson  was  introduced  to  the  first  company  in  Lon- 
don, as  all  the  people  of  fashion,  both  male  and  female, 
were  eager  to  see  the  historian  of  Queen  Mary,  who 
had  given  them  so  much  pleasure.  He  did  not  dis- 
appoint their  expectation,  for  though  he  spoke  broad 
Scotch  in  point  of  pronunciation  and  accent  or  tone, 
his  was  the  language  of  literature  and  taste,  and  of  an 
enlightened  and  liberal  mind.     Dr  Blair  exhibited  in 


oy  Google 


BLA.IR  AND  R0BEBT30N.  495 

a  much  narrower  circle,  for  nothing  of  his  having  been 
yet  published  but  his  Dissertation  on  Ossian,  he  had 
raised  but  little  curiosity ;  and  excepting  the  family  of 
Northumberland.ason  of  which.  Lord  Algernon  Piercy, 
had  been  three  years  under  his  roof  at  the  university, 
he  hardly  was  known  to  any  of  the  English  nobility 
or  gentry,  and  depended  chiefly  for  his  entertainment 
there  on  such  literary  people  as  he  had  seen  at  Edin- 
burgh, or  was  introduced  to  by  Dr  Blair  of  Westmin- 
ster, or  James  M'Pherson,  the  translator  of  Ossian* 

Blair  had  taken  charge  of  Lord  Glasgow,  the  King's 
Commissioner,  during  the  General  Assembly,  who, 
though  he  was  a  very  able  man,  had  so  much  distrust 
in  himself  that  he  could  not  compose  his  own  speeches. 
This  service  was  laid  upon  me,  and  I  had  much  plea- 
sure in  the  close  communication  which  this  gave  me 
with  his  lordship,  as  it  opened  to  me  a  near  view  of 
uncommon  talents  and  exalted  mind,  of  the  service  of 
which  the  world  was  in  great  measure  deprived  by  the 
most  insuperable  diffidence  and  modesty.-f- 

I  was  a  member  of  the  Assembly  this  year,  in  which 
there  was  little  business  of  any  consequence.  Henry 
Dundas,  who  was  now  well  known  there,  took  an 
attentive  charge  of  it,  and  leaned  on  me  as  his  best 
clerical  assistant. 

*  HU  "Lectures  on  Rhetoric,"  fts  delivered  to  his  class,  though  not  then 
published,  had  obtiuDed  coDsiderable  colloquial  celebrity.  It  wa«  not  until 
ITTT  tlwt  he  became  funoue  by  the  publication  of  hia  Sermuiu.— Ed. 

+  -See  almve,  p.  472. 


izecy  Google 


CHAPTER   XIV. 

1789-1770:    AGE,  47-*S. 

THE  CLEKOT    OF  SCOTLAKD    AND    THB    WI8D0V-IAX  —  CABLTLC  AP- 

POIKTED  THEIR  CH A UPION— SOJOURN   IN   LONDON THE  SCOTCH 

DANCma   ASSEMBLY — -THE    CHURCH   OF    SCOTLAND'S   CLAIUS   TO 

CONSIDERATION NEGOTIATIONS    WITH    STATESKEN D8    IX)DD 

PREACHING  TO  THE  MAODALENS — THE  CAREER  OP  COLONEL  DOT 

ANECDOTES  OF  WOLFE  AND  QUEBEC^QARRICK  AND  JOHN  HOME'S 

PLATS — DECISION   OF   THE  DOUGLAS  CAUSB^LORD   MANSFIELD 

THB  EXCITEMENT — CONVERSATION  AT  MRS  Montague's — The  re- 
turn  HOME  —  BACK    TO    LONDON    ABOUT    THE    WINDOW-TAX 

anecdotes    of    the    FORUATION    OF    THE    NORTH    MINISTBY 

CONCLDBION. 


The  vrindow-tax  alarmed  the  clergy  more  and  more, 
and  as  I  bad  been  the  great  champion  in  maintaining 
on  every  occasion  that  the  Scottish  clergy  by  our  law 
ought  to  be  exempted  from  this  tax,  on  the  same 
grounds  on  which  they  are  exempted  from  paying  the 
land-tax  for  their  glebes,  while  one  of  oiir  meetings 
■were  deliberating  what  was  to  be  done,  I  told  them 
that  as  I  intended  to  be  in  London  in  the  spring  on 
private  business,  I  would  very  gladly  accept  of  any 
commission  they  would  give  me,  to  state  our  claim  to 
the  King's  Ministers,  and  particularly  to  the  Lords  of 


izecy  Google 


JOUEKET  TO  LONDON.  49? 

the  Treasury  ;  and  at  least  to  prepare  the  way  for  an 
application  for  exemption  to  the  Parliament  in  the 
following  year,  in  case  it  should  be  found  expedient. 
Robertson,  who  had  thought  it  more  advisable  to  pay 
rather  than  resist  any  longer,  was  surprised  into  con- 
sent with  this  sudden  proposal  of  mine,  and  irankly 
agreed  to  it,  though  he  told  me  privately  that  it 
would  not  have  success.  The  truth  was,  that  Mrs 
Carlyle's  health  was  so  indifferent  that  I  became 
uneasy,  and  wished  to  try  Bath,  and  to  visit  London, 
where  she  never  had  been,  on  our  way.  The  clergy 
were  highly  pleased  with  my  offer  of  service  without 
any  expense,  and  I  was  accordingly  commissioued,  in 
due"  form,  by  the  Committee  on  the  Window-Tax,  to 
carry  on  this  affair.  We  prepared  for  our  journey, 
and  set  out  about  the  middle  of  February.  We  had 
the  good  fortune  to  get  Martin,  the  portrait-painter, 
and  Bob  Scott,  a  young  physician,  as  our  companions 
on  our  journey.  This  made  it  very  pleasant,  as  Mar- 
tin was  a  man  of  uncommon  talents  for  conversation. 
We  stopped  for  two  days  with  the  Blacketts  at  New- 
castle, and  then  went  on  by  Huntingdon,  and  after 
that  to  Cambridge.  As  I  had  not  been  there  when  I 
was  formerly  in  London,  I  was  desirous  to  see  that 
famous  university;  and  besides,  had  got  a  warm 
exhortation  from  my  friend  Dr  Robertson,  to  diverge 
a  little  from  the  straight  line,  and  go  by  Hockwell, 
where  there  were  the  finest  eels  in  all  England .  We 
took  that  place  in  our  way,  and  arrived  long  enough 
before  dinner  to  have  our  eels  dressed  in  various  wnys ; 
2  I 


oy  Google 


498  TUG  FAMILY  CIRCLE. 

but  though  the  spitch-cocked  had  been  so  highly  recom- 
mended by  our  friend,  we  thought  nothing  of  them,  and 
Mrs  Carlyle  could  not  taste  them,  so  that  we  had  all  to 
dine  on  some  very  indifferent  mutton-broth,  which  had 
been  ordered  for  her.  I  resolved  after  this  never  to 
turn  off  the  road  by  the  adiice  of  epicures. 

We  got  to  Cambridge  in  the  dark,  hut  remained 
all  next  forenoon,  and  saw  all  the  pubUc  buildings, 
some  of  which  are  very  fine,  particularly  King's  Col- 
lege Chapel.  As  none  of  us  had  any  acquaintances 
there  that  we  knew  ot  we  were  not  induced  to  stay  any 
longer,  and  so  made  the  best  of  our  way  to  London. 

My  youngest  sister  Janet,  a  beautifu],  elegant,  and 
pleasing  young  woman,  having  gone  to  London  to 
visit  her  married  sister,  had  herself  married,  in  1760, 
a  gentleman  who  had  been  captain  of  a  trading  vessel 
in  the  Mediterranean,  and,  having  been  attacked  by  a 
French  or  Spanish  privateer,  took  her  after  a  short 
engagement.*  He  was  a  very  sensible  clever  man, 
much  esteemed  by  his  companions,  and  had  become 
insurance-broker.  On  our  arrival  in  London,  there- 
fore, which  was  on  the  11th  February,  we  took  up 
our  residence  at  their  house,  which  was  in  Alderman- 
bury.      They  had  also  a  country-house,  where  their 

*  See  Scota  Magazme,  December  1759 ; — 

"CAFTPMB  BY  rRITATBEBS,  ETO. 

"  B7  the  Dragon,  Bell,  aad  the  Grtyhlmnd,  Sewar,  botli  &tim  LrmdOD, 
Le  Pendant,  Jos.  Oeruh&rd,  from  St  Domingo ;  c&iried  into  GibnJtar." 
See  also  the  CdZcdonian  JWreiiry,  ISth  December  1769; — 
"  The  Dra^it,  Bell,  anil  the  Greyhoimd,  Dewar,  botli  from  London,  are 
nrrivod  at  Gibnitar,  and  have  cwried  •  Frencih  prize  with  them." — Not* 
appendtd  to  the  MS. 


izecy  Google 


THE   FAMILY   CIRCLE.  499 

children  resided  the  whole  year,  and  where  they  spent 
the  summer  months ;  and  being  only  nine  miles  from 
London,  with  a  very  good  road,  my  brother-in-law 
could  easily  ride  every  day  to  attend  to  liis  business, 
and  return  to  dinner.  Merton  was  a  very  agreeable 
place.  The  house  had  been  originally  built  by  Lord 
Eglinton,  and  soon  after  forsaken  and  sold.  There 
was  a  large  garden  of  three  acres,  divided  into  three 
parts,  and  planted  with  the  beat  fruit-trees,  on  which, 
when  I  afterwards  saw  it  in  the  season,  I  said  there 
were  more  peaches  aud  apricots  than  grew  then  in 
Midlothian ;  for  I  well  remember  that  [there  were 
very  few]  till  we  had  hothouses  here,  which  had  then 
only  had  a  beginning,  by  Lord  Chief  Baron  Ord,  at  the 
Dean,  and  Baron  Stuart  Moncrieff,  and  were  not  in 
great  numbers  till  1780. 

About  the  third  night  after  we  came,  we  went  with 
the  Bells  to  the  Scotch  dancing  assembly,  which  then 
met  in  the  Ring's  Arms  Tavern,  in  Cheapside,  where 
we  met  many  of  our  acquaintance,  and  were  intro- 
duced to  several  others  with  whom  we  were  not  before 
acquainted.  X  was  glad  to  find  from  them  all  that 
my  brother-in-law  was  in  high  esteem  among  them  as 
a  man  of  business,  not  only  for  his  integrity,  but  his 
aptitude  for  business.  My  sister  was  much  admired 
as  a  fine  woman,  and  no  less  for  the  elegance  and  pro- 
priety of  her  manners  than  for  her  handsome  face 
and  fine  person.  He  had  the  good-luck  to  be  called 
Honest  Tom,  in  distinction  to  another  who  frequented 
,  Lloyd's  Coffeehouse,  who  was  not  in  so  much  favour, 


oy  Google 


500  IHE  WILKITE8. 

and  was  besides  a  verj  hot  Wilkite,  After  a  few  days 
more  we  were  invited  to  a  fine  subscription-dinner  in 
thg  London  Tavern,  where  there  was  a  company  of 
about  fifty  ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  dinner  was 
sumptuous,  but  I  was  not  much  delighted  with  the 
conversation.  The  men,  especially,  were  vulgar  and 
uneducated ;  and  most  of  the  English  among  them 
violent  Wilkites,  and  gave  toasts  of  the  party  kind, 
which  showed  their  breeding  where  the  majority  were 
Scotch.  It  was  with  some  difficulty  that  I  could  get 
Honest  Tom  to  treat  their  bad  manners  with  ridicule 
and  contempt,  rather  than  with  rage  and  resentment. 
Having  now  been  near  a  week  in  London,  it  was 
proper  that  I  should  give  a  commencement  to  the 
business  which  I  had  undertaken ;  I  therefore  applied 
myself  to  making  the  necessary  calls  on  Dr  Gordon  of 
the  Temple,  a  Scotch  solicitor-at-law,  and  the  Lord 
Advocate  for  Scotland,  and  whoever  else  I  thought 
might  be  of  use.  I  bad  drawn  a  short  memorial  on 
the  business  which  Dr  Gordon  approved,  but  wished 
it  to  be  left  with  him  for  corrections  and  additions. 
This  I  did,  but  was  surprised  to  find,  when  he  returned 
it  several  weeks  after  as  fit  to  be  "sent  to  the  press, 
that  there  was  hardly  any  change  on  it  at  all.  But  I 
was  still  more  surprised,  when  caUing  on  the  Lord 
Advocate  (James  Montgomery,  Esq.),  and  opening 
the  alfair  to  him,  to  hear  him  answer  that  he  wished 
me  success  with  all  his  heart,  but  could  giVe  me  no 
aid ;  for,  he  added,  that  when  the  clergy  were  lately 
in  four  years'  arrears,  the  payment  of  which  would 


oy  Google 


THE   CHUBCH   NEGLECTED.  501 

have  greatly  distressed  them,  Dr  Rubertaon  bad  come 
to  him  in  Edinburgh,  and  had  Btrongly  interceded 
with  him  to  get  that  arrear  excused,  and  he  would 
answer  for  the  punctual  payment  by  the  clergy  in 
future.  He  had,  accordingly,  on  this  promise,  applied 
to  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  then  First  Minister,  and  ob- 
tained what  the  Doctor  had  asked  on  the  condition 
promised.  In  this  state  of  things  it  was  impossible 
that  he  could  assist  me  as  Lord  Advocate,  but  that, 
as  a  private  gentleman,  he  would  do  all  he  could ;  that 
was,  to  introduce  me  to  the  Minister,  to  speak  of  me 
as  I  deserved,  and  to  say  that  he  thought  the  petition 
I  brought  very  reasonable,  and  agreeable  to  the  law  of 
Scotland.  All  this  he  punctually  fulfilled,  for  he  was 
an  honourable  man. 

The  Church  of  Scotland  had  been  at  all  times  very 
meanly  provided ;  and  even  when  they  were  serving 
their  country  with  the  utmost  fidelity  and  zeal  at  the 
time  of  the  Restoration,  and  ever  afterwards  support- 
ing that  part  of  the  aristocracy  which  resisted  the  en- 
croachments of  the  Crown  and  maintained  the  liberties 
of  the  people — even  then  their  most  moderate  requests 
to  be  raised  above  poverty  were  denied.*  After  the 
union  of  the  crowns,  and  even  after  that  of  the  legis- 
latures, they  have,  on  every  application  for  redress, 
been  scurvily  treated.  The  history  of  our  country 
bears  the  strongest  testimony  of  their  loyalty  to  the 
king,  while  they  warmly  opposed  every  appearance  of 

"  Whether  or  Dot  the  author  moant;  to  say  Rr/nrmaStm,  the  word  Rtrto- 
ration  must  have  been  a  slip. — Gd. 


izecy  Google 


602  THE  CHURCH  NEGLECTED. 

arbitrary  power  even  to  peraecution  and  death.  Th^ 
were  cajoled  and  flattered  by  the  aristocracy  when 
tbey  wanted  their  aid,  but  never  relieved,  till  Crom- 
well considered  their  poverty,  and  relieved  them  for 
the  time.  Yet,  after  Presbytery  was  finally  settled  at 
the  Revolution,  the  clergy  were  allowed  almost  to 
starve  till,  down  in  our  own  time,  in  the  year  1790, 
a  generous  and  wise  man  was  raised  to  the  Pi-esident's 
chair,  who,  being  also  President  of  that  Court  when 
it  sits  as  a  committee  of  Parliament  for  the  aug- 
mentation of  ministers'  stipends,  with  the  concur- 
rence of  his  brethren  bad  redressed  this  grievance, 
and  enabled  the  clergy  and  their  families  to  survive 
such  years  of  dearth  as  the  1799  and  1800,  which, 
but  for  that  relief,  must  have  reduced  them  to  ruin. 
This  happened  by  good-luck  while  the  land  estates 
in  Scotland  were  doubled  and  tripled  in  their  rents, 
otherwise  it  could  not  have  been  done  without  a 
clamorous  opposition.* 

It  is  observable  that  no  country  has  ever  been  more 
tranquil,  except  the  trifling  insurrections  of  1715  and 
'45,  than  Scotland  has  been  since  the  Revolution  in 
1688 — a  period  of  117  years;  while,  at  the  same  time, 
the  country  has  been  prosperous,  with  an  increase  of 
agriculture,  trade,  and  manufactures,  as  well  as  all  the 
ornamental  arts  of  life,  to  a  degree  unexampled  in  any 
age  and  country.  How  far  the  steady  loyalty  to  the 
Crown,  and  attachment  to  the  constitution,  together 

*  Tho  Lord  President  of  tiia  Conrt  of  Sesson  here  referred  to  ia  Sir  Il»y 
CunpbelL     This  matter  is  again  alluded  to,  p.  6ZT. — Ed. 


izecy  Google 


nith  the  unwearied  diligence  of  the  clergy  in  teach- 
ing a  rational  religion,  may  have  contributed  to  thia 
prosperity,  cannot  be  exactly  ascertained;  but  surely 
enough  appears  to  entitle  them  to  the  high  respect  of 
the  State,  and  to  justice  from  the  country,  in  a  decent 
support  to  them  and  to  their  families,  and,  if  possible, 
to  a  permanent  security  like  that  of  the  Church  of 
England,  by  giving  the  clergy  a  title  to  vote  on  their 
livings  for  the  member  of  Parliament  for  the  county, 
which  would  at  once  raise  their  respect,  and,  by  mak- 
ing them  members  of  the  State,  would  for  ever  secure 
their  interest  in  it,  and  firmly  cement  and  strengthen 
the  whole. 

Before  I  began  my  operations  relative  to  the  win- 
dow-tax, I  witnessed  something  memorable.  It  being 
much  the  fashion  to  go  on  a  Sunday  evening  to  a 
chapel  of  the  Magdalen  Asylum,  we  went  there  on  the 
second  Sunday  we  were  in  London,  and  had  difficulty 
to  get  tolerable  seats  for  my  sister  and  wife,  the  crowd 
of  genteel  people  was  so  great.  The  preacher  was  Dr 
Dodd,  a  man  afterwards  too  well  known.  The  unfor- 
tunate young  women  were  in  a  latticed  gallery,  where 
you  could  only  see  those  who  chose  to  be  seen.  The 
preacher's  text  was,  "  If  a  man  look  on  a  woman  to 
lust  after  her,"  &c.  The  text  itself  was  shocking,  and 
the  sermon  was  composed  with  the  least  possible  deU- 
cacy,  and  was  a  shocking  insult  on  a  sincere  penitent, 
and  fuel  for  the  wnrm  passions  of  the  hypocrites.  The 
fellow  was  handsome,  and  delivered  his  discourse 
remarkably  well  for  a  reader.    When  he  had  finished. 


oy  Google 


50i  SIR  FLETCHER  NORTON. 

there  were  unceasing  whispers  of  applause,  which  I 
could  not  help  contradicting  aload,  and  condemning 
the  whole  institution,  as  well  as  the  exhibition  of  the 
preacher,  as  cmilra  bonos  mores,  and  a  disgrace  to  a 
Christian  city. 

Od  the  day  after  this  I  went  to  the  House  of  Peers, 
and  heard  Sir  Fletcher  Norton's  pleading  on  the 
Douglas  Cause,  on  the  side  of  Douglas,  but  in  a  man- 
ner inferior  to  what  I  expected  from  his  fame :  but 
this  was  not  a  question  of  law,  but  of  &ct.  I  dined 
and  supped  next  day  with  Colonel  Dow,  who  had 
translated  well  the  History  of  Hindttsian,  and  wrote 
tolerably  well  the  Tragedy  of  Zingis.  As  James 
M'Pherson,  the  translator  of  Ossian,  and  he  Uved  to- 
gether, and  as  his  play,  in  point  of  diction  and  man- 
□era,  had  some  resemblance  to  the  poems  of  Ossian, 
there  were  not  a  few  who  ascribed  the  tragedy  to 
M'Pherson  ;  but  such  people  did  not  know  that,  could 
M'Pherson  have  claimed  it,  he  was  not  the  man  to 
relinquish  either  the  credit  or  profits  which  might 
arise  from  it,  for  the  tragedy  ran  its  nine  nights. 

Dow  was  a  Scotch  adventurer  who  had  been  bred 
at  the  school  of  Dunbar,  his  father  being  in  the  Cus- 
toms there,  and  had  run  away  &om  his  apprenticeship 
at  Eyemouth,  aud  found  his  way  to  the  East  Indies, 
where,  having  a  turn  for  languages,  which  had  been 
fostered  by  his  education,  he  soon  became  such  a 
master  of  the  native  tongue  as  to  accelerate  his  pre- 
ferment in  the  army,  for  he  soon  had  the  command  of 
a  regiment  of  sepoys.     He  was  a  sensible  and  know- 


izecy  Google 


COLONEL  DOW.  505 

ing  man,  of  very  agreeable  manners,  and  of  a  mild 
and  gentle  disposition.  As  he  was  telling  us  that 
night,  that,  when  he  had  the  charge  of  the  Great 
Mogul,  with  two  regiments  under  his  command,  at 
Delhi,  he  was  tempted  to  dethrone  the  monarch,  and 
mount  the  throne  in  hia  stead,  which  he  said  he  could 
easily  have  done  : — when  I  asked  him  what  prevented 
him  from  yielding  to  the  temptation,  he  gave  me  this 
memorable  answer,  that  it  was  reflecting  on  what  his 
old  schoolfellows  at  Dunbar  would  think  of  him  for 
being  guilty  of  such  an  action.  His  company  were 
Dr  John  Douglas  and  Garrick,  the  two  M'Phersons, 
John  Home,  and  David  Hume  who  joined  us  in  the 
evening.* 

I  have  before,  I  believe,  ^ven  some  account  of 
them  all  but  Kobert  M'Pherson,  the  chaplain,  whom 
I  had  not  known  till  now.  Though  not  a  man  of 
genius,  be  was  a  man  of  good  sense,  of  a  firm  and 
manly  mind,  and  of  much  worth  and  honour.  He 
was  a  younger  brother  of  M'Pherson  of  Banchors,  a 
man  near  the  head  of  the  clan  in  point  of  birth,  but 
not  of  a  large  fortune.  He  had  been  bred  at  Aber- 
deen for  the  Church,  but  before  he  passed  trials  as  a 
probationer,  he  had  been  offered  a  company  in  his 
regiment  of  Highlanders  by  Simon  Eraser,  and  had 
accepted.    But  when  the  regiment  rendezvoused  at 

*  Colonel  AlezAoder  Dow  is  known  as  the  translBtor  tutd  oontinuer  of 
the  FenUn  Histotj  of  Hindoslan,  tuid  the  writer  of  Tola  from  the  Pertian, 
and  of  another  tragedy  beadee  hia  Zingii,  called  SttKona.  The  editor  ia 
not  awaie,  howerer,  of  any  other  source  of  infomuttioii  about  the  personal 
adventures  referred  to  in  tho  toit  —Ed. 


izecy  Google 


Greenock,  he  was  told,  with  many  fair  speeches,  that 
the  captaius'  commissions  were  all  disposed  of,  much 
agaiDst  the  coIoDel's  will,  but  that  he  might  have  a 
lieutenancy,  or  the  chaplainry  if  he  liked  it  better. 
M'Pherson  chose  the  last,  and  took  orders  immedi- 
ately from  the  Presbytery  of  Lochcarron,  where  he 
returned  for  ten  days.  He  sood  made  himself  accept- 
able to  the  superiors  as  well  as  to  the  men,  and  after 
they  landed  in  Nova  Scotia,  in  every  skirmish  or 
battle  it  was  observed  that  he  always  put  himself  on 
a  line  with  the  officers  at  the  head  of  the  regiment. 
He  was  invited  to  the  mess  of  the  field  officers,  where 
he  continued.  On  hearing  this  from  General  Murray, 
I  asked  him  [M'Pherson]  if  it  was  true.  He  said  it 
was.  How  came  you  to  be  so  foolish  1  He  answered, 
that  being  a  grown  man,  while  many  of  the  lieutenants 
and  ensigns  were  but  boys,  as  well  as  some  of  the  pri- 
vates, and  that  they  looked  to  him  for  example  as  well 
as  precept,  he  had  thought  it  his  duty  to  advance  with 
them,  hut  that  he  had  discontinued  the  practice  after 
the  third  time  of  danger,  as  he  found  they  were  per- 
fectly steady. 

Dining  with  him,  and  General  James  Murray  and 
one  or  two  more,  at  the  British  oho  day,  X  put  him 
on  telling  the  story  of  the  mutiny  at  Quebec,  when 
he  had  the  command  after  the  death  of  Wolfe.  He  told 
us  that  the  first  thing  ho  had  done  was  to  send  and 
inquire  if  Mac  had  taken  advantage  of  the  leave  he 
had  given  him  to  sail  for  Britain  the  day  before,  for  if 
he  had  not  sailed,  there  would  have  been  no  mutiny. 


oy  Google 


Bat  he  was  gone,  and  I  bad  to  do  the  best  I  could 
without  him ;  and  so  he  went  on.  Not  being  certain 
if  this  anecdote  might  not  have  been  much  exag- 
gerated, according  to  the  usual  style  of  the  windy 
Murrays,  as  they  were  styled  by  Jock  at  the  Horn,  I 
asked  Mac,  when  the  company  parted,  how  much  of 
this  was  true  1  He  answered,  that  though  the  General 
bad  exceeded  a  little  in  his  compliments  to  him,  that 
it  was  so  far  true,  that  he,  being  the  only  Highland 
chaplain  there — he  of  Fraser's  regiment  having  gone 
home — he  had  bo  much  to  say  with  both  of  them 
that  he  could  have  persuaded  them  to  stand  by  their 
officers  and  the  General,  in  which,  if  those  two 
regiments  had  joined,  they  would  have  prevented  the 
mutiny. 

One  anecdote  more  of  this  worthy  man,  and  I  shall 
have  done  with  him.  In  one  of  the  winters  in  which 
he  was  at  Quebec  he  had  provided  himself  in  a 
wooden  house,  which  he  had  furnished  well,  and  in 
which  he  had  a  tolerable  soldier's  library.  While  he 
was  dining  one  day  with  the  mess,  his  house  took  fire 
and  was  burned  to  the  ground.  Next  morning  the 
two  serjeant-majors  of  the  two  Highland  regiments 
came  to  him,  and,  lamenting  the  great  loss  he  had 
sustained,  told  him  that  the  lads,  out  of  their  great 
love  and  respect  for  him,  had  collected  a  purse  of  four 
hundred  guineas,  which  they  begged  him  to  accept  of. 
He  was  moved  by  their  generosity,  and  by-and-by 
anwered,  "  That  he  was  never  so  much  gratified  in  his 
life  as  by  their  offer,  as  a  mark  of  kindness  and  respect. 


izecDy  Google 


of  whict  he  would  think  himself  entirely  unworthy 
if  he  could  rob  them  of  the  fruits  of  their  wise  and 
prudent  frugality ;"  and  added, "  that,  by  good  fortune, 
he  had  no  need  of  the  exertions  of  their  generosity." 
The  annals  of  private  men  I  have  often  thought  as 
instructive  and  worthy  of  being  recorded  as  those  of 
their  superiors. 

Having  formerly  given  some  account  of  James 
K'Phersou  and  Garrick,  I  shall  say  nothing  more  of 
them  here,  but  that  in  their  several  ways  they  were 
very  good  company.  Garrick  was  always  playsome, 
good-humoured,  and  willing  to  display ;  James  was 
sensible,  shrewd,  and  sarcastic.  Dow  went  a  second 
time  out  to  India,  and  after  some  time  died  thera 

By  this  time  I  bad  discovered  that  I  should  have 
no  need  to  go  to  Bath,  as  Mrs  C.  had  fallen  with 
child,  which  left  me  sufficient  time  to  wait  even 
for  the  very  slow  method  of  transacting  Treasury 
business,  which  made  me  sometimes  repent  that  I 
had  undertaken  it.  I  had  found  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot 
at  last,  who  both  encouraged  and  assisted  me.  I  had 
also  met  Mr  Wedderbum,  who  was  not  then  in  the 
line  of  doing  me  much  service.  Mr  Grey  Cooper, 
who  had  been  brought  forward  by  the  Honourable 
Charles  Townshend,  and  was  then  a  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury,  frankly  gave  me  his  services.  But  the  only 
person  (except  Sir  G.  Elliot)  who  understood  me 
perfectly  was  Mr  Jeremiah  Dyson.  He  had  been  two 
years  at  Edinburgh  University  at  the  same  time  as 
Akenside  and  Monckly,  and  had  a  perfect  idea  of  the 


izecy  Google 


GARBICE.  AND   HOME.  509 

constitution  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  and  the  naturo 
and  state  of  the  livings  of  the  clergy.  Of  him  I  ex- 
pected and  obtained  much  aid.  Broderip,  secretary 
to  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  on  whom  I  frequently  called, 
gave  me  good  words  but  little  aid. 

On  the  23d  of  this  month  I  went  with  John  Home 
to  the  first  nightof  his  tragedy  of  the  i^aia/Z?wcoi?cry, 
which  went  off  better  than  we  expected.  This  was 
and  is  to  my  taste  the  second-best  of  Home's  tragedies. 
Garrick  had  been  justly  alarmed  at  the  jealousy  and 
dislike  which  prevailed  at  that  time  against  Lord 
Bute  and  the  Scotch,  and  had  advised  him  to  change 
the  title  of  Rivine  into  that  of  the  Fatal  Discovery, 
and  had  provided  a  student  of  Oxford,  who  had  ap- 
peared at  the  rehearsals  as  the  author,  and  wished 
Home  of  all  things  to  remain  concealed  till  the  play 
had  its  run.  But  John,  whose  vanity  was  too  san- 
guine to  admit  of  any  fear  or  caution,  and  whose 
appetite  for  praise  rebelled  against  the  counsel  that 
would  deprive  him  for  a  moment  of  his  fame,  too 
soon  discovered  the  secret,  and  though  the  play  sur- 
vived its  nine  nights,  yet  the  house  evidently  slack- 
ened after  the  town  heard  that  John  was  the  author. 
Home,  however,  in  his  way,  ascribed  this  to  the  atten- 
tion of  the  public,  and  especially  of  the  Scotch,  being 
drawn  off  by  the  Douglas  Cause,  which  was  decided  in 
the  House  of  Lords  on  the  27th,  forgetting  that  this 
took  up  only  one  night,  and  that  any  slackness  de- 
rived from  that  cause  could  not  affect  other  nights. 

To  finish  my  account  of  this  play.  I  shall  add  here 


izecy  Google 


510  GA.EBICK  AND  HOME. 

that  Garrick  stQl  continued  to  perform  it  on  the  most 
convenient  temiB.  Mrs  Carlyle,  John  Home,  and  I, 
dined  with  Mr  A.  Wedderbum  at  his  house  in  Lin- 
coln'a-Inn  Fields,  and  went  to  \\\e  Fatal  Discovery 
■with  him  and  his  lady  and  his  brother,  Colonel  David 
Wedderbum,  when  we  were  all  perfectly  well  pleased. 
We  returned  with  them  to  supper,  "Wedderbum  having 
continued  cordial  and  open  all  that  day  \  his  brother 


We  became  acquainted  with  my  wife's  uncle  and  aunt, 
Mr  Laurie  and  Miss  Mary  Keed,  brother  and  sister  of 
her  mother  by  another  wife.  Mr  Keed  was  a  mahogany 
merchant  in  Hatton  Wall,  a  very  worthy  and  honour- 
able man ;  and  his  sister,  whom  I  had  seen  once  or 
twice  before  in  Berwick,  was  a  handsome  and  elegant 
woman,  though  now  turned  of  thirty,  with  as  much 
good  sense  and  breeding  as  any  person  we  met  with. 
Mr  Eeed  was  not  rich,  but  between  an  estate  of  £250, 
which  he  had  near  Alnwick,  and  his  business,  he  lived 
in  a  very  respectable  manner.  Their  mode  of  living 
was  quite  regulated,  for  they  saw  company  only  two 
days  in  the  week  ; — on  Thursday,  to  dinner,  when  you 
met  a  few  friends,  chiefly  from  Northumberland;  and 
here,  if  you  pleased,  you  might  play  cards  and  stay 
the  evening.  On  Sunday  evening  they  likewise  saw 
their  friends  to  tea  and  supper,  but  they  were  too 
old-fashioned  to  play  cards,  which  was  very  convenient 
for  me.  The  uncle  and  aunt  were  proud  of  their  niece, 
as  they  found  her,  in  point  of  conversation  and  man- 
ners, at  least  equal  to  any  of  their  guests ;  and  the 


izecy  Google 


THE  DOUGLAS  CAUSE.  511 

niece  was  proud  of  her  uncle  and  aunt,  as  in  him  she 
found  as  honest  a  man  as  Mr  Bell,  and  in  her  a  woman 
who,  for  beauty  and  elegance,  could  cope  with  my 
Bister,  who  was  not  surpassed  by  any  lady  in  the  city. 
Here  I  met  with  many  old  acquaintances,  and  made 
some  new  ones,  such  as  Sir  Evan  Nepean  and  his  lady, 
then  only  in  their  courtship,  and  A.  CoUingwood,  a 
clever  attorney,  said  to  be  nearly  related  to  the  family 
of  Unthank — indeed,  a  natural  son  of  my  wife's  grand- 
father. To  this  very  agreeable  place  we  resorted  often  ; 
and  when  I  came  the  next  year  alone,  I  availed  my- 
self of  it,  especially  on  Sunday  nights. 

I  was  much  indebted  to  my  hospitable  friend,  Dr 
Blair  of  Westminster,  at  whose  house  also  I  met  with 
sundry  people  whose  acquaintance  I  cultivated.  On 
the  26th  of  this  month  I  met  bim  at  Court,  after 
having  attended  service  in  the  Chapel  Koyal  and  in 
the  chaplain's  seat,  and  was  by  him  introduced  in  the 
drawing-room  to  Lord  Bathurst,  then  very  old,  but 
extremely  agreeable;  Dr  Barton,  Dean  of  Bristol, 
Eector  of  St  Andrew,  Holborn,  &c.,  and  to  Dr  Tucker, 
Dean  of  Gloucester — very  excellent  people,  whose 
acquaintance  I  very  much  valued.* 

On  the  27th  I  attended  the  House  of  Peers  on  the 
Douglas  Cause.  The  Duke  of  B[uccleuchJ  had  promised 
to  carry  me  down  to  the  House ;  bat  as  I  was  going  into 
Grosvenor  Square  to  meet  him  at  ten  o'clock,  I  met 
the  Duke  of  Montague,  who  was  coming  from  his 

■  Jonah  Tucker,  whose  works  on  Trade  unticipBted  some  of  the  estab- 
lished doctdnea  on  [lolitical  ecooomy.— Ed. 


oy  Google 


512  THE  DOUGl^S  CAUSE. 

house,  and  took  me  into  his  chariot,  saying  that  the 
Duke  of  B.  was  not  yet  ready.  He  put  me  in  by 
the  side  of  the  throne,  where  I  found  two  or  three  of  my 
friends,  among  them  Thomas  Bell.  The  business  did 
not  begin  till  eleven,  and  from  that  time  I  stood,  with 
now  and  then  a  lean  on  the  edge  of  a  deal  board,  till 
nine  in  the  evening,  without  any  refreahmeut  but  a 
small  roll  and  two  oranges.  The  heat  of  the  house 
was  chiefly  oppressive,  and  Lord  Sandwich's  speech, 
which,  though  learned  and  able,  yet  being  three  hours 
long,  was  very  intolerable.  The  Duke  of  Bedford 
spoke  low,  but  not  half  an  hour.  The  Chancellor 
and  Lord  Mansfield  united  on  the  side  of  Douglas ; 
each  of  them  spoke  above  an  hour.  Andrew  Stuart, 
whom  I  saw  in  the  House,  sitting  on  the  left  side  of 
the  throne,  seemed  to  be  much  affected  at  a  part  of 
Lord  Camden's  speech,  in  which  he  reflected  on  him, 
and  immediately  left  the  House  ;  from  whence  I  con- 
cluded that  he  was  in  despair  of  success.  Lord  Mans- 
field, overcome  with  heat,  was  about  to  faint  in  the 
middle  of  hia  speech,  and  was  obliged  to  stop.  The 
side-doora  were  immediately  thrown  open,  and  the 
Chancellor  rushing  out,  returned  soon  with  a  servant, 
who  followed  him  with  a  bottle  and  glasses.  Lord 
Mansfield  drank  two  glasses  of  the  wine,  and  after 
some  time  revived,  and  proceeded  in  his  speech.  We, 
who  had  no  wine,  were  nearly  as  much  recruited 
by  the  fresh  air  which  rushed  in  at  the  open  doors  as 
hia  lordship  by  the  wine.  About  nine  the  business 
ended  in  favour  of  Douglas,  there  being  only  five 


izecy  Google 


THE   DOUGLAS   CAUSE.  513 

Peers  on  the  other  side.  I  was  well  pleased  with 
that  decision,  as  I  had  favoured  that  side  :  Professor 
Ferguson  and  I  being  the  only  two  of  our  set  of 
people  who  favoured  Douglas,  chiefly  on  the  opinion 
that,  if  the  proof  of  filiation  on  his  part  was  not  bus- 
tained,  the  whole  system  of  evidence  in  such  cases 
would  be  overturned,  and  a  door  be  opened  for  end- 
less disputes  about  succession.  I  had  asked  the  Duke 
of  B.,  some  days  before  the  decision,  how  it  would 
go;  he  said  that  if  the  Law  Lords  disagreed,  there 
was  no  saying  how  it  would  go ;  because  the  Peers, 
however  imperfectly  prepared  to  judge,  would  follow 
the  Judge  they  most  respected.  But  if  they  united, 
the  case  would  be  determined  by  their  opinion ;  it 
being  [the  practice]  in  their  House  to  support  the 
Law  Lords  in  all  judicial  cases. 

After  the  decision,  I  persuaded  my  friends,  as  there 
was  no  coach  to  be  had,  not  to  attempt  rushing  into 
any  of  the  neighbouring  taverns,  but  to  foUow  me  to 
the  Crown  and  Anchor  in  the  Strand,  where  we  arrived, 
Thos.  Bell,  Alderman  Crichton,  Robert  Bogle,  junior, 
and  I,in  time  enough  to  get  into  a  snug  room,  where  we 
wrote  some  letters  for  Scotland,  the  post  then  not  de- 
parting till  twelve;  and  after  a  good  supper,  Bell  and 
I  got  home  to  Aldermanbury  about  one  o'clock,  where 
our  wives  were  waiting,  though  not  uninformed  of  the 
event,  as  I  had  despatched  a  porter  with  a  note  to 
them  immediately  on  our  arrival  in  the  tavern. 

The  rejoicings  in  Scotland  were  very  great  on  this 
occasion,  and  even  outrageous :  although  the  Douglas 


oy  Google 


SIl  BATH  HOUSE. 

family  bad  been  long  in  obscurity,  yet  the  Hamiltons 
had  for  a  long  period  lost  their  populai-ity.  The  at- 
tachment which  all  their  acquaintances  had  to  Baron 
Mure,  who  was  the  original  author  of  this  suit,  and 
to  Andrew  Stuart,  who  carried  it  on,  swayed  their 
minds  very  much  their  way.  They  were  men  of  un- 
common good  sense  and  probity.* 

Mrs  Pulteney  being  still  living,  we  had  a  fine  din- 
ner at  Bath  House,  after  which,  Mrs  Carlyle  and  I 
paid  an  eveniug  visit  to  Mrs  Montagua  Pulteney 
at  this  time  had  fallen  much  under  the  influence  of 
General  Robert  Clerk,  whom  I  have  mentioned  before. 
I  happened  to  ask  him  when  he  had  seen  Clerk  ;  he 
answered  he  saw  him  every  day,  and  as  he  had  not 
been  there  yet,  he  might  probably  pay  his  visit  before 
ten  o'clock,  and  then  enlarged  for  some  time  on  his 
great  ability.  Clerk  had  subdued  Pulteney  by  per- 
suading him  that  there  was  not  a  man  in  England  fit 
to  be  Chancellor  of  Exchequer  but  himself.  Mrs  Pul- 
teney'a  good  sense,  however,  defeated  the  effect  of  this 
infiueuce.  Pulteney  was  unfortunate  in  not  taking 
for  his  private  secretary  and  confidential  friend  Dr 
John  Douglas,  who  had  stood  in  that  relation  to  the 
late  Lord  Bath,  and  was  one  of  tho  ablest  men  in 
England.  But  on  Putteney's  succession  he  found 
himself  neglected,  and  drew  ofi".     Clerk  came  at  ten, 

*  Andrev  Stnoi^  often  mentioned  by  Coriyle,  had  devoted  the  whols 
eae^ios  Mtd  ptmpeeti  of  his  life  to  the  Hunilton  aide  of  the  mum.  Ha 
challenged  Thurlow,  the  leading  counsel  on  the  opjiosite  side,  and  they 
fought.    His  bitter  "Letters  to  Lord  MuuGeld"  have  often  Iwea  km),  lika 

those  of  J  muni,  as  a  model  of  poliabed  vitupetstSon. — Gd. 


izecy  Google 


as  Fulteoey  bad  foretold,  and  I  saw  how  the  land 
lay. 

On  this  first  miBsion  to  London  I  was  mnch  obliged 
to  Sir  Alexander  Gilmour,  who  was  a  friend  of  the 
Dake  of  Grafton's.  He  knew  everybody,  and  intro- 
duced me  to  everybody.  One  day  he  carried  me  to 
the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  (Cornwallis),  who  re- 
ceived me  graciously  ;  in  short,  I  called  on  all  the 
Scotch  noblemen  and  Members  of  Parliament,  many  of 
whom  I  saw,  and  left  memorials  at  every  house  where 
I  called.  Lord  Frederick  Campbell  was  particularly 
obliging.  At  this  time  I  dined  one'  day  with  Sir  A. 
Gilmour  on  a  Sunday,  after  having  been  at  Court ; 
General  Graham  and  Pulteney,  and  Colonel  Riccart 
Hepburn,  diued  there.  In  the  conversation  there,  to 
my  surprise  I  found  [Graham]  talking  strongly  against 
Administration  for  not  advising  the  King  to  yield  to 
the  popular  cry.  Gilmour  opposed  him  with  violence, 
and  I  drew  an  inference,  which  proved  true,  that  he 
had  been  tampering  with  her  Majesty,  and  using  politi- 
cal freedoms, which  were  not,  long  afterwards,  the  cause 
of  his  disgrace.  Graham  was  a  shrewd  and  sensible 
man,  but  the  Queen's  favour  and  his  prosperity  had 
made  him  arrogant  and  presumptuous,  and  he  blew 
himself  up.*   Not  long  after  this  time  he  lost  his  office 

*  Thii  is  protwblj  the  "Colonel  OrKme''  who,  Bccording  to  Walpole 
(who  uya  he  was  x  notorious  Jacobite,  and  out  in  the  '46j,  negotiated  the 
latrr'mge  of  G«aige  HI.,  having  been  "deapatohed  in  the  mort  priv&te 
muinet  as  a  traTeller,  and  inTssted  with  no  cluuncler,  to  visit  vtuioui  Lttle 
Proteiitant  conrta,  and  make  report  of  the  qualiScations  of  the  Mveral  ua- 
married  princeoaea.  "—See  ifcnt.  <ifOeo.  III.,  ch.  v.— £d. 


izecy  Google 


516  LORD   MANSFIELD. 

Dear  tbe  QuceD>  and  retired  into  obscurity  in  Scotlaod 
for  the  rest  of  bis  day  a. 

My  connection  with  physicians  made  me  a  member 
of  two  of  their  dubs,  which  I  seldom  missed.  Qpe  of 
tbem  was  at  tbe  Horn  Tavern  in  Fleet  Street,  where 
they  bad  laid  before  tbem  original  papers  relating  to 
their  own  sdence,  and  had  published  a  volume  or  two 
of  Essays,  which  were  well  received.  Armstrong, 
who  took  no  share  in  the  business  generally,  arrived 
when  I  did,  about  eight  o'clock ;  and  as  tbey  bad  a 
great  deference  for  him,  and  as  be  was  whimsical,  tbey 
delayed  bespeaking  supper  tUI  be  came,  and  then  laid 
that  duty  on  bim.  He  in  complaisance  wished  to 
turn  it  over  on  me,  as  the  greatest,  or  rather  the  only 
stranger,  for  I  was  admitted  speciali  gratia;  but  I 
declined  tbe  office.  Tbe  conversation  was  lively  and 
agreeable,  and  we  parted  always  at  twelve.  There 
was  another  club  held  on  the  alternate  Thursday  at 
the  Queen's  Head  in  St  Paul's  Churchyard,  which  was 
not  conBned  to  physicians,  but  induded  men  of  other 
professions.  Strange  the  engraver  was  one,  a  very 
sensible,  ingenious,  and  modest  man. 

In  the  course  of  my  operations  about  the  window- 
tax,  I  bad  frequently  short  interviews  with  Lord 
Mansfield.  One  day  be  sent  for  me  to  breakfasis 
when  I  had  a  long  conversation  with  hina  on  various 
subjects.  Amongst  others,  be  talked  of  Hume  and 
Eobertson's  Histories,  and  said  that  though  they  had 
pleased  and  instructed  bim  much,  and  though  be  could 
point  out  few  or  no  faults  in  tbem,  yet,  when  he  was 


izecDy  Google 


BISHOP   JKRKICK.  517 

reading  their  books,  he  did  not  think  he  was  reading 
English :  could  I  account  to  him  how  that  happened  1 
I  answered  that  the  same  objection  had  not  occurred 
to  me,  who  was  a  Scotchman  bred  as  well  as  bom ;  but 
that  I  bad  a  solution  to  it>  which  I  would  submit  to 
his  lordship.  It  was,  that  to  every  man  bred  in  Scot- 
land the  English  language  was  in  some  respects  a 
foreign  tongue,  the  precise  value  and  force  of  whose 
words  and  phrases  he  did  not  understand,  and  there- 
fore was  continually  endeavouring  to  word  his  expres- 
sions by  additional  epithets  or  circumlocutions,  which 
made  his  writings  appear  both  stiff  and  redundant. 
With  this  solution  his  lordship  appeared  entirely 
satisfied.  By  this  time  his  lordship  perfectly  under- 
stood the  nature  of  our  clfum  to  exemption  from  the 
window-tax,  and  promised  me  his  aid,  and  suggested 
some  new  arguments  in  our  favour. 

I  made  a  very  valuable  acquaintance  in  the  Bishop 
of  London,  R  Jerrick,  having  been  introduced  to  him 
by  his  son-in-law,  Dr  Anthony  Hamilton,  whom  I  met 
at  Dr  Pitcaim's.  I  found  the  Bishop  to  be  a  truly 
excellent  man,  of  a  liberal  mind  and  excellent  good 
temper.  He  took  to  me,  and  was  very  cordial  in 
wishing  success  to  my  application,  and  was  very 
friendly  in  recommending  me  and  it  to  his  brethren 
on  the  bench.  He  never  refused  me  admittance,  and 
I  dined  frequently  with  him  this  year  and  the  next 
He  was  then  considered  as  having  the  sole  episcopal 
jurisdiction  over  the  Church  of  England  in  America. 
He  was  so  obliging  to  mj  requests  that  be  ordained. 


izecy  Google 


518  ANECDOTES  AND  CHARACTERS, 

at  my  desire,  two  Scotch  probationers,  who,  having 
little  chaoce  of  obtaiuing  settlements  here,  were  glad 
to  try  their  fortune  in  a  new  world.  As  I  was  unwill- 
ing to  forfeit  mj  credit  with  this  good  man,  I  had  not 
recommended  them  but  with  perfect  assurance  of  their 
good  characters.  The  first,  whom  I  think  he  had  sent 
to  Bermudas,  he  gave  me  thanks  for  when  I  saw  him 
a  year  after,  as,  he  told  me,  he  had  fully  answered  the 
character  I  had  given  him.  He  [the  Bishop]  was  a 
famous  good  preacher,  and  the  beat  reader  of  prayers 
I  ever  heard.  Being  Dean  of  the  Chapel-itoyal,  he 
read  the  communion-service  every  Sunday.  Though 
our  residence  was  at  my  sister's  in  Aldermanbury,  as 
I  had  occasion  frequently  to  dine  late  in  the  west  end 
of  the  town,  I  then  lodged  in  Kew  Bond  Street  with 
my  aunt,  and  resorted  often  at  snpper  to  Robert  Adam's, 
whose  sisters  were  very  agreeable,  and  where  we  had 
the  latest  news  from  the  House  of  Commons,  of  which 
he  was  a  member,  and  which  he  told  us  in  the  most 
agreeable  manner,  and  with  very  lively  comments. 

My  good  aunt  Paterson's  husband,  a  consin  of  Sir 
Hew  Faterson,  took  care  to  have  us  visit  his  son's 
widow,  Mrs  Seton,  the  heiress  of  Touch,  whose  first 
husband  was  Sir  Hew's  son,  who  had  died  without 
issue.  There  we  dined  one  day  with  a  large  company, 
mostly  Scots,  among  whom  were  Mrs  WaUdnshaw — 
who  had  a  place  at  court,  though  she  was  sister  of  the 
lady  who  was  said  to  be  mistress  to  Prince  Charles, 
the  Pretender's  sod — and  David  Hume,  by  that  time 
Under-Secretary  of  State.    The  conversation  was  lively 


izecDy  Google 


BISHOP  IK>nGLAS.  519 

and  agreeable,  but  we  were  much  amused  with  ob> 
serving  how  much  the  thoughts  and  conversation  of 
all  those  in  the  least  connected  were  taken  up  with 
every  trifling  circumstance  that  related  to  the  Court. 
This  kind  of  tittle-tattle  suited  Dr  John  Blair  of  all 
men,  who  had  been  a  tutor  to  the  King's  brother,  the 
Duke  of  York,  and  now  occasionally  assisted  Dr  Bar- 
ton as  Clerk  of  the  Closet  to  the  Princess  Dowager  of 
Wales.  It  was  truly  amusing  to  observe  how  much 
David  Hume's  strong  and  capacious  mind  was  filled 
with  infantine  anecdotes  of  nurses  and  children.  Mr 
Seton  was  the  son  of  a  Mr  Smith,  who  had  been 
settled  at  Boulogne,  a  wine  merchant,  was  a  great 
Jacobite,  and  had  come  to  Scotland  in  the  time  of  the 
Rebellion,  1 745.  Poor  Mrs  Seton,  whose  first  husband, 
Patersou,  was,  by  his  mother,  a  nephew  of  the  Earl  of 
Mar,  had  fallen  a  sacrifice  to  that  prejudice,  for  Seton 
possessed  do  other  charm.  I  call  her  a  sacrifice,  be- 
cause his  bad  usage  shortened  her  da;^.  She  was  a 
very  amiable  woman.  His  future  history  is  well 
known.* 

At  this  time  we  had  a  dinner  from  Dr  O&rtshor^ 
whose  wife,  the  heiress  of  Rusco,  in  Galloway,  was  my 
conaiQ.+  Besides  Drs  Blair  and  Dickson,  there  were 
several  dissenting  parsons,  such  as  Drs  Price,  Kippis, 

*  Aiehibald  Seton  snccesnvely  filled  «ever>l  bigK  officea  in  the  Indiui 
MTvicet  uid  died  in  ISlS.-^OaiSermat't  Magadne,  TdL  Ixxzrui  p.  184.  The 
mansioa  of  Touch,  long  the  abode  of  one  of  the  old  Seton  funiltes,  )•  * 
renenble  square  tower,  iritli  Uter  odjinictB,  on  the  iJope  of  the  Oargimnock 
null,  ^xnrt  tiiree  miles  from  Stirling. — Ed. 

t  Dr  Mftiwell  Outshore,  >  native  of  KirkcadbiightaluTe,  died  after  ■ 
long  and  soccestfnl  ]nr>feuioDiiI  career  in  London,  in  1812.  — Ed. 


,1.0,  Google 


520  ENGLISH  DISSBNTINO  FABS0N3. 

and  Alexander,  who  were  very  bad  company  indeed, 
for  they  were  fiery  republicans  and  Wilkitea,  and  very 
pedantic,  petulant,  and  peremptory.  Blair  and  I, 
however,  with  the  help  of  Dickson,  kept  them  very 
well  down.  Gartehore  himself  acted  the  part  of 
umpire,  with  a  leaning  to  their  side,  as  they  had  an 
ascendant  over  many  of  bis  patients. 

John  Home,  who  was  very  obliging  to  us,  when  I 
was  at  liberty,  In  the  middle  of  April,  went  with  Mrs 
Carlyle  and  me  to  see  Hampton  Court  and  "Windsor. 
After  we  had  seen  the  first,  we  went  and  showed  Mrs 
Carlyle  Garrick's  villa  in  Hampton  Town,  which  she 
was  highly  pleased  with.  The  family  had  not  yet 
returned  to  the  country.  We  went  all  night  to  Wind- 
sor. In  the  morning  we  called  on  Dr  Douglas  and 
his  lady,  a  granddaughter  of  Sir  George  Rooke,  of 
Queen  Anne's  reign,  then  in  residence.  He  engaged 
us  to  dine  with  him.  We  went  to  church  and  heard 
him  preach  an  excellent  sermon,  though  ill  delivered. 
His  conversation  was  always  instructive  and  agree- 
able. He  had  a  greater  number  of  anecdotes,  and 
told  them  more  correctly,  than  any  man  I  ever  knew. 
In  going  through  his  library,  which  was  pretty  full  of 
books,  he  selected  one  small  elegant  French  novel,  and 
gave  it  as  a  keepsake  to  Mrs  Carlyle,  which  she  and 
I  were  much  pleased  with,  as  a  token  of  regard. 

We  had  passed  one  day  with  Mrs  Montague  by  in- 
vitation, which  did  not  please  us  much,  as  the  conver- 
sation was  all  preconceived,  and  resembled  the  rehear- 
sal of  a  comedy  more  than  the  true  and  unafiected 


izecDy  Google 


SITTINQ  FOR  POBTRAIT.  521 

dialogue  which  conveys  the  tmaffected  and  unstudied 
sentimeuts  of  the  heart.  What  a  pity  it  was  that  she 
could  not  help  acting ;  and  the  woman  would  have 
been  respectable  had  she  not  been  bo  passionately 
desirous  of  respect,  for  she  had  good  parts,  and  must 
have  had  many  allurements  when  she  was  young  and 
beautiful.* 

John  Home  vent  with  U2  to  see  Sion  House,  the 
inside  of  which  had  been  most  beautifully  adorned 
by  Robert  Adam.  We  dined  with  Mr  and  Mrs  Barry, 
who  had  been  old  friends  of  John's,  and  Barry  had  been 
his  mihtary  companion  at  Falkirk,  and  escaped  with 
him  &om  Doune  Castle.  John  was  much  attached  to 
him,  and  he  deserved  it.  His  wife  was  very  amiable. 
There  dined  with  us  M'Pherson  and  Blair,  besides 
Home.  Out  stay  in  London  drew  to  a  close,  and  hav- 
ing obtained  all  I  expected  from  the  Treasury,  which 
was  encouragement  to  apply  to  Parliament  nest  year,  I 
made  haste  to  show  Mrs  Carljle  what  she  had  not  seen. 

We  went  to  Greenwich  in  the  morning,  and  the 
same  day  dined  again  with  Mr  and  Mrs  Seton,  and 
supped  with  my  old  Mend,  Lady  Lindores. 

I  sat  to  Martin  for  the  large  picture  that  went  next 
year  into  the  Exhibition  :  this  was  for  the  third  time. 
Another  sitting  in  January  thereafter  did  the  business. 
We  went  to  the  opera  with  my  sister.  We  stayed  for 
our  last  fortnight  at  my  aunt's,  as  my  business  at  the 
Treasuiy  made  it  more  convenient^  and  my  wife  had 
lo  make  all  her  farewell  visits.      She  had  not  seen 

*  See  aboT^  p^  462.— Ed. 


izecy  Google 


522  JOURNEY  NORTHWAKDS. 

Oarrick,  who  was  at  last  to  play  for  three  nights. 
With  difEciilty  and  bribery  we  got  places ;  but  Mrs  C 
felt  sick,  and  we  were  obliged  to  leave  it  in  the  middle. 
We  went  to  see  Westminster  Abbey,  and  dined  with 
our  kind  friends,  the  Blairs,  who  had  engaged  us.  My 
sister  being  now  gone  to  Merton  with  her  children,  we 
took  aunt  and  passed  a  day  there.  On  the  last  day 
we  went  into  the  city,  and  took  leave,  and  dined  at 
uncle  Reed's. 

We  dined  on  the  25th  April  at  the  Brand's  Head 
with  some  friends,  and  set  out  on  our  journey  north- 
wwrds  at  five  in  the  evening.  Mr  Home  had  got  a 
partner,  a  young  man  of  the  name  of  Douglas,  going 
to  Berwick.  This  lad  being  fantastic  and  vain,  be- 
cause he  had  an  uncle  who  was  under-doorkeeper  to 
the  House  of  Commons,  diverted  us  much.  To  enjoy 
him.  Home  and  I  took  him  stage  about.  My  wife  was 
delighted  with  him  in  the  inns,  but  she  did  not  choose 
him  to  go  in  the  chaise  with  her,  as  she  was  at  this 
time  apt  to  be  sick.  My  wife's  condition  made  me 
resolve  to  travel  slow,  though  we  were  to  halt  some 
time  at  Newcastle. 

We  had  agreed,  for  my  wife's  lonusement  and  onr 
own,  to  take  the  middle  road,  and  go  down  by  North- 
ampton and  Nottingham,  where  we  had  never  been  ; 
and  were  much  amused  with  the  beauty  of  the  coun- 
try, and  the  variety  of  its  scenery.  When  we  came  to 
Nottingham,  however,  as  the  road  was  rough,  which  did 
not  suit  Mrs  Carlyle's  present  condition,  and  the  houses 
and  horses  inferior,  [we  thought]  it  would  be  better 


izecDy  Google 


JOHK  HOME  AND  HIS  WIFE.  n23 

to  turn  into  the  east  road  agais,  and  make  the  best 
of  our  way  to  Doncaster.  When  we  drew  near  that 
place,  Mrs  Carlyle  found  out  that  we  had  changed  our 
route,  and  was  well  pleased.  We  had  come  by  Mans- 
field and  Welbecks  (the  Duke  of  Portland's),  and  the 
Duke  of  Norfolk's,  places  well  worth  seeing.  The 
road  goes  through  the  trunk  of  a  famous  oak  tree. 
The  woods  in  that  part  of  the  forest  of  Willingbam 
are  very  fine,  and  the  oaks  are  remarkably  large.  We 
arrived  at  Wallsend,  a  very  delightful  village  about 
four  miles  below  Newcastle,  on  the  road  to  Shields, 
where  Mr  Blackett  had  a  very  agreeable  house  for  the 
summer.  There  were  other  two  gentlemen's  houses  of 
good  fortune  in  the  Tillage,  with  a  church  and  a  par- 
sonage-hoiute.  Next  day,  the  1st  of  May,  was  so  very 
warm  that  I  with  difficulty  was  able  to  walk  down  to 
the  church  in  the  bottom  of  the  village,  not  more  than 
two  hundred  yards  distant. 

Mary  Home,  a  cousin-gennan  of  Mrs  Blackett's  and 
my  wife's,  was  residing  here  at  this  time,  and  had 
been  for  several  months  at  Newcastla  This  was  the 
young  lady  whom  John  Home  married,  who  was  then 
a  pretty  lively  girl,  and  reckoned  very  like  Queen 
Charlotte.  She  unfortunately  had  bad  health,  which 
continued  even  to  this  day ;  for  she  is  now  sizty- 
seven,  and  is  still  very  &ail,  though  better  than  she 
has  been  for  several  years.  It  was  in  some  respects 
an  unlucky  marriage,  for  she  had  no  children.  Lord 
Haddingtoii,  however,  said  she  was  a  very  good  wife 
for  a  poet ;  and  Lady  Milton  having  asked  me  what 


izecy  Google 


524  AN   EQUESTRIAN   ACCIDENT. 

made  John  marry  such  a  sickly  girl,  I  answered  that 
I  supposed  it  was  because  he  was  in  love  with  her. 
She  replied,  "No,  no ;  it  was  because  jAe  was  in  love 
with  him." 

We  stayed  here  for  eight  or  ten  days,  and  visited 
all  the  neighbour,  who  were  all  very  agreeable,  even 
the  clergyman's  wife,  who  was  a  little  lightsome ;  but 
as  her  head  ran  much  on  fine  clothes,  which  she  could 
not  purchase  to  please  her,  but  only  could  imitate  in 
the  most  tawdry  manner,  she  was  rather  amusing  to 
Mrs  B.,  who  had  a  good  deal  of  humour — more  than 
her  sister,  who  had  a  sharper  wit  and  more  discern- 
ment. The  husband  was  a  very  good  sort  of  man, 
and  very  worthy  of  his  office,  but  oppressed  with 
famUy  cares.     Mr  Potter,  I  think,  was  an  Oxonian. 

AVe  did  not  fail  to  visit  our  good  friend  Mr  Colliog- 
wood  of  Chirton,  and  his  lady,  Mary  Roddam,  of  both 
of  whom  my  wife  was  a  favourite.  We  went  down 
together  to  Berwickshire  in  the  middle  of  May,  where 
we  remained  some  days  at  Fogo  Manse,  the  Bev.  Mr 
William  Home's,  where,  leaving  John  with  his  bride, 
we  came  on  to  Musselburgh  about  the  27th  of  May, 
near  the  end  of  the  General  Assembly. 

I  had  been  persuaded  to  buy  a  young  horse  icom 
a  farmer  near  Mr  Home's,  an  awkward  enough  beast, 
but  only  four  years  old,  which,  if  he  did  not  do  for 
a  riding-horse,  might  be  trained  to  the  plough,  for  I 
had,  at  the  preceding  Martinmas,  entered  on  a  farm  of 
one  hundred  acres  of  the  Duke  of  Bucdeuch's,  On 
the  Saturday  morning  after  I  came  home,  I  nnfor- 


izecoy  Google 


DOMESTIC  SORROWS.  525 

tunately  mounted  this  beast,  who  ran  away  with  me 
in  my  green  before  the  door,  and  was  in  danger  of 
throwing  me  on  the  railing  that  was  put  up  to  defend 
a  young  hedge.  To  shiin  this  I  threw  myself  off  on 
the  opposite  side,  in  sight  of  my  wife  and  children. 
I  was  much  stunned,  and  could  not  get  up  imme- 
diately, but  luckily,  before  she  could  reach  the  place, 
I  had  raised  myself  to  my  breech,  otherwise  I  did  not 
know  what  might  have  befallen  her  in  the  condition 
she  was  in.  No  harm,  however,  happened  to  her ;  and 
the  new  surgeon  who  had  come  in  our  absence,  a  John 
Steward  or  Stewart,  a  Northumbrian,  an  apprentice 
of  Sandy  Wood's,  was  sent  for  to  bleed  me,  I  would 
not  be  bled,  however,  till  I  had  made  my  report  on 
the  window-lights  ready  for  the  General  Assembly, 
which  was  to  be  dissolved  on  Monday,  lest  I  should 
not  be  able  to  write  after  being  bled,  or  not  to  attend 
the  Assembly  on  Monday.  But  it  so  happened  that  I 
was  little  disabled  by  my  fall,  and  could  even  preach 
next  day. 

When  we  returned  from  the  south,  we  were  happy 
to  find  our  two  fine  girls  in  such  good  health ;  but  my 
mother,  and  unmarried  sister  Sarah,  had  lived  for 
some  time  close  by  us,  and  saw  them  twice  every  day. 
Sarah,  the  eldest,  was  now  eight  years  of  age,  and  had 
displayed  great  sweetness  of  temper,  with  an  uncom- 
mon degree  of  sagacity.  Jenny,  the  second,  was  now 
six,  and  was  gay  and  lively  and  engaging  to  the  last 
degree.  They  were  both  handsome  in  their  several 
kinds,  the  first  like  me  and  my  family,  the  second  like 


oy  Google 


526  DOMESTIC  SORROWS. 

their  mother.  They  already  had  made  great  profi- 
ciency in  writing  and  arithmetic,  and  were  remarkably 
good  dancers.  At  this  time  they  bet;rayed  no  syiop- 
toms  of  that  fatal  dieeaee  which  robbed  me  of  tbem, 
unless  it  might  have  been  predicted  from  their 
extreme  sensibilities  of  taste  and  affection  which 
they  already  displayed.  It  was  the  will  of  Heaven 
that  I  should  lose  them  too  soon.  But  to  reflect  on 
their  promising  qualities  ever  aince  has  been  the  de* 
light  of  many  a  watchful  night  and  melancholy  day. 
I  lost  them  before  they  had  given  me  any  emotions 
but  those  of  joy  and  hope. 

On  the  25th  of  September  this  year,  Mrs  Carlyle 
was  delivered  of  her  third  daughter,  Mary  Roddam, 
and  recovered  very  well.  But  the  child  was  un- 
healthy from  her  birth,  and  gave  her  mother  the 
greatest  anxiety.  She  continued  to  live  till  June 
1773,  when  she  was  relieved  from  a  life  of  constant 
pain.  In  November  11th  that  year  she  had  her  son 
William,  who  was  very  healthy  and  promising  till 
within  six  or  eight  weeks  of  bis  death,  when  he  was 
seized  with  a  peripneumony,  which  left  such  a  weak- 
ness on  his  lungs  as  soon  closed  his  days. 

On  Monday  I  went  to  Edinburgh,  and  rendered  an 
account  of  my  mission  at  the  bar  of  the  General 
Assembly.  I  received  the  thanks  of  the  General 
Assembly  for  my  care  and  diligence  in  the  manage- 
ment of  this  business,  and  at  the  same  time  was  ap- 
pointed by  the  Assembly  their  commissioner,  with 
fuU  powers  to  apply  to  next  session  of  Parliament  for 


izecDy  Google 


THE  ILL-D3ED   CX.EBOT.  527 

an  exemption  from  the  window-tax,  to  bo  at  the  same 
time  under  the  dixectioD  of  a  committee  of  Assembly, 
which  was  revived,  with  additions.  This  first  success 
made  me  very  popular  among  the  clergy,  of  whom 
one-h^f  at  least  looked  upon  me  with  an  ill  eye  after 
the  ajBair  of  the  tragedy  of  Douglas.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  exemption  from  that  tax  was  a  very  great 
object  to  the  clergy,  whose  stipends  were  in  general 
very  small,  and  besides,  was  opposing  in  the  beginning 
any  design  there  might  be  to  lay  still  heavier  burdens 
on  the  clergy,  who,  having  only  stipends  out  of  the 
tithes  allocated,  together  with  small  glebes  and  a 
suitable  manse  and  offices  free  of  all  taxes  and  public 
burdens,  wonld  have  been  quite  undone  bad  they 
been  obliged  to  pay  all  that  has  since  been  laid  on 
houses  and  windows. 

For  as  much  use  as  the  clergy  were  at  the  Reforma- 
tion, and  for  as  much  as  they  contributed  to  the 
Kevolution,  and  to  preserve  the  peace  and  promote 
the  prosperity  of  the  country  since  that  period,  the 
aristocracy  of  Scotland  have  always  been  backward 
to  mend  their  situation,  which,  had  it  not  been  for  the 
manly  system  of  the  President  (Islay  Campbell),  must 
have  fallen  into  distress  and  contempt.  As  it  is,  their 
stipends  keep  no  pace  with  the  rising  prosperity  of 
the  country,  and  they  are  degraded  in  their  rank  by 
the  increasing  wealth  of  the  inferior  orders.  Had  the 
nobility  and  gentry  of  Scotland  enlargement  of  mind 
and  extensive  views,  they  would  now,  for  the  security 
of  the  constitution,  engraft  the  clergy  into  the  State, 


izecy  Google 


528  THE  ILL-USED  CLEBOY. 

as  they  have  always  been  in  England,  and  by  impart- 
ing all  the  privileges  of  freeholders,  except  that  of 
being  memberB  of  Parliament,  on  their  livings,  they 
would  attach  them  still  more  than  ever  to  their  coua- 
try ;  they  would  widen  the  basis  of  the  constitution, 
which  is  far  too  narrow,  without  lessening  their  own 
importance  in  the  smallest  degree,  for  there  could  be 
no  combination  of  the  clergy  against  their  heritors  ; 
on  the  contrary,  they  would  be  universally  disposed 
to  unite  with  their  heritors,  if  they  behaved  well  to 
them  in  all  political  buainess;  but  I  know  very  few 
people  capable  of  thinking  in  this  train,  and  far  less 
of  acting  on  so  large  and  liberal  a  plan.  In  the 
mean  time,  on  account  of  many  unfortunate  circum- 
stances, one  of  which  is,  that  patrons,  now  that  by 
help  of  the  Moderate  interest,  as  it  is  called,  there  is 
no  opposition  to  their  presentations,  have  restored  to 
them  that  right  they  so  long  claimed,  and  for  most 
part  give  them  the  man  they  like  beat ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  least  capable,  and  commonly  the  least  worthy,  of 
all  the  probationers  in  their  neighbourhood.*  The 
unfitness  of  one  of  the  professors  of  divinity,  and  the 
iofluence  he  has  in  providing  for  young  men  of  his 
own  fanatical  cast,  increases  this  evil  not  a  little,  and 
accelerates  the  degradation  of  the  clergy.  His  cousin. 
Sir  James  H.  Blair,  never  repented  so  much  of  any- 
thing as  the  placing  him  in  that  chair,  as  he  soon  dis- 
covered the  disadvantage  to  the  Church  that  might 
[arise]  from  his  being  put  in  that  situation.     It  is  a 

*  The  eenteiiM  teema  incomplete^  but  «ic  in  H8. — Ed. 


izecy  Google 


KETUHN  TO  LONDON".  529 

pity  that  a  'man  so  irreproachable  in  his  life  and  man- 
ner, and  even  distinguished  for  his  candour  and  fair- 
ness, should  be  so  weak ;  but  he  does  more  harm  than 
if  he  were  an  intriguing  hypocrite. 

During  the  summer  1769,  after  I  had  given  the 
clergy  such  hopes  of  being  relieved  from  the  window- 
tax,  they  set  about  a  subscription  (the  funds  of  the 
Church  being  quite  inadequate  at  any  time,  and  then 
very  low)  for  defraying  the  expense  of  their  commis- 
sioner, and  of  procuring  an  Act  of  Parliament.  Nearly 
two-thirds  of  the  clei^  had  subscribed  to  this  fund, 
for  a  sum  of  about  £400  was  subscribed,  if  I  remem- 
ber right,  by  subscriptions  from  five  shillings  to  one 
guinea,  and  put  into  the  hands  of  Dr  George  Wishart, 
then  Principal  Clerk  of  the  Church. 

Mrs  C.  having  recovered  from*  her  late  inlying,  I 
now  prepared  to  go  to  London  to  follow  out  the  object 
of  my  commission ;  and  lest  I  should  be  too  late,  I 
set  out  in  such  time  as  to  arrive  in  London  on  the 
21st  of  December.  I  had  a  Major  Paul  as  my  com- 
panion in  the  chaise,  and  though  we  took  five  days 
to  it,  the  ezpense  in  those  days  was  no  more  than 
£10,  8s.  7d.  As  my  business  lay  entirely  in  the  west 
end  of  the  town,  I  took  up  my  lodging  in  New  Bond 
Street,  and  engaged  the  other  apartment  for  John 
Home,  who  was  to  be  there  in  a  fortnight.  But  I 
immediately  took  Neil  [  ],  a  trusty  servant,  who 

had  been  with  him  last  year,  and  could  serve  us  both 
now,  as  I  required  but  very  little  personal  service. 
The  very  day  after  I  came  to  London,  I  had  wrote  a 


izecy  Google 


580  UINISTEBIAL  SEOBETS. 

paper  signed  Neator,  in  support  of  the  Duke  of  Graf- 
ton, who  was  then  in  a  tottering  state.  This  paper, 
which  appeared  on  the  23d  of  December,  drew  the 
attention  of  I^rd  Elibank  and  other  Scotch  gentle- 
men who  attended  the  British  Coffeehouse,  which  con- 
vinced me  that  I  might  continae  my  political  labours, 
as  they  were  acceptable  to  Administration.  At  this 
time  I  did  not  know  that  the  Dake  of  Grafton  was  so 
near  going  out,  but  soon  after  I  discovered  it  by  an 
accident.  On  one  of  the  mornings  which  I  passed 
with  Lord  Mansfield,  after  he  had  signified  his  entire 
approbation  of  my  measures  to  obtain  an  exemption 
for  the  clergy  of  Scotland,  1  took  the  liberty  of  say- 
ing to  him  in  going  down  stairs,  that  his  lordship's 
opinion  was  so  clear  in  our  favour,  that  I  had  nothing 
to  wish  but  that  he  would  be  so  good  as  to  say  so  to 
the  Duke  of  Grafton.  His  answer  surprised  me,  and 
opened  my  eyes.  It  was,  "  I  cannot  speak  with  the 
Duke  of  Grafton ;  I  am  not  acquainted  with  his 
Grace ;  I  never  conversed  with  him  but  once,  which 
was  when  he  came  a  short  while  ago  from  the  King  to 
offer  me  the  seals.  I  can't  talk  with  the  Duke  of 
Grafton  ;  so  good  morning,  Doctor,  Let  me  see  you 
again  when  you  are  further  advanced."  I  went  in- 
stantly with  this  anecdote  to  my  friend  Mrs  Ander- 
son, at  the  British,  and  we  concluded  almost  instantly, 
without  plodding,  that  the  change  of  the  ministry  was 
nigh  at  hand.  When  I  saw  her  next  day,  she  told 
me  she  had  seen  her  brother,  Dr  Douglas,  who  was 
struck  with  my  anecdote,  and  combining  with  it  some 


izecDy  Google 


BARRE  AND  LOBD  NOBTH.  531 

things  he  Lad  observed,  concluded  that  the  fall  of  the 
Duke  of  Grafton  was  at  hand,  which  proved  true. 

This  accordingly  took  place  not  long  after,  when 
Charles  York,  the  second  son  of  the  Chancdlor  Hard- 
wick,  having  been  wheedled  over  to  accept  the  seals, 
and  being  upbraided  severely  for  having  broken  his 
engageinenta  with  his  party,  put  himself  to  death 
that  very  night ;  which  was  considered  a  public  loss, 
as  he  was  a  man  of  parts  and  probity.  Pratt  was 
appointed  Chancellor,  and  Lord  North  became  minis- 
ter. I  was  in  the  House  of  Commons  the  first  night 
that  he  took  his  place  as  Premier.  He  had  not  in- 
tended to  disclose  it  that  night ;  but  a  provokiog 
speech  of  Colonel  Barry's  obUged  him  to  own  it,  which 
he  did  with  a  great  deal  of  wit  and  humour.  Barr^ 
was  a  clever  mau  and  good  speaker,  but  very  hard- 
mouthed.*  I  was  the  first  person  at  the  British  after 
the  division  ;  and  telling  Mrs  Anderson  the  heads  of 
North's  speech,  and  the  firmness  and  wit  with  which 
he  took  his  place  as  First  Minister,  she  concluded  with 
me  that  he  would  maintain  it  long.  Lord  North  was 
very  agreeable,  and,  as  a  private  gentleman,  as  worthy 
as  he  was  witty  ;  but  having  unluckily  got  into  the 
American  war,  brought  the  nation  into  an  incredible 
sum  of  debt,  and  in  the  end  lost  the  whole  American 


*  See  the  debate  in  the  Pari.  JIUL,  xvL  705  d  trq—Tbe  name  of  Colonel 
luac  B»rr6,  so  consjiicuous  in  ita  lUy,  la  bo  completely  excluded  fmm  ordi- 
naiy  biogmpbical  worka  cf  reference,  that  it  may  be  useful  to  refer  to  a 
curions  notice  of  him  by  Wolpole  in  bin  Memoirs  q/*  Oeorge  III.  (L  109). 
Colonel  BaiT£  givea  ao  account  of  bis  own  Berricea  in  a  speech  reported  in 
Pari.  Hut.,  niiL  1S6.— Ed. 


izecy  Google 


532  HOBTH  AND  FOX. 

coloniea.  He  professed  himself  ignorant  of  war,  but 
said  be  would  appoint  the  most  respectable  geoerals 
and  admirals,  and  furnish  them  with  troops  and 
money  ;  but  he  was  weak  enough  to  send  the  Howes, 
though  of  a  party  opposite  to  him,  who  seemed  to  act 
rather  against  the  Ministers  than  the  Americans. 
They  were  changed  for  other  commanders ;  but  the 
feeble  conduct  of  the  Howes  had  given  the  Americans 
time  to  become  warlike,  and  they  finally  prevailed. 
North  maintained  his  ground  for  no  less  than  twelve 
years  through  this  disgraceful  war,  and  then  was 
obliged  to  give  way  that  a  peace  might  be  established. 
This  at  first  was  thought  necessary  to  Great  Britain ; 
but  Lord  North's  attempt  to  make  a  coalition  with  his 
former  opponents  having  failed,  and  Charles  Fox's 
scheme  of  governing  the  nation  by  an  aristocracy, 
with  the  aid  of  his  India  Bill,  being  discovered  and  de- 
feated, made  way  for  Mr  Pitt's  first  Administration  in 
1783,  which  soon  restored  national  credit  and  promised 
the  greatest  prosperity  to  the  British  empire,  had  it 
not  been  interrupted  by  the  French  Eevolution  in 
1789,  and  the  subsequent  most  dangerous  war  of 
1798.  It  was  discovered  early  in  this  period  that  the 
revolt  and  final  disjunction  of  our  American  colonieB 
was  no  loss  to  Great  Britain,  either  in  respect  of  com- 
merce or  war.  I  have  been  led  to  this  long  digression 
by  Lord  North's  having  become  Premier  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  year  1 7  70. 

Although  the  discharge  of  my  commission  required 
attention  and  activity,  yet  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury 


izecy  Google 


BATH  IK   1770.  533 

having  frequently  referred  me  for  an  answer  to  a  dis- 
tant day,  I  took  the  opportunity  of  making  frequent 
excursions  to  places  where  I  had  not  been. 

One  of  the  first  of  them  was  to  Bath  with  John 
Home,  to  pay  a  visit  to  his  betrothed,  Mary  Home, 
whom  he  married  in  the  end  of  summer.  He  bad  sent 
her  to  Bath  to  improve  her  health,  for  she  was  very 
delicate.  We  set  out  together,  and  went  by  the  com- 
mon road,  and  arrived  on  the  second  day  to  dinner. 

Miss  Home  had  taken  a  small  house  at  Bath,  where 
she  lived  with  a  Miss  Pye,  a  companion  of  hers,  and 
a  friend  of  Mrs  Blackett's.  They  lived  very  com- 
fortably, and  we  dined  with  them  that  day.  Bath  is 
beautifully  built,  and  situated  in  a  vale  surrounded 
with  small  hills  cultivated  to  the  top ;  and  being  built 
of  fine  polished  stone,  in  warm  weather  is  intolerably 
hot ;  but  when  we  were  there  in  the  beginning  of 
March  it  was  excessively  cold.  The  only  thing  about 
it  not  agreeable  to  the  eye  ia  the  dirty  ditch  of  a  river 
which  runs  through  it. 

On  the  morning  after  we  arrived,  we  met  Lord 
Galloway  in  the  pump-room,  who  having  had  a  family 
quarrel,  had  retired  to  Bath  with  one  of  his  daughters. 
The  first  question  he  asked  me  was,  if  I  had  yet  seen 
our  cousin,  Sandie  Goldie,  his  wife  being  a  sister  of 
Patrick  Heron's.  I  answered  no,  but  that  I  intended 
to  call  on  him  that  very  day.  "  Do,"  said  his  lordship, 
"  but  don't  tell  his  story  while  you  are  here,  for  he  is 
reckoned  one  of  the  cleverest  fellows  in  this  city,  for 
being  too  unreasonable  to  sign  receipts  for  above 


izecy  Google 


634  BRISTOL  IH   1770. 

£1000,  the  produce  of  the  reversion  of  his  estate. 
He  makes  a  very  good  liveUhood  at  the  rooms  by 
betting  on  the  whist-players,  for  he  does  not  play." 
Lord  Galloway  engaged  us  to  dine  with  him  next 
day.^  We  went  to  the  rooms  at  night,  and  to  a  ball, 
where  I  was  astonished  to  find  so  many  old  acquaint- 
ances. 

We  had  called  on  Goldie,  who  engaged  us  to  dine 
with  him.  The  day  after  we  were  to  dine  at  Lord 
Galloway's.  We  met  with  Dr  Gusthard,  M.D,  who 
had  the  charge  of  Miss  Home's  health.  He  was  the 
son  of  Mr  Gusthard,  minister  of  Edinburgh,  and  being 
of  good  ability  and  a  winning  address,  had  come  into 
very  good  business.  Lord  Galloway,  though  quite 
illiterate  by  means  of  the  negligence  of  his  trustees  or 
tutors,  was  a  clever  man,  of  much  natural  ability,  and 
master  of  the  common  topics  of  conversation.  We 
dined  next  day  at  Alexander  Goldie's,  where  we  had 
the  pleasure  of  his  lordship's  company.  In  our  land- 
lord we  discovered  nothing  but  an  uncommon  rapidity 
of  speech  and  an  entertaining  flow  of  imagination, 
which  perhaps  we  would  not  have  observed  if  we  had 
not  known  that  he  had  been  cognosced  at  Edinburgh, 
and  deprived  of  the  management  of  bis  estate. 

Next  day  we  made  a  party  to  Bristol  hot  wells,  and 
added  to  our  company  a  Miss  Scott,  of  Newcastle,  a 
very  pleasing  young  woman,  who  afterwards  married 
an  eminent  lawyer  there;  and  another  lady,  whose 
name  I  have  fo^ot,  who  was  a  good  deal  older  than 

*  Alexander  Stewart,  uxtb  Eul  of  GaUoway.    He  died  in  1773.— £d. 


izecDy  Google 


END   OP   THE   AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  535 

the  rest,  but  waa  very  pleasant,  and  had  £30,000,  by 
which  means  she  became  the  wife  of  one  of  the  Ha- 
thorns.  This  place  appeared  to  me  dull  and  disagree- 
able, and  the  hot  wells  not  much  better.  Next  day 
we  dined  at  Dr  Gusthaid'a,  and  the  day  after  set  out 
on  our  return  to  London.  We  resolved  to  go  by 
Salisbury  Plain  and  Stonehenge,  as  neither  of  us  had 
ever  been  there,  both  of  which  raised  our  wonder  and 
astonishment,  especially  Stonehenge,  but  aa  we  were 
not  antiquarians,  we  coiUd  not  form  any  conjecture 
about  it.     We  got  to  London  next  day  before  dinner. 


izecy  Google 


SUPPLEMENTARY    CHAPTER. 

Hia  CORRF„SPOSDENCB  ON   CHUHCH  MATTEBS — BIB   IKFL0GKCE HIS 

LIQHTER   CORRESPONDENCE — THE  GREAT  CONTEST  OF  THE  GLBRE' 

SHIP — THE  AUGMENTATION  QUESTION  —  POLITICS COUJNS's  ODB 

ON  THE  SUPERSTITION  OF  THE  HIOHLANDS CARLYLE  AND  POETRY 

— DOMESTIC  HISTORV — HIS  PERSONAL  APPEARANCE — THE  COMPO- 
SITION OF  HIS  AUTOBIOGRAPHY CONDITION  AND  EDITING  OF  TBB 

MANUSCRIPTS — HIS  LAST  DAYS — HIS   DEATH. 

At  this  point  the  Autobiography  stops,  the  pen  hav- 
ing literally  dropped  from  the  dying  Author's  hand. 
It  would  be  vain  and  presumptuous  to  attempt  to 
carry  out  his  purpose — the  intended  remainder  must 
be  counted  among  the  world's  literary  losses.  But  it 
may  he  considered  proper  that  the  Editor  should 
briefly  notify,  for  the  reader's  instruction,  the  subse- 
quent events  of  Carlyle'a  life,  uttering  them,  as  far  as 
possible,  in  his  own  words,  by  enlivening  the  narrative 
with  such  passages  from  his  letters  and  other  writings 
as  make  the  nearest  approach  to  the  characteristics  of 
hia  Autobiography.  The  project  he  had  undertaken 
for  the  relief  of  his  brethren  from  the  window-tax 
was  a  tedious  and  tortuous  affair,  and  cost  him  mnch 
travelling,  talking,  and  writing  before  it  was  effected. 
If  he  had  lived  to  tell  the  story  of  his  labours,  we 
would  have  had  vivid  sketches  of  many  a  little  scene 


izecDy  Google 


DUNDAS  AND  THE  WINDOW-TAX.  337 

and  character,  bo  adorning  as  almost  to  conceal  the 
train  of  unimportant  and  uninteresting  transactiona 
But  no  one  would  be  thanked  in  the  present  day  for 
extracting  the  tenor  of  the  narrative  out  of  the  official 
despatches,  committee  minute  and  other  like  docu- 
ments in  which  it  is  imbedded. 

It  is  not  until  the  year  1782  that  this  matter  is 
wound  up,  in  a  letter  to  Bundas,  thanking  him  for 
the  assistance,  "  without  which,"  he  says,  "  I  could 
not  have  bo  satisfactorily  concluded  my  little  affair  in 
London;"  and  as  this  letter,  after  some  news  about 
the  General  Assembly  and  the  new  Moderator,  breaks 
in  upon  some  larger  political  transactions,  a  passage 
from  it  may  not  be  unacceptable.  It  refers  to  a  pro- 
ject for  sending  Dundas  out  as  Governor-General  of 
India. 

"  I  don't  know  well  whether  to  be  glnd  or  eorry,  to  hear  it  repe&ted 
again  &nd  agiun  that  jou  are  going  out  supreme  governor  of  the  Eiut 
Indies,  with  full  powers.  1  am  Sony  you  ohonld  disappear  at  this  time 
from  our  hemiEphere,  as  I  have  a  chance  of  being  set  myself  before 
jour  return.  I  am  much  more  sorry  that  Britain  should  lose  the  ad- 
vantage of  your  virtue  and  abilitiee  at  so  critical  a  period-  At  the 
name  time,  I  must  own  that  this  is  but  a  partial  view  of  the  subject ; 
for  when  I  consider  how  many  millions  of  the  human  race  look  for  a 
guardian  angel  to  raise  and  perfect  tbem,  I  see  a  shining  path  in  the 
East  that  leads  to  a  pinnacle  of  glory  and  virtue.  Go,  then,  and  pursne 
the  way  that  Providence  points  out.  Your  health  may  he  in  danger, 
but,  with  a  principality,  who  thtoka  of  health  t  besides,  a  sore  throat 
or  a  collie  is  aa  dangerous  in  obscurity." 

The  window  -  tax  discussion  does  not,  however, 
afford  many  extracts  so  good  as  this ;  and,  indeed,  the 
greater  portion  of  Carlyle's  existing  correspondence 
lies  under  a  like  disqualification  to  be  the  companion 


oy  Google 


538  BUSINESS  CORBESPONDENCE. 

of  his  aDimated  Autobiography.  The  letters  which 
the  world  would  pick  out  from  the  correspondence  of 
a  man  of  rare  gifts  are  those  written  to  his  familiar 
friends ;  but  he  himself  is  apt  to  preserve  as  the  more 
important  the  correspondence  upon  business  afiairs 
affecting  public  or  private  interests  at  the  moment. 
Hence,  among  the  stores  placed  at  the  Editoi^s  dis- 
posal, by  far  the  larger  portion  refer  to  matters  of 
local  interest — literally  parochial  affairs,  which  called 
for  dutiful  and  laborious  attention  in  their  day,  but 
cannot  be  resuscitated  with  either  profit  or  pleasure 
at  the  present  time.  There  are,  for  instance,  the  pro- 
ceeding of  a  presbytery  or  a  synod  to  be  watched  and 
managed  :  Some  leading  man  in  the  Church  court  has 
got  into  bad  hands,  and  must  be  rightly  advised,  other- 
wise harm  will  come  of  it :  The  right  man  must  be 
thoroughly  backed  for  this  perferment — the  wrong 
man  will  get  that,  if  So-and-  so  be  not  spoken  to,  and 
so  forth.  Such  affairs  had  their  little  world  of  living 
interest,  now  no  more. 

It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  Carlyle  had  a  great  voice 
in  the  selection  of  the  men  who  were  either  to  be 
brought  into  the  Church  by  ordination  to  charges,  or 
who  were  to  be  advanced  as  leaders  from  having 
proved  themselves  worthy  in  the  ranks.  No  one  will 
expect  an  inquiry  to  be  here  pursued  into  the  manner 
in  which  he  exercised  in  each  case  the  influence  he  pos- 
sessed. If  the  lighter  motives  had  some  effect  tfae 
heavier  would  have  a  greater ;  and  it  woidd  be  wrong 
to  suppose  that  his  patronage  was  exercised  on  no  better 
ground  than  what  is  stated  in  the  following  little  cha- 

DigmzecDy  Google 


INFLUENCE  IN  PKOMOTION.  539 

racteristic  paBsage,  though  he  do  doubt  thought  thecoa- 
siderations  stated  iu  it  should  have  their  own  weight : — 

"Lord  Douglas  b  here  tmd  well.  A  church  of  hia  in  the  Hene, 
called  PrestoD,  is  vacant  just  now.  Tha  incumbent  was  so  very  old 
that  it  is  more  than  probable  that  he  maj  be  engaged,  otherwioe  perhaps 
joor  Grace  might  take  the  opportnnitj  of  providing  for  Mr  Young, 
the  handsome  jouog  man  and  fine  preacher,  who  is  a  native  of  Dalkeith. 
My  presentiment  in  his  favour  haa  been  confirmed  by  inqiilrj.  If  Lord 
Douglas  should  be  engaged,  suppose  you  should  try  for  Botbwell,  which 
CBu't  be  long  of  being  vacant!  I  think  it  of  great  consequence  to  a  noble 
family,  especially  if  they  have  many  children,  to  have  a  sensible  and 
superior  clergyrnau  settled  in  their  parish.  Young  is  of  that  stamp, 
and  might  be  greatly  improved  in  taste,  and  elegance  of  mind  and  man- 
ners, by  a  free  mtree  to  lady  Douglas.  Tlie  late  Lord  Hopetoun,  who 
was  a  man  of  superior  sense,  was  very  unfortunate  in  his  first  lady's 
time.  By  some  accident  the  highflying  clergy  were  chiefly  admitted 
about  them.  Weak  heads  and  warm  imaginations  lie  open  to  the  zeal 
of  fanaticism  or  the  arts  of  hypocrites.  He  found  his  error  when  it  was 
too  late,  and  was  sorry  he  had  not  encouraged  the  Wisharts  and  Slaira 
to  come  about  liim." 

Carlyle's  infiueuce  in  ecclesiastical  promotion  ap- 
pears not  to  have  been  entirely  limited  to  Scotland. 
Occasionally  hia  distinguished  friends  would  find  a 
place  for  a  student  who  could  not  get  on  with  the 
Presbyterian  system,  in  the  more  manageable  Church 
of  England  and  Ireland  ;  as,  for  instance  : — 

"  There  is  an  old  aaaiatant  of  mine,  J W by  nama,  who, 

.having  grown  impatient  at  not  obtaining  a  church  here,  took  orden  in 
the  Church  of  England— sold  a  little  patrimony  he  had,  and  bought  a 
chaplaincy  to  a  regiment  Since  that  time  he  baa  been  always  nnhappy. 
He  was  for  some  years  in  Minorca,  where  he  lost  his  health.  He  fol- 
lowed the  regiment  to  Lreland,  where  he  lost  his  sight  He  came  to 
Bath  and  recovered  his  health  and  sight,  but  lost  his  substance.  He 
applied  to  me  fur  God's  sake  to  get  him  a  curacy  anywhere,  that  ho 
might  be  able  to  pay  for  a  deputy-chaplain.  I  recommended  him  to  a 
friend  of  mine  in  Loudon,  who  procured  the  curacy  of  Hertford  for 
him.  Soonafterhe  wrote  me  from  thence  that  he  was  so  much  despised 
in  that  town  that  he  was  in  danger  of  hanging  himselC" 

He  was  to  have  got  this  hopeful  parsonage  on  the 
Chancellor's  list,  but  there  were  technical  obstacles ; 

Digitizecy  Google 


540  YOUNG   ALISON. 

and  now  if  the  correBpondent  would  obtiun  for  "  my 
poor  despised  friend  a  araall  living  of  XlOO  a-year  or 
80,"  it  would  be  "  to  serve  a  worthy  creature,  humble 
as  he  IB," 

There  are  more  pleasing  associations  connected  with 
a  scrap  of  writing — undated,  but  of  course  belongiog  to 
a  late  period  of  life.  Every  one  will  recognise  him  who 
is  its  object,  though  he  is  more  aptly  remembered  as 
the  venerable  pastor  and  philosopher  than  as  the  young 
Oxonian. 

"  Dr  Carljle  begi  le^ve  to  recommeiid  Mr  Alison  to  Mr  Dandaa's 
best  offices,  as  a  joung  diTina  bred  in  the  Church  of  Englaiid,  of  nil' 
common  merit  and  accomplishments.  After  the  nsnal  academical 
edacation  at  Edinburgh,  Mr  Alison  studied  two  ^ears  at  Glasgow,  and 
from  tbence  was  sent  aa  an  exhibitioner  to  Baliol  College  in  Oxford, 
where  he  resided  for  nine  orten  years,  and  where  he  received  ordinatjon." 

In  another  letter  we  find  him  thanking  Dundas  for 
taking  "Archy"  by  the  hand,  and  explaining  that  it 
will  thus,  in  this  instance,  be  unnecessary  to  draw  upon 
the  patronage  of  Sir  William  Pulteney,  with  whom 
also  Carlyle  had  corresponded  about  his  young  friend.* 

*  It  has  been  said,  however,  on  good  authoritj,  that  it  was  to  Pulteney 
that  Alison  owed  hia  promotioQ  in  EnglaniL  St«  Memnir  of  Alison  in  "the 
fragment  of  a  Biographical  Dictionary  by  the  Sitiety  for  the  Difliision  ot 
Useful  Knurledga.  In  a  letter  by  Pulteney,  dated  22(1  June  1T84,  there 
is  this  jilesiiant  account  of  Alison's  marriage  t»  the  daughter  of  Br  John 
Gregory  : — "Andrew  Stuart  aud  I  accompanied  Mr  Alison  to  Thrapston, 
and  the  marriage  took  ])lace  on  the  19th  by  a  liceoce  from  the  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury.  1  couiliicteil  them  afternards  to  their  residence,  and  we  left 
them  next  morning  after  lireokfaat  as  happy  as  it  is  poasible  for  people  to 
be.  Mr  Alison  was  obliged  to  cume  round  by  London  in  order  to  take  an 
oath  at  granting  the  licence,  and  I  was  glad  ot  the  opportunity  which  tlie 
jonmey  afforded  me  of  making  ao  acquaiutance  with  him  ;  for  though  I  had 
little  doubt  that  Miss  G.  had  made  a  projier  choice,  yet  I  wished  to  be  per- 
fectly satisfied  ;  and  the  result  is,  that  I  think  neither  yon  nor  Mr  Kairae 
have  said  a  word  too  much  in  his  favour." 


,1.0,  Google 


ADAM   FERGUSON.  541 

In  the  same  letter  in  which  he  thus  holds  out  a 
hand  to  a  young  aspirant,  he  pleads  at  greater  length 
and  with  deeper  earnestnesB  the  cause  of  his  old  friend 
Adam  Ferguson,  whom  he  expected  to  die  before  he 
had  been  paid  the  debt  of  fame  and  fortune  which 
the  world  owed  to  him,  or  even  realised  the  means  of 
securing  his  family  from  destitution.  It  so  happened 
that  Ferguson,  though  attacked  with  hopeless- looking 
symptoms  in  middle  life,  wore  on  to  a  good  old  age  ; 
and  that,  through  various  chances,  he  became  wealthy 
in  his  declining  years.  That  the  world  had  done 
gross  uijustice  to  The  History  of  the  Rom.an  Republic, 
was  a  fixed  opinion  with  Carlyle ;  and,  In  pleading 
for  its  author's  family,  he  says  : — 

"  I  do  iiot  know  hj  what  fatallt;  it  ia  that  the  beat  and  most  manly 
historj  (with  soidb  imperfection b,  no  doubt)  of  modern  times,  has  beeii 
so  Utile  sought  after.  The  time  will  come  when  it  will  be  read  aud 
admired.  That  time,  I  hope,  is  not  at  a  great  distance.  QetmaDy  is 
the  country  whereitwillreceive  its  name;  and  when  the  report  retuma 
from  the  learned  there,  the  book  will  begin  to  be  prized.  But  Ferguson 
may  be  dead  by  that  time,  and  an  Iriah  edition  may  glut  the  market. 
I  was  always  in  hopes  that  some  of  you  would  have  quoted  it  in  the 
House  of  Cummona,  as  Cliarlea  Fox  did  Principal  Watson's  Philip,  for 
some  of  bis  purposes  in  the  time  of  the  American  War.  I  am  sore 
Ferguson's  contains  ten  times  more  instruction  for  the  statesman  and 
legislator  than  the  other  does ;  but  I  have  been  disappointed." 

By  far  the  greater  portion  of  Carlyle's  letters  which 
have  been  preserved  relate,  as  has  been  said,  to  matters 
of  business — such  as  those  dealt  with  in  the  preceding 
quotations,  or  even  afiairs  of  stUl  less  interest.  Some 
bundles  of  epistles,  addressed  to  him,  show  that  he  had  a 
wide  correspondence  of  a  lighter  cast ;  and  he  is  re- 
ported to  have  been  famous  as  a  lashionable  letter- 


izecy  Google 


642  PARNASSIAN   COERESPONDENCE. 

writer — a  highly-prized  accomplishment  in  his  day. 
Much  of  this  correspondence  was  with  the  female 
aristocracy,  including  members  of  the  two  great  Scot- 
tish ducal  families,  Argyle  and  Buccleuch.  He  was, 
indeed,  as  he  said  his  parishioners  hinted  against  him 
when  he  became  their  clergyman,  partial  to  the  com- 
pany of  his  superiors.  Bat  if  he  liked  the  aristocracy, 
the  aristocracy  liked  him ;  the  two  met  half-way,  and 
he  was  a  man  who  could  hold  his  own  with  them. 
Thus  he  occupied  the  happy  though  often  rather  pre- 
carious position,  of  ono  who  is  alike  removed,  on  the 
one  hand,  from  the  tuft-hunter,  possessing  nothing 
but  sycophancy  to  give  for  the  countenance  he  seeks; 
and  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  surly  cynic,  who 
cannot  trust  that  his  independence  will  hold  good 
beyond  the  circuit  of  his  tub.  No  doubt,  whatever 
society  one  keeps,  one  must  give  a  deference  to  its 
laws  and  customs — which  is  a  different  thing  from 
paying  undue  deference  to  its  individual  members. 
There  was,  in  that  day,  among  the  enlightened  women 
of  rank  who  cultivated  men  of  genius,  a  propensity 
to  get  the  most  out  of  them,  by  drawing  upon  their 
talents,  in  conversation  and  correspondences  of  a 
peculiarly  allegorical,  or,  as  he  terms  it,  "  Parnassian  " 
character,  a  little  like  the  euphuism  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  though  not  so  absolutely  hard  and  unnatural. 
Moderate  as  it  was,  however,  it  is  difficult  to  suppose 
a  person  of  Carlyle's  acute  and  sarcastic  character 
well  adapted  to  it ;  and  we  can  suppose  him  as  little 
at  home  in  it,  as  his  friend  David  Hume,  when  he  had 


oy  Google 


PARNAjSSIAN  COBBESPONDBNCE.  543 

to  perform  the  Sultan  between  two  rival  beauties  in 
Madame  de  Tessa's  salon.  Such  efforts  of  this  kind  as 
he  unbent  himself  to,  appear,  however,  to  have  been 
very  acceptable.  Here,  for  instance,  follows  a  letter  to 
his  amiable  friend.  Lady  Frances  Scott.  In  puTsuance 
of  some  jocular  fiction,  of  which  the  point  is  not  now 
very  obvious,  he  bad  been  addressing  her  as  the  ghost 
of  iirs  M'Cormick — an  elderiy  female,  whose  death 
has  been  brought  about  by  the  neglect  and  craelty  of 
the  lady — characteristics,  of  course,  entirely  the  re- 
verse of  her  true  qualities.  She  writes  back  "from  the 
Elysian  fields,"  where  "  we  have  never  ceased  gliding 
about  the  heavens  with  the  happy  spirits  our  com- 
panions ;  for  you  mxist  know  that  the  chief  source  of 
happiness  here  arises  from  the  power  which  our  wings 
give  us  of  never  being  two  minutes  in  a  placa"  There 
is  a  certain  materiality,  however,  in  the  elysium,  for 
the  angels  or  goddesses  are  looking  after  affluent  gods 
with  broken  constitutions;  while  impoverished  deities 
of  the  male  sex  worship  where  there  is  neither  youth 
nor  beauty,  but  plenty  of  wealth,  to  attract.  Olympian 
Jove  is  but  a  master  of  the  ceremonies,  and  "  Juuo  is 
neither  endowed  with  celestial  loveliness  nor  awe-in- 
spiring dignity."  This  is  the  way  of  stating  that  the 
family  are  at  the  Bath  waters,  then  in  their  pride, 
with  the  successor  of  Beau  Nash  playing  the  part  of 
Olympian  Jove.  Carlyle's  answer,  instead  of  aiding 
and  developing  the  allegory,  is  apt  rather  to  scatter 
its  filmy  texture  by  outbreaks  of  practical  sagacity 
and  homely  wit. 


oy  Google 


5W  PAItNASSIAN  CORBESPONDEKCE. 

"  At  my  retora  from  the  south,  ten  days  ago,  I  found  your  bLdjship*^ 
dated  from  Elysium,  which  transported  me  so,  thnt  I  had  to  receive 
sundry  twinges  iu  the  region  of  the  hewt,  by  the  daily  decline  of  a  cbitd 
and  the  grief  of  her  mother,  who  is  the  greatest  martyr  to  seniiibility 
that  ever  was  bom,  and  at  lost  to  get  a.  great  knock  on  the  pate  by  the 
sudden  death  of  Dr  Gregory,  who  was  our  chief  staj  and  support,  before 
I  could  recollect  that  I  was  still  in  the  body.  Were  I  to  wait  till  I 
could  aoewer  yoars  from  the  abodes  of  the  happy  in  the  niajiner  it 
deserves,  millions  of  more  ghuats  might  have  time  to  pass  the  Stygian 
ferry.  But  why  shoiiid  I  be  mortified,  that  as  ranch  as  he&ven  is  above 
hell,  your  ladyship's  description  should  surpass  mine  I  Though  I  dars 
aay  by  this  time  you  imagine  that  1  am  to  behave  to  you  as  an  old 
humourist,  a  friend  of  miue,  did  long  ago  to  me.  We  were  iu  nse  of 
corresponding  together,  and  many  a  diverting  letter  I  had  from  bim. 
At  last  he  took  a  panic  about  his  son,  who  was  at  school  her«,  and 
wrote  me  a  long  letter,  complaining  of  what  he  was  well  informed — 
viz.,  that  the  schoolboys  had  got  gunpowder,  and  were  in  daily  nse  of 
firing  pistols  aud  carabines,  and  that  they  made  squibs  and  crackers, 
to  the  infinite  danger  of  their  own  lives ;  and  then  he  quoted  me  an 
hundred  fatal  accidents  that  had  happened  by  means  of  gunpowder, 
aud  pisyod  my  interposition  to  save  the  life  of  liis  son.  As  I  knew  it 
was  impossible  to  prevent  the  evil  of  which  be  comphuned,  as  three 
regiments  of  foot,  with  a  train  of  artillery,  were  encamped  in  the  links, 
I  first  read  one  of  the  most  extravagant  chapters  in  all  Rabtlau,  and 
then  wrote  bim  a  letter  assuring  him  that  he  had  not  heard  the  hun- 
dred part  of  the  truth ;  for  that  the  boys  were  arrived  at  the  most 
dangerous  and  incorrigible  use  of  powder,  and  then  gave  him  instaoces 
— such  as  that  they  came  Ui  church  every  Sunday  with  swivel-gunB 
sci'ewed  on  their  left  arms,  with  which  they  popped  down  everybody 
whom  they  disliked,  kc  The  effect  of  this  letter  was  that  the  old 
gentleman  found  himself  so  far  outdone,  that  it  entirely  broke  np  our 
correspondeiice.  And  when  I  employed  somebody  to  auk  bim  the  reamn 
of  his  silence,  he  said  that  the  young  folks  nowadays  (this  was  fifteeo 
years  ago)  went  such  lengths  in  fiction,  that  it  was  impoesible  to 
answer  them. 

"  But  your  ladyship  shall  see  that  I  am  not  in  the  least  mortified  by 
yonr  tetter,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  I  am  highly  delighted  withit,and 
value  it  more  than  I  would  do  a  new  volume  of  the  Arabian  Night* 
Entertainmentt.  Before  I  Iuft  the  shades  below,  I  had  &  peep  into 
Blysium  myself;  and  though  I  did  not  find  things  exactly  in  the  same 
state  your  ladyship  did,  as  I  happened  not  to  be  in  the  same  region  ot 
heaven,  that  can  be  no  objeetiou  ;  for  surely  there  can  be  no  Elysium 
without  variety ;  bat  that  may  possibly  be  the  subject  of  auotbu'  letter. 


izecDy  Google 


PAKNASSIAN   CORRESPONDENCE.  545 

In  the  mcMi  Ume,  I  may  give  jonr  ladyship  some  intelligence  of  wbut 
ie  going  on  here. 

"  Bj  the  hy,  thoDgh  1  hftve  do  grent  taste  now  for  that  part  of  bliss, 
vhieh  ;oQr  Udjahip  says  consists  in  everUstingfleetiogabontbyiiieans 
of  tlie  wings  th&t  mnke  a  part  of  the  celestial  body,  jet  I  remember  the 
time  when  I  should  liave  thought  sncb  a  power  very  material  to  happi- 
ness. Bleaa  me  1  bow  I  envied  the  happy  in  some  island  in  the  Pacific 
Ocean  —  not  Atlantic— whom  Peter  Wilkins  represented  as  having 
moat  powerful  and  tmsty  pioiona.  But  in  those  days  I  nsed  to  be 
in  love,  and  thonght  that  winga  would  make  me  eTer}'whRre  present 
with  my  miatresa. 

"  I  am  very  glad  to  bear  that  Jupiter  is  henpecked,  since  he  suflers 
tlie  name  of  angel  to  be  prostituted  for  gold  in  hia  dominions.  I  sup- 
pose he  draws  a  good  round  sum  by  way  of  tax  for  liberty  to  go  by 
that  name.  We  have  known  titlea  of  honour  sold  upon  earth,  yon 
know,  and  why  not  the  privilege  of  being  angels  1  When  they  have 
onoe  given  their  hands,  they'll  not  long  boast  of  their  angelic  appellar 

"  No ;  really  we  are  very  much  imposed  upon.  Happiness  does  not 
consist  in  the  place — it  resides  in  the  dispoaition  of  the  person,  sod  the 
company.  The  material  difference  in  your  abode  and  mine  oonsiated 
in  the  long  stories  that  were  sncb  a  torment  to  me,  and  that  you  were 

"  But  to  return  to  anblunary  things.  First,  as  to  pnblic  diversions : 
I  bare  neither  had  time  nor  inclination  to  mix  with  the  conversable 
world  in  the  capital,  near  which  I  reside ;  so  that  I  can  entertain  your 
ladyship  with  very  few  pieces  of  news  of  any  kind.  You  would  hear, 
no  doubt,  of  the  mock  masquerade  they  had  some  time  in  January. 
That  piece  of  mummery  was  carried  on  so  ill,  that  I  daresay  they 
won't  attempt  another  in  haste.  The  two  Tnrka  met  with  rather  hard 
nst^e,  considering  the  natural  as  well  as  assamed  gisvity  of  their  cha- 
racters. The  one  waa  excluded  bis  own  house  all  night  by  the  custom- 
house porter,  being  misUken  for  a  vagrant  Turk  who  had  been  begging 
on  the  streets  all  winter ;  and  the  other  got  a  sad  curtain-lecture  from 
hia  wife  for  having  embraced  a  religion,  even  t)ut  in  disguise,  that 
allows  no  souls  to  women,  and  bIIowb  of  four  wives  and  iuaomerable 
concubines. 

''  The  playhouse  has  been  much  frequented  since  Mrs  Yates  arrived, 
who  receives  infinite  i^laoae.  For  thoagh  she  often  appears  on  the 
stage  more  than  hatf-«eaB-over,  she's  not  the  less  agreeable  to  all  the 
male  part  of  her  audience,  who  come  there  &  little  disguised  themselves ; 
and  in  this  land  of  obsequious  wives,  you  know,  there  is  no  dispnUng 
the  taste  of  the  men. 

2H 


izecy  Google 


546  PARNASSIAN  COBEESPONDENCE. 

"  With  respect  to  tha  fioe  arte,  I  hftve  rmson  to  believe  that  cookeiy 
is  Htill  tbe  favourite ;  and  na  we  were  a  little  behind  in  that  article,  it 
is  verj  tight  that  it  ehotild  contiuae  to  be  progreuiTe  for  some  time. 
The  men  of  geniaa  and  taste  who  frequent  that  temple  of  pleasore 
that  goes  bj  the  name  of  Fortune's,  have  sabsctibed  very  handsomely 
to  enable  the  chief  priest  there  to  hire  a  French  cook  of  the  fiiat  ae- 
complislimenta.  There  are  hundreds  of  people,  indeed,  on  the  point  of 
starving,  bat  the  eminent  critics  have  observed  that  there  is  the  greatest 
race  of  genius,  and  that  tbe  fine  arts  thrive  best,  in  tbe  time  of  pnblic 
calamities — such  aa  civil  war,  pestilence,  or  famine. 

"  General  Scott,  who  is  here  this  winter  looking  out  for  another  wife 
to  make  him  nneBsy,  gives  the  most  snperb,  elegant,  and  refined  enter- 
tainments that  ever  were  in  this  northern  region.  Poor  Mr  8tnart 
Moncrief,  who  had  no  other  department  in  the  Temple  of  Fame  bat 
thatwbicli  ia  allotted  to  the  makers  of  great  feasts,  after  witnessiDgODv 
of  the  General's  most  magnificent  repasts— for  you're  certain  he  could 
not  be  a  partaker — went  home  and  wept  for  two  hours  over  Ids  vaa- 
quisbed  reputation,  sickened,  and  went  to  bed,  and  died,  for  au]>thing 
I  know,  next  day.  Dead,  he  certainly  is,  to  glory  I  M'Queen  the 
lawyer,  who  felt  a  very  different  passion  firom  envy,  after  having  de- 
voured of  twenty-seven  sevaral  diabes,  attacked  at  last  audeut  pye 
with  so  much  vivacity,  that  he  had  nigh  perished  in  the  cause — at  least 
ho  was  able  to  attend  no  other  caus&  for  a  fortnighL 

"  We  are  to  propose  to  next  General  Assembly  that  a  certain  deadly 
sin,  for  which  both  men  and  women  used  to  do  penance  and  be  severely 
rebuked  in  tba  Church,  shall  be  blotted  out  of  our  Statnte-Book,  and 
the  sin  of  Gluttony  put  in  its  place, 

"  As  to  tbe  state  of  learning  this  winter,  I  am  told  there  are  many 
poorer  students  than  usual,  But  they  say  they  are  better  boys,  anJd 
mind  the  ladiee  less  than  they  used  to  do.  The  Englieb  of  that  ii^  I 
fikncy,  that  as  there  are  but  few  men  of  fortune  among  them,  the  aunta 
and  tbe  mothers  don't  mind  them.  The  misses,  dear  angels,  t  hope, 
are  above  valuing  any  man  but  for  bis  personal  merit  Lord  Mon- 
boddo,  one  of  tbe  most  learned  judges,  is  just  about  publishing  a  book, 
in  which  be  demonstrates  that  mankind  walked  originally  on  oll-fbnn, 
like  other  animals,  aud  had  tails  like  most  of  them  ;  that  it  was  most 
likely  SOOO  years  before  they  learned  to  walk  in  an  erect  postnre,  and 
OOOO  more  before  they  could  learn  tbe  use  of  speech.  Tbe  females,  he 
thinks,  might  speak  two  or  three  centuries  sooner." 

Here  is  a  specimen  of  what  may  be  considered  the 
same  order  of  composition,  although  it  ia  varied  to 


izecy  Google 


PARNASSIAN  CORRESPONDENCE.  547 

Buit  the  taste  of  a  male  correspondent.     It  is  taken 
from  the" 

"ScroUof  tt  Letter  to  Sir  JohsMacphersou,  Bart.  1707. 

"  Although  one's  correapondence  with  one's  friend  ehonld  be  nerer 
so  much  interrupted  by  buBinesa  or  idleness,  there  are  certun  wxnr 
aiouB  when  they  must  not  be  neglected,  such  as  marriBgea  and  births, 
and  even  death  it£cir.  As  the  last  lias  l&tely  befallen  me,  though  I  am 
happily  restored  to  life,  I  think  it  is  proper  to  announce  to  you,  my 
very  good  friend,  my  return  to  this  world,  and  to  give  you  some  ac- 
count of  the  slight  peep  I  h»d  iuto  the  other.  About  a  month  ago  I 
was  suddenly  seized,  after  a  hearty  dinner,  with  a  dreadful  collie,  which 
lasted  for  fifty  hours,  which  threatened  immediate  dissolution,  and 
actually  sent  me  out  of  the  body  for  a  few  minutes.  During  that 
short  period  (like  Mahomet  in  his  dream)  I  had  a  view  of  Elysium, 
banging,  as  I  thought,  ou  the  brink  of  a  cloud,  and  every  moment 
ready  to  descend.  But,  aa  I  saw  clearly  before  me,  the  first  group  I 
perceived  was  David  Hume,  and  Adam  Smith,  and  James  Macphereon, 
lounging  on  a  little  hillock,  with  Col.  James  Edmonstone  Btanding  be- 
fore them,  brandishing  a  cudgel,  and  William  Kobertaon  at  David's 
feet  in  a  listening  posture.  Edmonstone  was  rallying  David  and  Smith, 
not  without  a  mixture  of  anger,  for  having  contributed  their  sliare  to 
the  present  state  of  the  world  j  the  one,  by  doing  everything  in  his 
power  to  undermine  Cliristianity,  and  the  other  by  introducing  that 
nnrestrained  and  universal  commerce,  which  propagates  opinions  as 
well  as  commodities.  The  two  philosophers,  conscious  of  their  follies, 
were  shrunk  into  a  nutshell,  when  Jamea  the  bird,  in  the  act  of  rais- 
ing himself  to  insult  them,  perceiving  my  grey  hairs  hanging  over  them 
in  the  cload,  eicclainied,  '  Damn  your  nonsensical  palaver ;  there  is 
Carlyle  just  coming  down,  and  John  Home  and  Fei^^oD  cannot  be 
&r  behind,  when  1  shall  have  irresistible  evidence  for  the  authenticity 
of  Oasian.  Blair,  1  daresay,  is  likewise  on  the  road,  and  I  hope  he'll 
bring  bis  dissertation  on  my  woi-ks  along  with  bim,  which  is  worth  a 
thousand  of  his  mawkish  sermons,  which  are  only  calculated  to  catch 
milk-sops  and  silly  women.'  Upon  this  Robertson  rose  to  his  feet,  and 
seemed  to  be  in  act  to  speak  one  of  bis  decisive  sentences  in  favour  of 
the  winning  side,  when  Joseph  Black,  and  Charley  Congaltou,  and 
Sandy  Wood,  who  had  hold  of  the  skirts  of  my  coat,  fearing  I  should 
leap  down  at  the  sight  of  so  many  of  my  friends,  and  carry  them  aft«r 
Dic,made  a  sadden  and  strong  pull  altogether,  and  jerked  me  back  into 
life  again,  not  without  I'egret  at  being  disappointed  in  meeting  with  bo 
choice  a  company." 


izecDy  Google 


■ii6  HIS  SOCIAL  HABITS. 

The  social  habita  of  Carlyle  were,  doubtless,  like 
other  men's,  miieb  influenced  by  his  domestic  poBition- 
It  was  his  lot  to  taste  of  more  than  the  avera^ 
amount  of  human  sorrow,  for  he  lost  all  his  childreo 
at  an  early  period,  and  while  there  were  yet  above 
thirty  years  of  his  own  earthly  pilgrimage  to  be  per- 
formed. The  last,  his  son  William,  born  in  1773,  died 
in  1777.  Had  it  been  otherwise,  perhaps  his  memo- 
randa might  not  have  left  traces  of  so  continued  a  suc- 
cession of  visits  and  receptions  of  guests.  While  they 
show  him  to  have  been  much  in  the  worW,  however, 
they  bear  no  trace  of  his  being  addicted  in  later  life  to 
the  social  convivialities  where,  males  only  can  be  pre- 
sent; for  his  faithful  partner,  Mary,  is  his  almost  con- 
stant companion,  whether  his  visits  be  to  a  ducal  man- 
sion in  London,  or  to  the  quiet  manse  of  some  old 
companion.  How  it  continued  to  fare  with  him  and 
with  his  chosen  friends  may  best  be  told  in  one  or  two 
extracts  from  the  letters  in  which  he  communicates 
the  passing  news  to  his  correspondents.  One  of  his 
early  companions — a  John  Macpherson — had  been 
signally  fortunate  in  life.  Getting  into  the  service  of 
the  East  India  Company,  he  rose  by  stages,  though 
not  without  unpropitious  casualties,  until  he  became 
Sir  John  Macpherson,  and  the  successor  of  Warren 
Hastings  as  Governor  of  British  India.  To  him  Car- 
lyle thus  reports,  in  1796,  about  some  of  their  common 
friends : — 

"  Now  for  an  account  of  yoar  old  Mends,  which,  if  70Q  uw  Fer- 
guson as  he  passed,  which  T  tbiuk  ;oa  did,  I  might  spare. 


izecDy  Google 


SOCIAL  COEEESPOKCENCE.  549 

"  To  b^in  with  Bobertaoo,  vbom  70U  shall  see  so  more.  Id  one 
word,  be  appeared  more  reBpecUble  vhen  be  was  dying  than  ever  be 
did  eveu  when  living.  He  waa  calm  and  collected,  and  even  placid, 
Mid  even  gay.  My  poor  wife  had  a  desire  to  see  him,  aud  went  on  pnr- 
poee,  bat  wben  sbe  saw  him,  from  a  window,  leauiag  on  hia  daughter, 
wit)]  hie  tottering  frame,  aud  directing  the  gardener  how  to  dress  some 
flower-beds,  ber  eeuBibilitj  threw  her  into  a  paroxysm  of  grief ;  abe 
fled  np-aturs  to  Mra  RuBSell  and  coald  not  aee  him.  His  honse,  for 
three  weeks  before  be  died,  was  really  an  anticipation  of  heaven. 

"  Dr  BlaJr  is  ae  well  aa  poseible.  Preaching  every  Sunday  with  in- 
creaung  applanae,  and  frisking  more  with  the  whole  world  than  ever 
he  did  in  bis  youngest  days,  no  symptom  of  frailty  about  bim  ;  and 
thoDgb  be  wan  bofied  at  not  having  an  offer  of  the  Principality,  be  is 
happy  in  being  resorted  to  a*  the  head  of  the  nuiveruty. 

"  John  Home  is  in  very  good  health  and  spirits,  and  haa  had  the 
comfort,  for  two  or  three  winters,  of  having  M^or  Home,  hia  brother- 
in-law,  a  very  sensible  man,  in  the  hoDse  with  him,  which  makes  him 
leas  dependent  on  stranger  company,  which,  in  advanced  years,  is  not 
so  easy  to  be  found,  nor  endured  when  it  ia  found. 

"  With  respect  to  myself,  I  have  had  many  woruiags  within  these 
three  years,  but,  on  the  whole,  as  I  have  only  fits  of  iltneaa,  and  no 
disease,  T  am  sliding  softly  on  to  old  age,  without  any  remarkable  in- 
firmity  or  Ulure,  and  can,  upon  occaaions,  preach  like  a  son  of  thunder 
(I  wish  I  were  the  Bold  Tlinnderer  for  a  week  or  two  against  the  vile 
levelling  Jacobina,  whom  I  abhor).  My  wife,  your  old  friend,  has  been 
better  than  nsoal  this  winter,  and  is  strong  in  uetaphysics  and 
ethics,  and  (can)  almost  repeat  all  Ferguson's  last  book  of  Lectures, 
which  do  him  infinite  honour.  I  say  of  that  book,  that  if  Baid  is  the 
Aristotle,  Ferguson  is  the  Plato  of  Scotch  philosophers  ;  and  the 
Faculty  of  Arts  of  Edinburgh  have  adopted  my  phrase." 

The  following,  from  a  letter  to  Principal  Hill,  dated 
25th  September  1801,  gives  an  account  of  a  visit  to 
Lord  Melville  when  he  had  retired  with  Pitt  on  the 
formation  of  the  Addington  Administration  : — 

"  We  bod  Jesse  Bell  and  her  husband,  Mr  Gregg,  and  their  son  from 
London,  for  ten  days,  in  the  middle  of  Angust,  which  gratified  and 
amused  us  :  and  abont  the  end  of  it  John  Home  and  I  had  a  fine  jaunt 
to  Duneiro.  We  set  out  on  the  2Sth  of  August,  and  returned  on  the 
1st  of  September,  and  were  much  pleased  will)  our  reception  every- 
where, as  well  aa  with  tlie  country,  which  was  then  in  the  higheat 
beanty,  and  where  we  had  never  been  before. 


oy  Google 


550  SOCIAL  CORRESPONDENCE. 

"  Oar  great  object,  ao  doabt,  was  the  retired  statesnuui,  whom  it 
deliglited  us  to  aee  bo  well  Hnd  so  hajipy,  and  as  easy  and  digagi  as  he 
was  in  hia  boyish  Aa-ya. 

"  I  was  afr&id  that^  like  most  of  ex-mioisterSj  hia  gaiety  might  be  put 
on  to  save  appearances.  However,  as  his  was  not  a  &11,  but  a  voluntaTj 
and  long-projected  retreat,  and  as  he  ia  conaciona  that  his  great  exertions 
hare  not  only  saved  liia  own  country,  but  pat  it  in  the  power  ot  Europe 
to  savs  themselves,  while  the  applauses  of  his  country,  universal  and 
unreserved,  nt  once  resound  hid  uncorrupted  integrity,  as  well  as  his 
unbounded  capacity, — I  believe  Lim  genuine  and  sincere. 

"  I  compared  his  phice  to  an  eagle's  neat,  which  pleased  bim.  But 
I  did  not  add,  that  he  was  like  the  thuuder-heariug  bird  of  Jove, 
whom  his  master  had  allowed  to  retire  awhile,  after  his  war  with  tlie 
giants,  to  recreate  himself  from  the  toils  of  war,  and  sport  \tith  bis 
own  brood ;  but  who,  in  the  midst  of  carclesaueaa  and  ease,  still  throws 
his  eyes  around  him,  from  his  airy  height,  to  descry  if  the  regions  of 
the  air  are  again  disturbed,  and  to  watch  the  first  nod  of  the  Imperial 
Sing,  to  take  wing  and  resume  liis  place  in  the  Chanot  of  War. 

"  We  passed  three  days  and  three  nights  with  him,  one  at  Ochtei^ 
tyre  and  another  at  Monzie,  and  fain  would  I  have  gone  down  the 
country,  as  I  bad  never  been  farther  up  before  than  at  Lord  Einnoul's. 
But  my  partner,  in  spite  of  all  his  heroic  tragedies,  was  too  much 
afraid  of  the  water  to  take  any  other  road  than  Stirling  Bridge.  The 
country  was  truly  rich  aud  yellow  with  grain,  and  the  harvest  far  ad- 
vanced for  the  lat  of  September. 

"  Plenty,  thank  God,  has  returned,  but  I  am  afraid  peace  ia  still  at 
a  distance. 

"  Buonaparte  is  entirely  govei-ned  by  personal  considerations,  and 
he  has  still  the  chance  of  au  invasion  in  Ireland  to  establish  his  throue 
awhile.  I  can  hardly  thick  he  wilt  venture  to  invade  Britain.  Yet, 
if  Admiral  de  Winter  ahould  fight  an  obstinate  battle  off  our  coast,  and, 
in  the  mean  time,  a  few  transports  should  land  with  2000  men  any- 
where between  this  aud  Newcastle,  it  might  prove  very  troublesome, 
while  their  main  effoit  was  made  on  Ireland.  In  the  interval  left  us, 
we  are  in  high  preparation  here,  and  our  camp,  with  the  force  in  Edin  ■ 
burgh,  are  put  in  condition  to  act  together  with  effect  on  the  shortest 
warning. 

"  There  was  a  fine  show  on  Tuesday,  ns  you  would  see  in  the  papers, 
and  there  is  to  be  a  repetition  of  it  on  Braid  Tlills  next  week. 

"  Major  Elliot,  of  the  Lanarkshire,  aaid  to  me  that  their  Tuesday's 
work  was  worth  all  they  had  been  taught  before,  and  he  is  a  soldier  of 


izecy  Google 


HIS  POLITICS.  551 

The  reader  will  have  noticed  the  keen  zest  with 
which  Carlyle  always  watched  the  politics  of  the  time, 
whether  home  or  foreign.  It  is  infinitely  to  be  re- 
gretted, therefore,  that  he  did  not  bring  down  his 
Autobiography  through  the  French  Revolution  and 
the  Great  War.  He  would  have  spoken,  no  doubt, 
entirely  on  one  side,  but  with  that  breadth  and  fixity 
of  opinion  which  partakes  more  of  devotion  than  of 
mere  partiality  or  prejudice,  and  is  both  respectable 
and  interesting  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  think  other- 
wise. His  politics,  indeed,  were  a  political  faith  that 
never  awer^'ed.  Wtile  many  of  his  friends  were 
frightened  into  their  Conservative  opinions  by  the 
terrors  of  the  French  Revolution,  he  took  and  kept 
his  position  calmly  in  the  very  front  of  his  party,  like 
a  soldier  at  his  post.  The  resoluteness  of  the  resist- 
ance offered  by  such  men,  not  only  to  innovation,  but 
to  the  mere  raising  of  the  faintest  question  of  the 
necessity  of  matters  being  as  they  are,  is  a  thing 
which  it  is  difficult  for  men  of  any  party  to  realise 
in  the  year  1 860. 

By  the  Test  Act,  the  members  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland  were  in  England  placed  legally  in  the  same 
position  as  other  dissenters  from  the  Church.  Loving 
and  admiring  his  own  Church  as  he  did,  it  might  have 
been  anticipated  that  he  would  rather  fiirther  than 
repress  a  remonstrance  by  the  General  Assembly  of 
1791,  in  which  they  represented  that  the  members  of 
the  Church  of  Scotland  were  unequally  dealt  with, 
since  they  could  not  hold  any  office  in  England  with- 


izecDy  Google 


552  HIS  POLITICS. 

out  taking  the  communion  according  to  the  CSiurch 
of  England ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  no  similar  com- 
pliance was  required  of  Episcopalians  holding  office  in 
Scotland,  fiat  he  was  not  to  be  caught  by  this  bait, 
nor  was  he  to  remain  silent  while  it  was  held  out  to 
the  weak  and  inexperienced.  He  came  forth  not 
merely  in  favour  of  the  Test,  but  in  strong  champion- 
ship of  it.  It  was  to  be  supported  upon  grounds  of 
toleration  towards  the  Established  Church  of  England, 
which  weU  merited  such  protection.  **  In  this  enlight- 
ened and  liberal  age,  when  toleration  has  softened  the 
minds  of  men  on  religions  opinions,  it  would  disgrace 
the  General  Assembly  to  do  anything  that  might  seem 
to  separate  the  two  Established  Churches  farther  iiom 
each  other.  Their  doctrines  are  nearly  the  same;  and 
he  must  be  but  a  very  narrow-minded  Presbyterian 
who,  in  the  various  circumstances  in  which  he  might 
be  placed,  could  not  join  in  the  religious  worship  of 
the  Church."  This  doctrine  must  have  been  a  little 
startling  to  those  brethren  who  inherited  even  but  a 
small  portion  of  the  doctrine  prevalent  in  his  youth — 
that  the  bare  toleration  of  Episcopacy  in  any  shape, 
and  in  any  portion  of  the  empire,  wag  one  of  the  great 
national  sins  for  which  Divine  vengeance  might  be 
anticipated.  Kor  is  it  easy  to  reaUse  the  feelings 
with  which  the  representatives  of  the  Covenanters 
would  receive  this  climax  of  a  speech  delivered  in 
1791  :— 

"Say,  Moderator,  had  I  tbe  talents  of,  &c.,  I  think  I  could  show  that 
ilie  Test  Act,  instead  of  an  evil,  U  a  bleaung.    The  Teat  Act  has  con- 


oy  Google 


HIS  POLITICS.  553 

firmed  the  Union.  The  Teat  Act  hna-cur«>d  EngluAiinsn  pf  tbeir 
jealoasj  of  Scotsmen,  not  very  ill-founded.  The  Test  Act  haa  quieted 
the  fears  of  the  Church  of  Engluid.  The  Teat  Act  has  enlarged  and 
confirmed  the  piinciplea  of  toleration  ;  so  far  u  it  from  being  a  rem- 
nant of  bigotrj  and  fanaticism  as  the  memorial  would  represent  The 
Act,  sir,  has  paved  the  road  to  office  and  preterment  The  Tut  Act, 
air,  for  there  a  no  end  of  its  pruses,  is  the  key  that  opens  all  the  trea- 
sures of  the  sooth  to  every  honest  Scotchman." 

But,  in  small  matters,  the  keenness  of  his  antipathy 
to  any  ionoTation  or  interference  with  established 
authorities  might  perhaps  be  even  more  distinctly 
exemplified.  For  instance,  in  1795,  a  LadyMaswell 
represented  to  him  that  certain  Highland  soldiers  at 
Musselburgh  were  in  religious  destitution  from  want 
of  a  clergyman  speaking  Gaelic.  She  caUs  them  "well- 
disposed  officers,  sergeants,  and  privates,"  though  it 
is  difficult  to  suppose  that  there  could  then  be  com- 
missioned officers  unacquainted  with  the  general  lan- 
guage of  the  empire.  She  offers  the  services  of  an 
enthusiastic  youthful  missionary  for  the  occasion,  and 
this  suggested  interference  with  the  established  order 
of  things  in  his  Majesty's  army  and  the  parish  of 
Inveresk  calls  from  its  minister  the  following  severe 
rebuke : — 

"  Dr  Carlyle  presents  respectful  compliments  to  Lady  Maxwell 
He  received  her  ladyship's  card,  in  answer  to  which  he  has  to  observe, 
that  she  proceeds  on  misinformation.  The  officers  who  command  the 
several  regiments  encamped  ore  too  conscientiouit,  and  nndentAud 
their  duty  too  well,  to  let  their  soldiers  be  without  the  ordinances  of 
religion  in  a  tongue  they  understand.  Tvo  chaplains,  men  of  respect 
and  of  standing  in  the  Church,  have  performed  public  worship  in  the 
Gaelic  language  every  Lord's  day  in  camp  since  ever  it  was  eitab- 

"  With  respect  to  her  ladyship's  design,  of  the  pwrity  of  which  Dr 
Cariyle  has  not  the  smallest  donbt,  it  belongs  to  the  commanding 
officers  to  approve  of  it  or  not,  and  not  to  him  ;  bnt  perhaps,  on  being 


izecDy  Google 


654  HIS   P0UTIC8. 

better  infbrnied,  Ladj  Maxwell  msj  not  thick  it  necemary  to  emploj 
her  stadeat  in  theologj',  however  well  qualified  ehe  may  hold  him  to  be, 
to  iaterfere  officiously  with  the  duty  of  the  two  clergymen  of  mature 
age  and  aekaowledged  ability.  The  young  man,  at  leaat,  seemed  not 
to  abound  iu  prudence,  when  he  pressed  eo  earnestly  as  be  did  to  be 
allowed  to  Tisit  the  condemned  prisoners,  whom  two  clergymen  bad 
been  aniioUBly  and  diligently  preparing  for  their  fate  for  the  whole 
preceding  week. 

"Those  times  of  sedition  and  mutiny  seem  to  require  that  every  per- 
son in  office  should  be  left  to  do  his  own  duty,  and  ^lat  strangers  should 
be  cautious  of  intermeddling  with  the  religious  tenets  or  prindples  of 
any  BBt  of  people,  especially  those  of  the  army. 

"ifiutb.,Julyn,  179S. 

"  To  lady  Maxwell,  Dowsger  of  Pollock, 
"  atBoaemouut,  near  Edinbnrgh." 

If  there  be  sometbiog  a  little  incoDgruouB  to  the 
small  occasion  in  the  tone  of  this  rebuke,  it  will  per- 
haps be  admitted  that  there  is  something  sublime  in 
the  following  brief  testimony  to  his  principles,  de- 
Hvered  to  the  General  Assembly  in  1804 — two  years 
after  he  had  passed  his  eightieth  year,  and  one  before 
his  death ; — 

"  Note  of  what  I  s^d  (Assembly  1804),  when  an  address  to  hie  Ma- 
jesty was  read,in  which  was  an  ezptession,  t/itf  au;^(f4it«,or  theow/uJ 
sUuaCi/m  of  (Am  cmailry : — 

"  MoDBRATOR, — I  was  BO  uolucky  Bs  Dot  to  be  able  to  attend  the 
committee  who  drew  up  this  address,  and  consequently  have  heard  it 
now  for  the  first  time.  In  general  I  am  well  pleased  with  the  address. 
But  there  is  one  phrase  in  it,  which  has  just  now  been  read,  that  I 
do  not  like.  I  do  not  like  to  have  it  known  to  our  enemies,  by  a. 
public  act  of  this  Assembly,  that  we  think  our  country  in  an  awfnl 
state,  which  implies  more  terror  and  dismay  than  I  am  willing  to 
own.  When  the  Almighty  wields  the  elements,  which  are  His  inatm- 
ments  of  vengeance  on  guilty  nations— when  heaven's  thunders  roll 
and  envelop  the  world  in  fire — when  the  furiuus  tempest  rages,  and 
whelms  triumphiint  navies  in  the  deep— when  the  burning  monntaiu 
disgorges  its  fiery  entrails  and  lays  populons  cities  in  ashes ; — then, 
indeed,  I  am  overawed :  I  acknowledge  the  right  arm  of  the  Almighty : 


izecy  Google 


THE  CLEEKSHIP  QUESTIOK.  555 

I  am  &wed  into  reverence  and  fear :  I  am  still,  aod  feel  t!iat  He 
is  God:  I  am  damb,  and  open  not  my  month.  But  when  a  puny 
mortal,  of  no  better  materials  than  myself,  strata  and  frets,  and 
fumea  and  menaces,  then  am  I  roused,  but  not  overawed  ;  I  pat  mj- 
aelf  in  amy  against  the  vain  boaster,  and  am  ready  to  say  with  the 
high-priest  of  the  poet,  I  fear  Gad,  and  have  no  other  fear." 

The  year  1789  became  disagreeably  memorable  to 
Carlyle,  from  Lis  having  then  been  defeated  in  an  ob- 
ject of  ambition,  which  was  near  his  heart,  and,  as  he 
thought,  fairly  within  his  reach.  This  was  the  ap- 
pointment to  the  office  of  Clerk  to  the  General  Assem- 
bly, become  vacant  by  the  death  of  Dr  Drysdale,  in 
whose  appointment  he  had  been  largely  instrumental. 
The  salary,  £80  a-year,  was  an  object  to  a  clergyman 
of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  but  the  position  and  influ- 
ence towards  which  the  office  might  be  rendered 
available  were  of  far  higher  moment.  To  understand 
this,  it  is  only  necessary  to  keep  in  view,  that  the 
constitution  of  that  Church  admits  of  no  hierarchy 
or  gradation  of  offices.  Every  body  of  men,  acting 
in  a  collective  or  corporate  capacity,  must,  however, 
have  some  person  presiding  over  them  to  regulate 
their  proceedings,  and  represent  them  in  their  com- 
munications with  the  rest  of  the  world.  For  the 
preservation  of  the  Presbyterian  polity  from  the  en- 
croachments of  any  such  officer,  however,  the  "  Mo- 
derator," who  presides  over  the  proceedings  of  each 
Church  Court,  is  elected  periodically,  or  for  the  occa- 
sion. Permanent  appointments  are  given  to  subordi- 
nate officers  only,  and- each  Church  Court,  from  the 
General  Assembly  downwards,  has  thus  its  clerk,  who 


izecy  Google 


55C  THE  CLEEKSHIP  QUESTION. 

is  the  servant  of  the  collective  body.  It  will  naturally 
happen,  however,  under  such  arrangements,  however 
skilfully  devised,  that  where  one  kind  of  man  really 
is  what  he  professes  to  be,  a  servant,  another  kind  of 
man  becomes  a  master.  Hence,  it  is  often,  on  the 
occasion  of  such  appointments,  a  question  of  more 
consequence.  Who  can  be  kept  out^  than.  Who  can 
be  put  in? 

Carlyle  not  unnaturally  concluded  that  he  had  done 
services  to  the  Church  at  large,  and  to  many  of  its 
ministers,  which  entitled  him  to  expect  this  small 
recompense  at  their  hands. 

On  the  other  hand,  for  reasons  which  the  tenor  of 
his  Autobiography  reveals  with  sufficient  distinctness, 
there  was  a  large  party  among  the  clergy  determined 
to  do  all  that  their  strength  enabled  them  to  do  to 
defeat  him.  The  public  eminence  and  extensive  social 
influence  on  which  hia  claims  rested  were,  in  their 
eyes,  the  strongest  motives  for  resistance.  He  repre- 
sented what  to  them  were  hostile  interests.  These 
interests  were  as  yet  outside ;  by  endowing  him  with 
an  office  of  place  and  tmst  among  them,  they  would 
be  bringing  the  enemy  within  the  gates.  The  taking 
of  the  vote  was  a  great  field-day,  for  which  the  forces 
had  been  long  mustered  and  disciplined  on  both  sides 
— the  friends  of  Government,  with  Dundas  at  their 
head,  taking  the  part  of  Carlyle;  while  the  cause  of 
his  competitor,  Dr  Balzell,  was  led  by  Harry  Blrskine, 
the  great  jester.  It  was,  however,  a  question,  not 
merely  of  ecclesiastical  politics,  but  of  soundness  in 


izecDy  Google 


THE  CLERKSHIP  QUESTION.  557 

opinion  and  teaching,  and  on  this  matter  hia  enemies 
occupied  the  strong  position  of  professing  to  be 
sounder  in  faith  and  stricter  in  conduct  than  his 
fiiends.  When  such  an  element  as  this  affects  a 
contest,  it  is  sure  to  disturb  the  original  numerical 
strength  of  the  parties,  by  a  sort  of  intimidation. 
The  side  professing  greater  sanctity  frightens  its 
more  timid  opponents  into  a  compromise.  They  are 
afraid  of  bringing  on  themselves  the  suspicion  of 
heterodoxy; — they  are  often  conscious  of  something 
about  themselves  that  would  not  easily  endure  a  hos- 
tile scrutiny,  and  so  they  purchase  peace  by  compliance 
with  their  natural  opponents,  or  by  keeping  out  of" 
the  way :  so  Carlyle  found  it. 

The  vote  stood  at  first  145  for  Carlyle,  and  X42 
against  him,  so  that  he  was  elected  by  a  majority  of 
three.  He  took  his  place  as  clerk,  and  delivered  an 
address,  in  which  he  stated  that  it  had  ever  been  his 
object  in  ecclesiastical  courts  to  correct  and  abate  the 
fanatical  spirit  of  his  country, — an  allusion  by  no 
means  likely  to  mitigate  the  wrath  of  his  opponents. 
But  the  matter  was  by  no  means  decided.  It  had 
been  arranged  that  there  should  be  a  scrutiny  of  the 
foundation  of  each  voter's  right  of  membership,  and 
that  the  decision  of  the  Assembly  should  be  as  the 
relative  numbers  stood  after  the  bad  votes  were 
struck  out  It  was  as  if  a  division  of  the  House  of 
Commons  at  the  beginning  of  a  session,  should  stand 
subject  to  the  deduction  of  the  votes  of  all  the  mem- 
bers who  may  be  afterwards  found  by  an  election 


izecy  Google 


558  THE  CLEREaHIP  QUESTION. 

committee  to  be  unduly  elected.  It  would  be  useless 
to  describe  the  techoicalities  of  such  a  process;  but 
it  is  pretty  clear  that,  like  the  coutemporary  con- 
troverted elections  in  the  House  of  Commons,  there 
was  no  rigid  law  to  govern  it,  and  much  of  it  was 
decided  rather  through  casual  victories  than  the  appli- 
cation of  fixed  general  principles.  The  contest  was 
long  and  keen,  and  apparently  not  quite  decorous, 
aa  we  may  infer  from  the  following  short  account  of 
it,  in  a  very  moderatdy-toned  work — Dr  Cook's  hife 
of  Princi'pcd  Hill:— 

''la  cauvuBing  the  claims  o&  the  CommissioDa  to  which  objectioos 
were  made,  there  w&s  displayed  ingenuity  that  would  have  dooe 
credit  to  a  more  importimt  causa ;  but  with  this  there  was  mingled 
a  degree  of  violence,  unworthy  of  tbe  venerable  court  in  which  it  was 
exhibited.  The  debates  were  protracted  to  a  most  unusual  leo^fa, 
and  upon  one  occasion,  after  all  regard  to  order  had  beea  cast  aside, 
the  Modemtor,  with  unshaken  firmness,  exercised  the  power  which  he 
coDceived  to  be  vested  in  him.  He  turned  to  the  Commisaioner,  and 
having  received  his  consent  that  tbe  Assembly  should  meet  at  a  cer- 
tain hour  next  day,  be  adjourned  the  house.  Amidst  the  loudneHS  of 
clamour,  this  step,  which  none  but  a  man  of  courage  and  serve  would 
have  taken,  was  applauded ;  and  it  probably  was  useful  in  pnttiug 
eome  restraint  on  tbe  angry  passions  which  had  before  been  ho  inde- 
cently urged.  Previous  to  the  scrutiny,  the  Moderator,  having  been 
asked  to  declare  for  whom,  in  the  event  of  an  equality,  he  would  vote, 
he  replied  tliat  Ite  now  voted  for  Dr  Carlyle ;  thus  uneqiiivocaliy 
showing  whom  be  whs  eager  to  support,  although  he  might  have 
avoided  thus  explicitly  giving  his  voice  against  Mr  Dalzel,  for  whom 
he  had  a  high  esteem,  and  with  whom,  as  Professor  of  Greek,  be  bad 
maintained  sucli  kindly  intercourse." 

Carlyle  found  his  opponent  gaining  so  surely,  that 
he  abandoned  the  contest.  The  result  irritated  him 
at  first,  and  his  anger  was  naturally  directed  less 
against  his  avowed  enemies  than  those  who,  though 


izecDy  Google 


THE  AUGMENTATION  QDESTION.  559 

ranked  of  his  own  party,  had,  for  the  reasons  already 
explained,  voted  against  him  or  stayed  away.  But 
while  the  voice  of  his  friends  was  still  for  war,  to  be 
carried  on  in  a  new  Assembly  or  in  the  Court  of  Ses- 
sion, he  wrote  to  the  all-influential  Dandas,  recom- 
mending peace.  "Although  the  court,"  he  says, 
''should  sustain  themselves  judges — and  I  suppose 
they  would — yet  the  suit  might  prove  so  very  tedious 
as  to  render  it  totally  unworthy  of  aU  the  trouble, 
were  we  even  certain  of  being  victorious  in  the  end. 
Some  people  think  that  next  Assembly  may,  on  the 
ground  of  the  protest,  take  up  the  business  and  re- 
verae  what  has  been  done  by  the  last ;  but,  God  knows, 
this  is  not  worth  while ;  for  it  would  oblige  me  to 
exert  every  species  of  power  or  interest  we  have  to 
bring  up  an  Assembly  stronger  on  our  side  than  the 
last,  which  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  do,  as  our 
opponents  woiJd  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost." 
In  a  letter  to  Dr  Blair,  as  the  representative  of  the 
more  zealous  of  the  party,  Bundas,  while  explain- 
ing with  his  usual  practical  sagacity  the  impolicy 
of  continuing  the  contest,  says  —  "  If  Mr  C  were 
a  young  man,  and  the  office  X500  a-year  instead  of 
£80, 1  would  undertake  the  cause,  and  would  certainly 
carry  it ;  but  for  such  a  paltry  object  it  is  scarce 
worth  while  to  renew  such  a  disagreeable  contest." 

Two  years  later,  Carlyle  engaged  in  a  contest,  in 
which  the  clergy  as  a  body  were  on  his  side,  against 
the  landed  gentry  of  Scotland.  It  was  inaugurated, 
indeed,  in  1788,  by  Sir  Harry  Moucreiff  Wellwood, 


izecDy  Google 


660  THE  AUGMENTATION  QDESTION. 

the  most  distinguished  member  of  the  opposite  party 
in  the  Church,  in  a  pamphlet  called  "  Sketch  of  a  Plan 
for  Augmenting  the  Livings  of  the  Ministers  of  the 
Established  Church  of  Scotland."  Since  the  first 
deliberate  disposal,  after  the  Reformation,  of  the  eccle- 
siasticfd  property  of  Scotland,  there  existed  a  certain 
amount  of  revenue  or  rent  charge,  which  was  stamped 
with  the  legal  character  of  being  available  to  the 
Church,  while  it  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  land- 
owners, who  were  enabled  to  make  their  possession 
fully  nine-tenths  of  the  law.  Much  of  the  ecclesias- 
tical history  of  Scotland,  in  fact>  clusters  round  the 
efforts  made  on  onff  side  to  keep,  and  on  the  other  to 
take,  this  fund.  From  the  beginning,  the  zealous 
protesting  barons  who  had  got  possession  of  the  pro- 
perty of  the  old  Church,  when  desired  to  give  it  up 
for  the  purposes  of  the  new,  said  that  such  an  idea 
was  a  fond  imagination ;  and  in  the  same  spirit, 
modified  to  the  condition  of  the  times,  their  successors 
had  treated  all  efforts  to  enlarge  the  incomes  of  the 
clergy  out  of  the  "  unexhausted  teinds,"  as  the  chief 
substance  of  the  fund  was  technically  termed. 

In  the  General  Assembly,  Carlyle  adopted  the  tone 
that  the  Church  was  entitled  to  what  it  demanded  ; 
and  that  by  the  help  it  had  given — first,  in  establish- 
ing the  Hanover  succession,  and  next,  in  supporting 
law  and  order — it  had  well  earned  the  frank  assistance 
of  the  Government  and  the  aristocracy  in  securing 
its  rights.  The  following  passage  is  taken  from  one 
of  his  speeches  on  this  matter : — 


izecDy  Google 


THE   AUGMEMTATION   QUESTION.  561 

"  I  mnst  confess  that  I  do  not  love  to  hear  thin  Cliiirch  calletl  a  poor 
Church,  or  the  poorest  Church  in  Chruteudom.  I  doubt  very  much 
that,  if  it  were  minutely  inqnired  into,  this  is  really  the  £&ct  But, 
iodependent  of  that,  I  dislike  the  Uugu^e  of  whining  and  com- 
plaint. We  are  rich  in  the  beat  goods  a  Church  cau  have — the  lesm- 
ing,  the  mannera,  and  the  character  of  its  membera.  Tliere  are  few 
hrutchea  of  literature  in  which  the  luinisters  of  this  Church  have  not 
excelled.  There  are  few  subjects  of  fine  writing  in  which  thej  do  aot 
stand  foremoat  in  the  tank  of  authors,  which  is  n  prouder  boast  than 
all  the  pomp  of  the  Hierarchy, 

"  We  have  men  who  have  successfullj  eulightened  the  world  in 
almost  every  branch,  not  to  mention  treatiaes  in  defence  of  Christi- 
anity, or  eloquent  illuatrationB  of  every  brajich  of  Christian  doctrine 
and  morals.  Who  have  wrote  the  best  histories,  ancient  and  mo- 
dem I — It  has  been  clergymen  of  this  Church.  Who  has  wrote  the 
clearest  delineation  of  the  human  understanding  and  all  its  powers  1 
— A  clergyman  of  this  Church.  Who  has  nritten  the  best  syalem  of 
rhetoric,  and  exemplified  it  by  his  own  orationa  1^  A  clergyman  of  this 
Chorch.  Who  wrote  a  tragedy  that  has  been  deemed  perfect! — A 
cler;gyman  of  this  Church.  Who  was  the  most  profound  mathema- 
tician of  the  age  he  lived  in  }— A  clergyman  of  thia  Church.  Who 
is  bis  BDCcesBor,  in  reputation  as  in  office  1  Who  wrote  the  best 
treatise  on  agriculture!  Let  us  not  complain  of  poverty,  for  it  is  a 
splendid  poverty  indeed !    It  is  pavperUu  fecunda  viroram." 

The  Government  brought  in  a  bill  for  "the  Aug- 
mentation of  Stipends,"  but  they  found  the  country 
gentlemen  of  Scotland  too  strong  for  them,  and  it  was 
abandoned.  In  the  General  Assembly  Carlyle  took 
the  opportunity  of  dropping*  some  sharp  remarks  on 
the  ingratitude  thus  shown  to  the  Church,  and  did 
not  spare  his  friend  Dundas.  A  jocular  country 
clergyman  remarked  that  nothiDg  better  could  come  of 
sycophancy  to  the  aristocracy  ;  and  told  a  story  how 
a  poor  neighbour  of  his  own,  after  a  course  of  ser- 
vility, had  got  nothing  but  castigation  in  the  end, 
and  found  no  better  remonstrance  to  make  than  that 
which  had  been  addressed  to  Balaam — "Am  not  I  thine 
2  N 


izecy  Google 


562  COLLINS  3  ODE. 

asa,  npon  which  thou  hast  ridden  ever  since  I  was  thine 
to  this  day  1 "  The  allusion  took,  and  was  improved 
by  Kay  the  caricaturist.  The  Government  promised 
still  to  do  justice  to  the  clergy,  but  they  had  to  wait 
for  it  until  the  year  1810,  when  the  Act  was  passed  for 
bringing  all  stipends  up  to  a  minimum  of  £150  a-year. 
On  the  establishment  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edin- 
burgh in  1783,  Carlyle  made,  through  its  Transac- 
tions, a  very  acceptable  gift  to  literature.  Johnson,  in 
his  Life  of  CoUins,  referred  to  the  loss  of  an  ode  on 
the  Superstitions  of  the  Highlands,  which  Dr  Warton 
and  his  brother  had  seen,  and  "  thought  superior  to 
his  other  works,  but  which  no  search  has  yet  foimd." 
A  poem  so  wild  and  sweet — so  far  beyond  the  bounds 
of  the  conventionalities  of  the  day,  and  so  fuU  of 
imagery  drawn  direct  from  nature  in  her  highest  and 
most  wayward  flights — was  not  likely  to  be  quite  for- 
gotten by  any  one  who  had  seen  it.  Carlyle  remem- 
bered having  read  it  in  1 749  with  Home,  to  whom  it 
was  addressed,  and  John  Barrow,  who  had  been  one  of 
Home's  fellow-prisoners  in  Doune  Castle.*  After  a 
search,  Carlyle  found  tha  actual  manuscript  of  the  ode 
in  an  imperfect  state.  He  and  Heiuy  Mackenzie  set 
themselves  to  filling  up  the  la<;un<B,  and  presented  it 
in  a  complete  shape  to  the  Royal  Society.  Soon  after- 
wards the  ode  was  published  from  what  was  said  to  be 

*  Barrow  was  "the  cordial  youth"  referred  to  in  Ifae  concluding  stams. 
One  might  auppou  that  hewsa  the  same  "Barry"  whom  Carlyle  met  in 
London  in  1769,  also  one  of  the  fugitirea  from  Donne  (page  621).  But 
fnrmio,  aocoiding  to  Carlyle'g  letter  in  the  "Tnui8actirin8,"diedpaymarter 
of  the  foroea  in  the  American  War  of  1756. 


izecDy  Google 


COLLINS  S   ODE.  5C3 

an  original  and  complete  copy,  which  of  course  devi- 
ated from  the  other  on  the  points  where  Carlyle  and 
Mackenzie  had  completed  it.  This  copy  was,  however, 
printed  anonymously,  and  its  accuracy  has  not  passed 
unsuspected.  The  editor  of  Pickering's  edition  of 
Collins  (1853)  says:  "The  Wartons,  however,  had 
read  and  rememhered  the  poem,  and  the  anonymous 
editor  dedicated  the  ode  to  them,  with  an  address. 
As  this  called  forth  no  protest  from  the  WartonB,  it  is 
to  be  presumed  that  they  acknowledged  the  genuine- 
ness of  the  more  perfect  copy ;  and  it  has  for  that 
reason,  though  not  without  some  hesitation,  been 
adopted  for  the  text  of  this  edition." 

The  Royal  Society  version  has,  however,  its  own  in- 
terest on  the  present  occasion,  as  Carlyle's  interpola- 
tions a£Ford  some  little  indication,  if  not  of  his  poeti- 
cal capacity,  at  least  of  his  taste.  Here,  for  instance, 
is  the  concluding  stanza,  with  the  words  supplied  by 
Carlyle  printed  between  commas  : — 

"  AU  hail,  ye  Bccnea  tliat  o'er  mj  soul  prevail ; 

Ye  '  apacioua '  friths  and  lakes  which,  far  away, 
Are  by  smooth  Annan  fillpil,  or  p.vitoral  Tay, 

Or  Don'i  Tomantic  eprings,  at  iliatance  hail '. 
The  time  shall  come  when  I,  [Xirhapa,  ma;  tread 

Your  lovly  glens,  o'crfaung  with  spreading  broom. 
Or  o'er  your  atrctching  heatha  by  fancy  led : 

TbcD  will  I  dress  ODCe  more  the  faded  bower. 
Where  .Tohnaon  sat  in  Dnimmond'a  'social'  ahade, 

Or  crop  from  Teviot's  dale  each  '  ulaasio  flower,' 
And  moiim  on  Yarrow's  banks  'the  widowed  maid.' 
Meantime,  ye  poweta  that  on  the  plains  which  boro 

The  cordial  youth  on  Lothian's  plains,  attend  ; 
Where'er  Lc  dwell,  on  bill  or  lonely  muir, 

To  him  I  love  your  kind  protection  lead, 
And,  toncbed  with  love  Uke  mine,  preaerre  my  absent  friend." 


izecy  Google 


56i       ON   THE  SUP£BSTITI0N3  OF  THE  HIOULANOS. 

Here  is  another  specimen  of  the  interpolated  pas- 
sages : — 

"  'lis  thine  to  mng  hoiT,  framing  hidetma  BpelU, 
Id  Skye'B  lune  iaU  the  gifted  wimrd  'aits,' 
'  Waiting  in'  wintry  cave  'his  wayward  fits,' 
Or  in  the  depth  of  Uist's  daik  forest  dwell*."  * 

Scott  said  of  Carlyle,  that  "  he  was  no  more  a  poet 
than  his  precentor,"  a  rather  hard  saying,  about  which 
it  is  curious  to  consider  that  Scott  must  certainly  have 
had  his  mind  under  the  influence  of  the  passage  just 
cited  when  he  drew  his  own  seer  Bryan  in  the  Lady 
of  the  Lake — 

"  'Midst  groan  of  rock  ood  roar  of  itream 
The  wizard  waiti  prophetic  dream." 

It  is  observable  that  Carlyle's  interpolated  version 
has  considerably  more  resembluice  to  this  than  the 
other  has. 

We  find  Carlyle's  contemporary,  Smollett,  giv- 
ing him  credit  in  his  earlier  days  for  poetical  efforts 
which  cannot  be  traced  home  to  him.  Writing  in 
1747,  Smollett  says : — 

"  I  would  have  been  more  pnnctnal  had  it  not  been  for  (hwald  the 
musician,  who  promised  fVom  time  to  time  to  set  jonr  aonga  to  muaic, 
that  I  might  have  it  in  my  power  to  gratify  the  author  in  yoa,  by 
aendiag  your  productioas  do  improved.  Your  gay  catdiea  pleaae  me 
mnch,  and  the  IdmentatioaB  of  Fanny  Qardner  haa  a  good  dcAl  of 
nature  in  it,  though,  id  my  opinion,  it  might  be  bettered.  Oawald  has 
Bct  it  to  an  excellent  tune,  in  the  Scotch  style ;  but  as  it  ia  not  yet 
published,  I  cannot  regale  yon  with  it  at  preaent," 

Whether  the  "gay  catches"  were  of  Carlyle's  com- 

*  Id  the  other  version  it  stands — 

"  Tlfl  tbine  to  Ring  how,  fnualng  hldeoiu  ipelli. 

In  Sliye-I  Ions  Ills  tba  gUted  wIbM  iser, 

Lodged  In  tbt  vlntir  eiTS  with  tital  ■pent, 

Or  Id  Uig  depth  oT  Uirti  d«tk  fomt  dvclli.' 


oy  Google 


position  or  not,  there  seems  to  be  little  doubt  that  the 
ballad  of  "  Fanny  Gairdner  "  was  written  by  his  friend 
Sir  Gilbert  Elliot.  If  Carlyle  had  been  the  author,  it 
is  likely  that  some  trace  of  such  a  fact  would  have 
been  fonnd  in  his  Autobiography,  and  so,  perhaps,  of 
the  "gay  catches."  There  is  a  small  heterogeneous 
bundle  of  manuscript  verses  among  Carlyle's  papers — 
some  of  them  in  his  own  handwriting  and  some  in 
others.  They  are  all,  so  far  as  the  editor  is  aware,  un- 
known to  fame,  and,  on  consideration,  he  thought  it 
the  better  policy  not  to  meddle  with  them,  since  at- 
tempts to  settle  the  authorship  of  manuscript  litera- 
ture of  this  kind  are  apt  to  be  unsatisfactory, — the 
conclusions  adopted  on  the  most  subtle  critical  induc- 
tion, being  often  upset  by  some  person  who  has  been 
pottering  among  old  magazines  and  newspapers. 

It  would  have  been  extremely  interesting  if  Carlyle 
had  brought  down  his  Autobiography,  to  have  had  his 
remarks  on  the  new  literary  dynasty  of  which  he  lived 
to  see  the  dawn.  The  letters  written  to  him  show 
that  he  interested  himself  in  the  Lay  of  Oie  Last 
Minstrel,  and  in  Southey's  early  poems,  but  we  have 
not  his  own  criticisms  on  them.  The  following  on 
Wordsworth,  however,  is  surely  interesting.  It  is  in 
a  letter  addressed  by  Carlyle  to  "Miss  Mitchelson :" — 

"  I  mtiBt  tell  jon,  who  I  koow  will  Rjmpriibise  with  me,  that  I  wbb 
very  much  delighted  iodeed,  on  the  first  sight  of  a  new  species  of 
poetrj-jin  'The  Brothers,'  and  "The  Idiot  Boy,'  which  were  pointecl 
oat  to  me  by  Ciirljle  Bell,  as  chiefly  worthy  of  admiration.  I  read 
them  with  attention  and  wag  much  struck.  As  I  call  every  man  a 
philosopher,  who  has  seuse  and  observation  enough  to  add  one  fact 
relating  either  to  wind  or  body,  to  the  dirss  of  human  knowledge,  »o 


oy  Google 


666  THOUGHTS  ON   WOKDSffOETH. 

I  call  everj  man  a  poet,  whose  composition  pleases  at  once  the  imapna- 
tion  and  affecta  the  heart.  Ou  reading  '  The  Brother?,'  I  was  sur- 
prised at  first  with  its  Kimplicity,  or  rather  flatness.  But  when  I  got 
a  little  on,  I  found  it  not  only  raiHed  my  curiositj,  but  moved  me  into 
sympathy,  and  at  last  into  a  tender  approbation  of  the  eatviving 
brother,  who  had  discovered  such  virtuous  feelings,  and  who,  by  his 
dignified  and  silent  departure,  approached  the  subliuic  After  being 
so  affected,  could  I  deny  that  thia  waa  poetry,  however  simply  ex- 
pressed I  Nay.  I  go  farther,  and  aver  that,  if  tLe  narration  hod  been 
dressed  in  a  more  artificial  style,  it  would  hardly  have  moved  me 
at  all. 

"  When  I  first  read  '  The  Idiot  Boy,'  I  most  confess  I  was  alamied 
at  the  term  as  well  as  the  subject,  and  snspectetl  that  it  would  not 
please,  but  disgust.  But  when  I  read  on,  and  fouod  that  the  anthor 
had  so  finely  selected  every  circumstance  that  could  set  off  the  mother's 
feelings  and  character,  in  the  display  of  the  various  passions  of  joy  and 
nniiaty,  and  suspense  and  despair,  aud  revived  hope  and  returning  jay, 
tlirough  all  their  changes,  I  lost  sight  of  the  term  Idiot,  and  ofTerei] 
my  thanks  to  the  God  of  Poets  for  having  inspired  one  of  faia  sons 
with  a  new  species  of  poetry,  and  for  having  pointed  out  a  subject  on 
which  the  author  has  done  more  to  move  the  human  heart  to  tender- 
ness for  the  most  unfortunate  of  our  species,  than  has  ever  been  done 
before.  He  has  not  only  made  his  Idiot  Boy  an  object  of  pity,  but 
even  of  love.  He  has  done  more,  for  he  has  restored  him  to  his  place 
among  the  household  gods  whom  the  andents  worshipped." 

It  may  here  be  proper  to  say  a  few  words  ou  a 
matter  not  likely  to  have  been  directly  alluded  to  by 
Carlyle  himself — his  personal  appearance  and  deport- 
ment. They  are  of  more  than  usually  important  ele- 
ments in  his  biography,  since,  according  to  the  tenor 
of  some  traditions  and  anecdotes,  his  remarkable  per- 
sonal advantages  exercised  a  great  influence  both  on 
himself  and  others.  The  portrait  after  Martin,  en- 
graved for  this  volume,  represents  a  countenance 
eminently  endowed  with  masculine  beauty.  His  ap- 
pearance has  been  hitherto  chiefly  known  to  the  present 
generation  through  the  Edinhurgh  Portraits  of  Kay. 


izecDy  Google 


HIS   PERSONAL   AFPSARANCE.  567 

This  limner  had  the  peculiar  faculty,  while  preserving 
a  recognisable  likeness,  of  entirely  diresting  it  of  every 
vestige  of  grace  or  picturesqueness  which  nature  may 
have  bestowed  on  it.  In  this  instance  he  is  not,  how- 
ever, quite  successful ;  for  even  from  his  flat  etchings, 
the  "  preserver  of  the  Church  from  fanaticism  "  comes 
forth  a  comely  man  with  a  rather  commanding 
presence. 

Sir  Walter  Scott  has  left  a  colloquiai  sketch  of  him, 
which,  though  of  the  briefest,  is  broad  and  colossal  as 
a  scrap  from  the  pencU  of  Michael  Angelo.  He  is 
discoursing  of  the  countenances  of  poets ;  some  that 
represented  the  divinity  of  genius,  and  others  that  sig- 
nally failed  in  that  respect.  "  WeD,"  said  he,  "  the 
grandest  demigod  I  ever  saw  was  Dr  Carlyle,  minister 
of  Musselburgh,  commonly  called  Jupiter  Carlyle,  from 
having  sat  more  than  once  for  the  king  of  gods  and 
men  to  Gavin  Hamilton ;  and  a  shrewd  clever  old  carle 
was  he,  DO  doubt,  but  no  more  a  poet  than  his  pre- 
centor."" The  sitting  to  Gavin  HamUton  is  impro- 
bable. Had  Carlyle  been  accustomed  to  meet  this 
great  painter,  something  would  certainly  have  been 
said  about  him  in  the  Autobiography.  In  what  is  pro- 
bably a  variation  of  the  same  tradition,  it  is  said  that 
a  sculptor  accosted  him  on  the  streets  of  London  and 
requested  bim  to  sit  for  Olympian  Jove.  The  late  Chief 
Commissioner  Adam,  in  a  few  anecdotes,  called  The 
Giji  of  a  Grrandfather,  which  he  printed  at  a  press  of 
his  own  for  private  distribution,  says,  "  On  some  par- 

*  LoCRRUtT'a  L^e,  iv.  14fll. 


oy  Google 


&68  HIS   PERSONAL   APPEASANCE. 

ticular  occasion,  I  don't  exactly  recollect  what,  he  was 
one  of  a  mission  upon  Church  affairs  to  London,  where 
they  had  to  attend  at  St  James's  in  the  costume  of 
their  profession.  His  portly  figure,  his  fine  expressive 
countenance,  with  an  aquiline  nose,  his  flowing  silver 
locks,  and  the  freshness  of  the  colour  of  his  face,  made 
a  prodigious  impression  upon  the  courtiers;  but,"  adds 
the  Commissioner,  "  it  was  the  soundness  of  his  sense, 
his  honourable  principles,  and  his  social  qualities,  un- 
mixed with  anything  that  detracted  from,  or  unbe- 
coming, the  character  of  a  clergyman,  gave  him  his 
place  among  the  worthies." 

Besides  the  picture  engraved  for  this  work,  Martin 
painted  another  portrait  of  him,  far  more  ambitious, 
but  not  so  pleasing.  In  the  Autobiography  he  men- 
tions his  sitting  for  it,  much  as  Sheridan  spoke  of  his 
having  undergone  two  operations — the  one  sitting  for 
his  portrait,  the  other  getting  his  hair  cut  (p.  521).  Of 
the  completion  of  this  work  he  writes  to  his  wife,  on 
the  7th  of  April  1 770 :  "  My  picture  is  now  finished  for 
the  exhibition.  It  looks  like  a  cardinal,  it  is  so  gor- 
geously dressed.  It  is  in  a  pink  damask  night-gown, 
in  a  scarlet  chair.  Martin  thinks  it  will  do  him  more 
good  than  all  the  pictures  he  has  done."  Besides  the 
likenesses  by  Kay  and  Martin,  there  was  a  portrait  by 
Skirviug,  of  which  an  engraving—not  of  much  merit 
— is  in  the  hands  of  some  collectors.  In  an  undated 
letter  liOrd  Haddington  says :  "  I  am  much  obliged  to 
you  for  recollecting  your  promise  of  sitting  to  Rae- 
bum,  and  beg  that  it  may  be  a  head  done  on  canvass 
of  the  ordinary  size.    I  mean  it  to  hang  as  an  oma- 

DigmzecDy  Google 


HIS   FEB80NAL   AFFRARAKCE.  569 

ment  in  my  new  library,  and  that  size  will  answer 
best."  Accordin^y,  there  are  two  entries  in  the 
Diary:  "1796,  Mayl9. — Began  to  aittoRaebum  for 
Lord  Haddington."  "  9(/t  June. — Sat  with  Eaebum 
for  last  time.*'  A  letter  from  Lady  Douglas  (his 
old  friend.  Lady  Frances  Scott),  written  in  Feb- 
ruary 1 805,  a  short  time  before  his  death,  refers  to  a 
likeness  by  an  artist  who  was  living  within  the  past 
twelve  years.  "I  have  received  yoar  bust  fromHen- 
ning,  and  think  it  very  strikin^y  like ;  but  I  do 
not  think  that  he  has  quite  done  justice  to  the  pic- 
turesque appearance  of  your  silver  locks,  which,  *  in 
wanton  ringlets,  wave  as  the  vine  casts  her  tendrils.' 
If  I  have  time,  I  will  go  and  see  his  drawing  while  I 
am  at  Dalkeith." 

His  Autobiography  was  the  great  occupation,  and 
apparently  also  the  great  enjoyment,  of  the  concluding 
years  of  his  life.  He  began  it,  as  the  opening  an- 
nounces, in  the  year  1800,  when  he  was  entering  on 
his  seventy-ninth  year ;  and  he  appears  to  have  added 
to  it  from  time  to  time,  until  within  a  few  weeks  of 
his  death.  The  last  words  written-  in  his  own  hand- 
writing, which  became  very  tremulous,  are  about 
"  Lord  North's  having  become  Premier  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  year  1770  "  (p.  532).  The  few  remaining 
paragraphs  have  been  written  to  dictation. 

It  will  naturally  have  surprised  the  reader  that,  at 
so  advanced  an  age,  a  man  who  had  not  done  much 
in  early  life  to  give  him  the  facilities  of  a  practised 
composer,  should  have  written  with  so  much  vigour, 
eloquence,  and  point.    At  the  same  time,  the  sort  of 


izecy  Google 


670  THE  AUTOBIOGEAPHY. 

contemporary-like  freahnesa  with  which  he  realises 
scenes  over  which  long  years,  crowded  with  other  re- 
collections, had  passed,  looks  like  a  phenomenon  unex- 
ampled in  literature.  But  there  are  reasons  for  these 
characteristics.  The  editor  has  convinced  himself  that 
the  favourite  scenes  and  events  which  Carlyle  describes 
had  been  from  the  first  forming  themselves  in  his  mind, 
and  even  resolving  themselves  into  sentences,  which 
would  become  mellowed  in  their  structure  and  anti- 
theaia,  by  the  more  than  obedience  to  the  nonum^ue 
prematur  in  annum.  The  habit  acquired  by  a  clergy- 
man of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  who  had  to  preach  ser- 
mons committed  to  memory,  would  form  the  practice 
of  retaining  finished  pieces  of  composition  in  the  mind. 
This  view  of  the  literary  growth  of  the  work,  though 
originating  in  a  general  impression  from  its  whole  tenor, 
can  be  supported  by  a  few  distinct  incidents  of  evi- 
dence. The  chief  of  these  is  the  repetition  at  consider- 
able intervals  of  the  same  scene  or  anecdote,  in  almost 
the  same  words,  and  with  the  more  characteristic  Mid 
emphatic  expressions  identical.  Farther ;  there  is 
a  separate  manuscript  of  his  Autobiography,  down  to 
the  year  1735,  cited  In  the  notes  as  "  Recollections." 
These  were  written  at  different  times,  and  partly,  it 
would  seem,  before  he  began  the  present  work.  They 
were  prepared  for  the  amusement  of  his  friend  I^y 
Frances  Douglas ;  and,  expanding  into  rhetorical  deco- 
rations and  jocular  allusions — probably  intended  to 
enhance  their  interest  in  the  special  eyes  for  which  they 
were  destined — they  are  far  inferior,  except  in  a  few 


oy  Google 


THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  571 

passages,  to  the  corresponding  portion  of  the  Auto- 
biography. It  is  evident,  however,  that  they  are  siib- 
Btantially  the  same  material  inflated  for  the  occasion. 
In  fact,  the  amount  of  repetition  in  the  Autobio- 
graphy, and  the  absence  of  general  order  throughout, 
show  that  the  author  did  not  retain  the  full  faculty 
of  arranging  the  collection  of  finished  compositions 
stored  up  in  his  mind.  When  there  is  virtually  ver- 
batim repetition,  the  duplicate  of  the  passage  has  been 
omitted  in  the  printing.  But  it  was  impossible,  with- 
out depriving  the  work  of  its  racy  charms,  to  obliter- 
ate every  second  going  over  of  the  same  ground,  or  even 
to  group  together  the  dispersed  passages  which  bear 
upon  the  same  matter,  and  which  might,  had  the  author 
written  at  an  earlier  and  more  active  time  of  life,  have 
been  fused  by  him  into  each  other.  For  the  precision 
with  which  he  notified  dates  and  places  he  seems  to 
have  been  indebted  to  a  series  of  accurate  diaries. 
There  exists  at  least  a  succession  of  diaries,  from  the 
sojourn  in  London  in  the  midst  of  which  the  Auto- 
biography stops,  down  to  the  time  when  he  could  no 
longer  write.  It  is  likely  enongh  that  these  had  pre- 
decessora  ;  they  may  have  been  lost  sight  of,  from  his 
having  taken  them  out  of  their  repository  for  the  pur- 
pose of  consulting  them  in  the  composition  of  his 
Autobiography.  The  diaries  which  exist  are  of  the 
very  briefest  kind,  intended  evidently  for  no  other 
eye  but  his  own,  and  containing  no  more  words  or 
even  letters  than  might  be  sufficient  to  recall  to  me< 
mory  the  dates  and  sequence  of  the  events  of  his  life. 


izecDy  Google 


572  THE  MS.   OF  THE  ADTOBIOOEAPHY. 

Among  the  manuscripts  put  at  the  editor's  disposal, 
there  is  evidence  that  more  than  once  the  Autobio- 
graphy had  been  prepared  for  the  press.  Apart  fixnn 
changes  made  by  copyists,  the  author's  manuscript 
has  been  largely  tampered  with,  many  passages  are 
scored  out,  and  a  great  deal  has  been  doue,  no  doubt 
with  the  best  intention,  to  substitute  properly-turned 
periods  and  balanced  sentences  for  such  less  scientific 
composition  as  Carlyle  was  capable  of  achieving.  It 
fortunately  happened,  however,  that  except  in  one 
trifling  instance  mentioned  in  a  note,  the  original 
text  was  recoverable,  and  its  purity  restorable.  In  con- 
sidering his  responsibilities  in  the  matter,  the  editor 
did  not  think  that  he  was  entitled  to  deprive  the  world 
of  what  the  author  had  thought  fit  to  communicate 
to  it ;  and  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  public 
would  prefer  Carlyle's  own  style  under  all  its  weight 
of  Scotticisms  and  obsolete  idioms,  to  the  best  modem 
improvements  that  might  be  made  on  it.  The  editor 
consequently  made  it  his  task  to  restore  the  suppressed 
passages,  and  obliterate  the  improvements. 

The  existence  of  this  Autobiography  has  been  well 
known,  and  there  have  been  many  expressions  of 
surprise  by  authors,  from  Sir  Walter  Scott  down- 
wards, why  it  had  not  been  made  public.  Perhaps 
it  is  better  that  it  should  have  waited.  It  is  easy 
to  sympathise  with  a  reluctance  to  have  published 
some  portions  of  it  half  a  century  ago.  When  a  man 
leaves  behind  him  his  experience  and  opinions  as  to 
his  contemporaries  iu  an  outspoken  book — as  this  cer- 


izecDy  Google 


D£CLIHINa  YEAK3.  &73 

tainly  is — the  manuscript  is  apt  to  be  dismantled  of 
one  ornament  ^ter  another,  to  spare  the  feelings  of 
the  surviving  kindred.  In  -thia  way  records  of  indi- 
vidual conduct,  which  it  might  be  cruel  to  publish 
immediately,  are  lost  to  the  world ;  while,  if  they  were 
preserved  until  the  generation  liable  to  be  distressed 
by  their  publication  have  departed,  they  might  be  given 
forth  without  offence.  What  at  one  time  is  personal, 
irritating,  and  even  cruel,  becomes,  after  a  generation 
or  two  has  departed,  only  a  valuable  record  of  the 
social  and  moral  condition  of  a  past  period.  Though 
the  popular  expectation  about  such  records  is,  that  they 
only  exist  to  remind  the  later  generation  of  pristine 
times  and  departed  virtues,  yet  the  account  of  personal 
follies  and  vices  which  they  may  contain  have  their  own 
weight  and  value  as  part  of  the  history  of  the  period. 

While  he  was  struggling  through  increasing  years 
and  infirmities  with  his  too  long  postponed  task,  the 
last  and  greatest  of  his  domestic  calamities  overtook 
him  in  the  death  of  his  wife,  on  the  31st  day  of  Janu- 
ary 1804.  For  once  the  hard  brevity  of  the  diary  is 
softened  by  a  touch  of  nature.  "  She  composed  her 
features  into  the  most  placid  appearance,  gave  me  her 
last  kiss,  and  then  gently  going  out,  like  a  taper  in 
the  socket,  at  7  breathed  her  last.  No  finer  spirit 
ever  took  flight  &om  a  clay  tabernacle  to  be  united 
with  the  Father  of  all  and  the  spirits  of  the  just" 

All  was  done  to  brighten  his  few  remaining  days 
that  the  affectionate  solicitude  of  relations  and  dear 
friends  could  do.     His  nephew,  Mr  Carlyle  Bell,  was 


izecy  Google 


574  DECLIKING  YEAE8, 

all  to  him  that  a  son  could  be,  and  held  that  place  Id 
his  affection.  Besides  the  scanty  remnant  of  his  old 
contemporary  friends,  there  rose  around  him  a  cluster 
of  attached  followers  among  the  younger  clergy,  fore- 
moat  and  best  beloved  of  whom  waa  John  Lee,  the  late 
learned  and  accomplished  head  of  the  University  of 
Edinburgh,  who  has  himself  just  passed  from  among 
us,  well  stricken  in  years.  Addressing  his  good  friend 
Lady  Frances  at  this  time,  he  thus  alludes  to  hia  ne- 
phew and  Lee :  "  I,  who  have  now  acquired  a  kind  of 
personal  greatness,  by  means  of  the  infirmities  of  age, 
which  make  me  dependent,  have  by  that  very  means 
acquired  all  the  trappings  of  greatness.  For,  besides 
my  nephew,  who  is  my  governor,  nurse,  and  treasurer, 
I  have  got  likewise  a  trusty  friend  and  an  able  physi- 
cian, an  uncommonly  good  divine  and  an  eminent 
preacher — all  in  the  person  of  one  young  man,  whom 
I  have  taken  to  live  with  me."  He  then  touches  on 
a  matter  which  still  afforded  him  an  interest  in  the 
world — the  completion  of  the  new  church  for  bis 
parish.  It-s  slender  spire  is  a  conspicuous  object  for 
many  miles  around.  "  By  the  first  Sunday  of  August 
I  intend,  God  willing,  to  gratify  my  people  by  open- 
ing my  new  church,  if  it  were  only  with  a  short 
prayer  (for  Othello's  occupation's  gone),  when  I 
shall  have  been  57  years  complete  minister  of  this 
parish."  But  it  was  not  to  be.  Among  the  last  entries 
in  his  brief  diary  in  1805,  are,  "25th  July — John 
Home  and  Mrs  Home ;  27th — George  Hill  called 
going  east."    Next  day,  the  entry  is  "very  iU ;"  for 


oy  Google 


some  days  afterwards,  "  no  change ; "  and  the  last 
entry,  as  distinct  as  any,  is  "August  12th  and  13tb, 
the  same."  He  died  on  the  25th.  So  departed  one 
who,  if  men  are  to  be  estimated,  not  by  the  rank 
which  external  fortune  has  given  them  or  the  happy 
chances  they  have  seized,  but  by  the  influence  they 
have  imparted  irom  mere  personal  character  and 
ability,  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  remarlcablc  on 
record.  Bom  in  a  simple  manse,  he  remained  all  his 
days  that  type  of  humble  respectability — a  village 
pastor;  nor  does  he  seem  ever  to  have  desired  a 
higher  sphere.  His  lot  was  not  even  cast  on  any  of 
those  wild  revolutionaiy  periods  which  give  men  in 
his  position  a  place  in  history ;  nor  did  he  attempt 
any  of  those  great  ventures  for  literary  distinction  in 
which  many  of  his  comrades  were  so  successful.  It 
seems  to  have  been  his  odc  and  peculiar  ambition 
that  he  should  dignify  bis  calling  by  bringing  it 
forth  into  the  world,  and  making  for  it  a  place  along 
with  rank,  and  wealth,  and  distinction  of  every  kind. 
This  object  he  carried  through  with  a  high  hand  ; 
and  scarcely  a  primate  of  the  proud  Church  of  Eng- 
land could  overtop  in  social  position  and  inUuence  the 
Presbyterian  minister  of  Inveresk. 

He  was  laid  beside  his  long-departed  children  and 
the  faithful  partner  of  his  days,  in  his  own  churchyard, 
which  he  had  always  loved  for  the  beauty  of  the  pros- 
pect it  overlooks.  The  following  inscription,  composed 
by  his  friend  Adam  Ferguson,  was  engraved  upon  his 
tomb  : — 
