THE Society of Scottifh Antiquaries having, fome years ago,
done me the honour to name rne one of their corresponding members, I attempted to thank them by an Epift'e,, written in the ScotoSnxon dialed, which, until of rate, was the general language of all
the low lands of North Britain, and is ftill prevalent among the people of the north- eaft provinces.
The
¥hrce Scottlfh Poems, &2. 403
The gentlemen, who are now employed in preparing for the prefs
a voiume of their Tranfadions, have intimared a wifh that I would
confem to have rhat EpiuMe publifhed; to which I can have no objection but one, namely, that I think it hardly worthy of publication*
It was the hafty production of a very few leifure hours, when^ after
being exhaufted with the incredible labour of collating a Greek manufcript, i fat clown, towards rhe clofe of the day* to a folitary meal,
and amufed myfelf in trying how far I could give to the dialed! of
my native country an air of novelty and elegance> that might not
difpleafe even a critical Englifh reader.
It is my opinion, that thofe who, for almoft a century part, have
written in Scots, Allan Ramfay not excepted, have not duly difcriminated the genuine Scottish idiom from its vulgarifms. They feem,
to have acted a firnilar part with certain pretended imitators of Spencer. Shakefpeare, and Milton, who fondly imagine that they are copying from thofe great models, when they only mimic their antique
mode of fpelling, their obfolete terms, and their irregular conftruction. Thus, to Write Scottlfh poetry, (for profe has been feldnm attempted), nothing more was deemed neceflary than to interlard the
compofition with a number of low words and trite proverbial phrafes, in common life among the illiterate; and the more anomalous
and farther removed from polite ufage thofe words and phrafes were^
fo much the more appofite and eligible they were accounted. It was
enough that they were not found in an Englifh lexicon to give them
a preference in the Scottifh gloffary; nor was it ever once coniidered, that all words truly Anglo-Saxon were as truly Scoto-ijaxon
Words; and that every exotic term which the Engliih have borrowed
from other languages, the Scots had an equal right to appropriate.
In the mean while, grammatical -analogy and critical accuracy
were totally negleded. There Was no general flandard of either
E e e 2 orthoepy
404 Three Scottl/h Pofms, <&c. Three Scottifh Poems, 405
orthoepy or orthography; and every one adopted that mode
ling and phrazing which •* was good in his own eyes,"
Perhaps this inveterate" error is, at this day, fcareely worth the
pains of correcting. Few perfons of genius and learning will be inclined to write in the Scottifh dialect; and if any were inclined, they
could not look for encouragement or imitators. Men will ever follow thofe purfuits that lead to riches or fame; and' Scottifh compofition, either in profe or poetry, will neither fill the writer's purfe
nor emblazon his reputation,
Yet I cannot help fomefimes thinking, that the neglect of cultivating the Scoto- Saxon tongue has been attended with fome detriment to the Englifh language; that many words and phrafes of great
energy a-nd beauty are ftill preferved in the former which the latter
wants, and which all its borrowed treafure but imperfectly fuppliesj.
and that, if the Scots, remaining a feperate nation j with a. King and
court rending among them, had continued to improve and embellifh
their own dialect, inftead of fervilely aping the Englifh, they would
at prefent be pofleffed of a language in many points fuperior to the
Englifh.
That this may not he confidered as a* paradox, I will endeavour to
fupport it by proofs that appear to me nearly conclufive ; proofsdrawn from the hiftory and comparifon of the two dialects.
That the Englifh and Scottifh were originally but one language,.
is hardly queftionable. It was introduced into Britain by the AngloSaxons about the middle of the fixth, century, and, with their con-
,<juefts, foon fpread itfelf over all the fouthern part of the ifland, except whither the old inhabitants retired in bodies, and with their
own laws and cuftoms, retained alfo their Celtic dialect.
How
How long the Saxon remained in Britain, in the form in which it
was introduced, it is now impoffible to afcertain, for want of coeval
written monuments. Some Britifh words would naturally mix with
it, either from connubial affociadon or contiguous abode. The old
names of places (with perhaps fome little variety of pronunciation)
would be generally adopted; and, if there were any fcience, art,
ufage, implement of war or hufbandry, fpecies of food or raiment,
or any other thing peculiar to the Britons, or unknown to the Saxons, the Britifh appellation would probably be retained. In the
fame manner, though not perhaps in the fame proportion, would the
Britons borrow from the Saxons.
But, as their mutual friendship was not of long continuance, and
was fucceeded by mutual averfion, it is not in the leaft probable, that
the original genius and texture of either language received any confiderable alteration from fo fhort an intercourfe. Accordingly, the
people of Wales and Cornwall continued to fpeak the Celtic dialects
that were peculiar to them at the time of the Saxon iriyafion; and
the Saxons to ufe nearly the fame Teutonic dialect which they
brought from the Continent.
Some changes, indeed, may probably have been made in it by the
1
introduction of Chriftianity among them, through the medium of
Roman miffionaries. From thefe they certainly received their alphabet, and learned the art of writing, which they adapted iboner to
their mother tongue than perhaps any other barbarous nation. Their
mother tongue, if not a polifhed", muft, even then, have been a co^
pious language, as they could exprefs in it the myfteries, facraments^
and rites, of their new religion, which we fhall hardly find any o;hcr
converted people to have done. The miffionaries themfelves.very
wifely encouraged the cultivation of the Saxon among their new
converts, as the bed mean of fecuring their converfion. The laws o£
Edelbert,
4-65 Three Scotti/h Poems•,
Edelbert, the firft Chriftian King of Kent, were written in Saxon *.
In Bede's time, many of the cleigy knew no other language. This
we learn from Bede himfelf, in his letter to Bifh >p Kcgberct f. For
the fake of fuch, as well as for that of the laity, he tranflated into
English the Greed and the Lord's prayer J. This, indeed, (hows the
great ignorance of the clergy; but it alfo fhows that the Saxon wa»
then, and muft have been before, a wu'tten language.
It had been applied even to poetry. Caedmon, who died in 670,
turned almoft all the Scripture hiftory into Saxon verfe ; and fa
fweetly pathetic were his (trains, that he was, like all other great
poets, fiippofed to be infpired: No pollerior bard could rival him J.
It is much to be regretted that thofe poems of Caedmon are loft,
except a very fmall fragment, prelcrved in Alfred's tranfLtion off
Bede's Hiftory, and which may be feen there, or in the ^d volume
of Hickes's Thefaurus.
On the invafion of the Danes, towards the clofe of the ninth century, and their complete conqueft of the country in 1017, the Saxon
idiom
* Quae confcripta Anglorum fermone ha&enus habentur; Bide, lib. 2. chap. 5.
f Et quidem omnes, qui Latinam linguam le&ionis lifu didicerunt, etiam haec (fym*
bolum Apoftolorum et Dominicam orationem) oprime didicifle certiflimum eft : Sed
idiotas, hoc eft eos qui propriae linguae notitiam habent, haec ipfa (ua lingua dicere, aC
Fedulo decantare facito. Quod non folutn d; Laicis, /. e-. in populari adhiic vita conftitutis, verum etiam de Clericis, five Monacbis, qui Latinae fuht linguae expertes, fieri
oportet ; t-p\fl- ad EcgberElum Antift. et Smith, p-. 306.
Proptcr quod et ipfc multis faepe facerdotibus idiotis haec utraq^ue in linguam Anglorum trauflata obtulii
j| Et quidem, et alii poft ilium in gente Anglorum religiofa poemata facere tentabant s
Sed nullus cum aequij.arare potuiu Nam ipfe, non ab tominibus, led divinitas adju*
his, gratis canendi donum accepiti
Three Scotltfh Poems, 6v. 407
idiom was fomewhat altered, though not nearly fo much as Hickes
ana others would have us to believe. The Danifh, being originally
derived from the fame fource, readily incorporated itfelf into a fifter
dialect; and the wile, unviolent, conduct of Canute contributed not
a little towards this incorporation.
In this Dano-Saxon, we have a fufficient number of monuments
remaining to enable us to form a juft idea of its comparative value-,
with refpect to other languages of that age; and, impure as it may
be called, it will certainly bear the comparifon.
But the Norman Conqueft was like to be more fatal to the Saxon.
William, by a tyranny peculiar to himfelf, endeavoured to abolifh
the very language of his Englifh fubjects, and to fubftitute, all at
once, his own French jargon in it's ftead. French was the only
tongue that was tolerated at court; the laws were written in French -
French fchools were eftablifhed all over the country; and the Saxon
"was univerfally profcribed.
The Saxon, however, which has always been the language of
freemen, tenacioufly kept its ground, and in the end triumphed over
its imperious rival, although not without retaining the fears of many
Wounds received in the conflict.
This Normanic-Dano-Saxon is the prefent EngJilh tongue; but fo
much amended, amplified, and embellHhed, fince the revival of letters, that it is, conftfledly, one of the moft correct, moft copious, and
-jnoft energetic languages in the world *.
- , - ' .. - I*»
* A.good hiftory of the origin, progrefs, and perfection of Englifh profe Is yet wanting. The Rev. Mr Herbert Croft has allured me, that he has ample materials for fuch
4-o8 three Scettifh Poems, <&c.
Let us now inquire when and how the Saxon was firft introduced into Scotland ; what was its gradua l progress; and what were
its diftindive charadenftics at the union oi the two kingdoms under
one Sovereign.
If it were true, as fome modern writers have imagined, that lie
low-lands, or eaftern parts of Scotland, were-originally peopled by
German Goths *, this inquiry would be unneceflary,; and the Scottifh dialed would, in point of Briufli naturalisation, have a prior
claim to the Englifti; for thofe,parts of Scotland were certainly inJhabited by the Pids before the Saxons entered Britain.
But, that the language of the Pids was a Gothic diale£t, I-have
never yet feen any thing like a pofiuve proof; while, on the other
hand, we hav.e at leaft one very ftrong negative proof that it was not
a Gothic dialed!. The names of all the rivers, mountains, towns,
villages, and-caftles, of any note or antiquity, from Berwick-law to
Buchannefs, and from Buchannefs to Arder-Sier, are all evidently
Celtic. We muft, then, either fuppofe that the language of the Picti
was a dialed; of the Celtic ; or that they were not the original inhabitants of the country,; or, in fine, that, after the extinction of the
Pidiih empire, or rather its union with that .of .the Irifh-Scots, the
Janguagc
a work. May we not hope, then, that, when he has finifhed his prefent great pndertaking, (a complete Dictionary of the Englifh Language), he will apply thole materials
to their proper ufe ? .
* Mr Hume, in the firft edition of his Hiftory, had faid, "This cannot be doubfed,"
and added, that '" the language fpoken in thofe counties is a ftronger proof r.f this
" event, than can be oppofed by the imperfeft, or rather fabulous annals which 4re ob-
<
{
 truded on us by the Scottifh hiftorians." This feems to me an odd fort of argument.
By the fame mode of reafoning, I might prove, that the eaft of England was originally
peopled by Angles or Saxons. In the latter editions of Hume's Hiftory, this'paiTage is
not found.
Three Scrtlffi Poems> &c,.
language of thefe latter univerfally prevailed, and effaced the very
remembrance of its Gothic predeceflbr. The fecond of thefe fuppofitions is contrary to hiftory; the third is belied by experience: Ths
firft, then, is the only one that is founded on probability.
To this ftrong negative argument, we may add a fort of pofitive
prefumption. The names of the Pidifh Kings, and the few appellatives of their tongue, that have been preferved in Bede, and other
ancient writers-, feem- to be as much Celtic as the proper names of
places. I am perfedly aware, how deceitful are the arguments de--
rived from mere etymology : there is hardly any branch of literature that is liable to be more abufed. Still, however, a rational etymology is often of great ufe in diftinguifhing nations, and tracing
their remote origins; efpecially if corroborated by other probable
arguments j and we find that thofe even who affed to defpife it the
moft, have occaficnally recourfe to it, for the fupport of their owa
favourite fyftems.
Whether the Pidifh dialed were exadly the fame with that of
the Irifh-Scottifh, there is no certain criterion, by which we canjudge. I am inclined to believe that there was a fhade of difference j as great perhaps as there is between the Erfe of Arran- and
that of Uiil; but ftill it was a Celtic dialed; and more or lefs intelligible to all thofe who fpoke Celtic. The Aberdeen breviary
commemorates, on the 24th of Auguft, a Saint Er=chad, born, at Kincardine in Mearns, (confelTedly a part of the Pidifh kingdom) who,,
going to Rome, was confecrated Bifhop of the Scottifh, nation ; and;
on his return, pafTed through the provinces of the BRITONS andi
' SCOTS, preaching the word'of God; until he came to the place o£
his nativity. That is, as I conceive it, he preached to all the
CELTIC inhabitants in' his mother-tongue j but not to the SAXONS,
wbofe language he did not uaderftand. It is alfq.wor.ih remarking,
' 3 5"
Three Scottl/h Poems, 6'f.
that of about one hundred Saints names, of which the Scottish Calendar confifts/ there are only threej I think, that are Saxon j and
thofe three are pofterior to the tenth century.
Taking it for granted, then, at prefent, that the inhabitants of
Scotland received their Saxon dialect from England, I will try to account for its progrefs, and its peculiarities, the beft I can.
With regard to the more fouthern provinces, between the Tweed
and the Forth, we may eafily conceive, that the language of their
Engtiih neighbours, may have more or lefs been ufed by them, even
before the Danifh invafion. Ofwy,King of Northumberland, had, as
early as 650, made both the Scots and -Picts, in fome meafure, his
tributaries: and a great number of Englifh had fettled in the fubjected provinces. Jn 68 1, the Pidfes, as Bede informs us, had -an
Englifti Bifhop given them, who was under the jurifdiction of the
Bifhop of York, and whofe fee was Abercurnig (Abercorn) on the
banks of .the Forth*. Accordingly, in a fynod holden by Archbifhop Theodore in 685, we .find Trumwine defigning himfelf Epiffofus Piftorum. This, however, muft have been after his expulfion
from the fee, that fame year, in which the Fids, having defeated
Egfrid, who, though brother-in-laxv to their King,' had wantonly
invaded their territories, either killed or captived all the Englifh
who could not fave themfelves by flight, and fo recovered their former pofleffions, .which the EngHfh had ufurped f.
. As
* Pofito quidem in regione AngTorum, fed in vicinia freti, quod Anglorum terras
JPKftorumque difterminat. — Bede, lib, iv. cb. 26.
f Ex q-jo ternpore fpes coepit et virtus Anglorurn Sucre ac retro fublapfa referri,
Picti terrani pofTeflibnis fuae quam tenuerant AnsU—receperunt— • ubi inter plurimos
'Three Scottljh Poems, &>c. 411
As the Englifli domination had lafted only thirty-five years, it is
hardly ppflible that their language had fo far prevailed over that of
the natives, as to become the common, or even a current dialect among them : yet, as it was a polifhed and written tongue, while the
Piclifti remained in its priftine barbarity, it would probably belearned by the clergy and the better fort, were it only for the purpofe of diftinguifhing themfelves from the herd of the people. And,
as the Greek was firft propagated among the Romans, through
their Grecian captives*; fo might the Englifh captives be inftru^
mental in fpreading the Saxon among their Pidtifh mafters. For, as
Hume mod juftly obferves, * The fuperiority of civility and know-
* Jedge, however fmall, over total ignorance and barbarifm is prodi-
* gioust-'
How far, fbuthward from the Forth, the boundary between the
two nations was now removedj it is hard to fay ; though I am inclined to believe that a part of the prefent Northumberland,, and
perhaps of Cumberland,, was on the Pictifh, fide»
3 F 2r ' The
mos gentis Anglorum, vel interemptos gladio, vel fervitio adtfictos, vel de terra Pictorum fuga lapfos, etiam vir Dei Triimwinus,. qui in eos epifcopatum acceperat, receffit*
—Bede, lib. iv. chaf., 16.
.* Graecia eapta ferum viftorem cepit, et artes
Intulit agrefti Latio.—Horat, '•,.. '
f The number of thefe Englilh Haves or fervants was greatly augmented" in the
reign of Malcolm III. who, after ravaging the north of England, carried away fo>
many young, men and women captives, that fcarcely a village, or even hamlet, in Scotland, was to be feen without fome of them. "• Anno duodecimo Wiliieltni, Rex Mal-
" colm venit in Angliam, et praedavit in Northumbriam, ufque ad Tinam,' et multos.
K
 thefauros et homines in vinculis fecum duxit."—Annal. WaverL ad an. 1078. " Re-
" pleta eft ergo Scotia fervis et ancillis Anglici generis, ira ut etiani ufque hcdio, nulia,,
" non dico viilula,, fed nee domuncula fine his valeat iaveairc."—ffo.wafew. p. 45,2. e(L
Francaf,
4*2 fhree &cattijh Poems > <tyc.
The long eeffation of hoftilities, that enfued, muft have been attended with a conftant mutual intercourfe; during which the Saxon
would make nearly the fame progrefs in fupplanting the Celtic as it
has ever fince done ; and of which, even in our own days, I fhaU,
afterwards, have.occafion to obferve Tome remarkable inftances.
When Bede finiftied his hiftory, in 73-1, the PixSts lived in the
Eioft perfect peace and amity with their Englifh neighbours j and
had even adopted from them the Romifh difcipline, with refpedt to
the celebration of Eafter ; which the Britons ftill obftinately rejected : another ftrong prefumptive proof of .the prevalence of Saxon
ufages, and confequently pf the Saxon language: for ufages and
language are commonly communicated together.
This-peace between .the Picts and Englifli appears to have been of
long duration, and not to have, been grofsly violated .until .the reign
qf Edward .the Elder, who, in 924 (fays.the Saxon Chronicle);entered into Pictland as .far as .Badecanwyllan* j .near to which he
built and garrifoned a town, and received the homage of the Scott-iih Kingt, and of all the Scottifh nation. From this garrifon, undoubtedly compofed of Englishmen, would the Saxon make daily
encroachments upon the Celtic ; as we (hall'.always find ,it to have
done, on fi-milar pceafions.
'Whatever
•*,.Badecanwyllan is fuppofed by<Gibfoh.tp be Bakewell in Derbyfhire. But this is
altogether incredible. It muft have been a place, I think, in the heart of the Pictifli
territories, where there had been no town or garrifon, before this period; but which
was now neceflary to keep the Scots in awe. A garrifon in Derby (hire could .never
Lave anfwered that purpofe.
•)- This was Kenneth, who, either by conqueft or alliance, nnited the two .nations.of
Pifti and Scots into one kingdom, henceforward, to be denominated Scotland.
tfhrcc Scottifh Poemst
 . 413
f ^the Saxon tongue had hitherto been received by the
(Pidts and Scots, was untainted with any other-dialed!:, and moft pro-
:bably remained fo till after the Norman Conqueft. For it does
not appear, that the Danes, during their ftruggles with the Engllfh,
and their eventual conqueft of England, made any permanent fettlement on the north fide of the Tweed. Canute, indeed, once appeared with his army on the Scottifli borders; but it was only to enforce the homage of the Scottifli King for the dominions which he
:held of the Crown of England. .
It is not then until the reign-of Henry II. towards the year 1175,
that we can look for any material alteration in the Scoto-Saxon diak£t;'but, in that year, the Caftles of Berwick, Roxburgh, Jedburgh,
Edinburgh, and Stirling, were put into the-hands of the Englifh for
a.ftipulated time ; and the two firft were entirely and perpetually
ceded to England. As-far as the influence of thofe garrifons reached, it would give a Norman tinge to the Scoto-Saxon,; for the
JEnglifh of that period was ftrongly Normanized.
, But the reign of Malcolm'Kenrnore feems to have been the firft
period of a general denization of Saxon in Scotland. That Monarch had been bred in England, and married an Englifh Princefs.
Her retinue were all Englifti. Englifh, in confequence, would become the language of the Court. The courtiers would carry it to
their refpedtive homes ; their domeftics would be ambitious to fpeak
the language of their matters; and thus it would be gradually introduced into every fafhionable circle. Many Saxons likewSfe left
England on account of the Norman oppreffion, and very naturally
too'k refuge in the neighbouring country, where they had all reafon
to hope for a friendly reception. Commerce and intermarriages became now frequent between the two nations; and that chain of predifpofing,
414 Three Scottlfh Poems , <&<:.
difpofing caufes was begun to be forged* which has fince happily
united them into one kingdom.
Although, from what has been faid, ir may reafonably be fuppofed, that the Englifti had made a confrderable progrefs in the
fouthern parts of Scotland, even before the Norman Conqueft, it
would be unfair thence to conclude, that it had become the commoa
language of the people. On the contrary, it is my belief, that it
was yet but little known beyond the Forth, and hardly known at all
beyond the Tay. We learn from Turgot, that St Margaret was obliged to make ufe of an interpreter, when fhe would fpeak to her
Scottifh fubjeds* j and the King, who knew both languages, ufually performed that office. Indeed, we can hardly conceive it poffible, that the common people of the more northern regions fliould
have yet abandoned their vernacular tongue^ to adopt a foreign dialed. Their religion would partly ferve to guard them againft this
innovation. The-y had been converted ta.Chriftian-ity b-ylrifli. miffionaries, who fpoke the fame language with themfelves. Icolomkil
was the parent ftock, from which their whole ecelefiaftical oeconomy had 'proceeded.: From it they had "received not only their faith,.
but alfo their discipline. The Abbot of Hit was their fole Patriarch,,
to whom even their Bifhops were originally fubordinatef. Their
Saints, as it has been ohferved, were ail Irifla ; and the RomanSaxon ritual feerns not to have been fully eftablifhed among them,;
until the reign of David.
* Even to the Bi£hops convened" in council. See Turgot Fita S. Marg.. apud Bollandum.
•{• Habere autem folet Infula (Hii) Reftorem femper Abbatem, Prefbyterutn ; cujus
juri et omnis Provincia, et Spfi etiam Epifcopi, ordine inufitato, debeant efie fubje£li^ —
Sede, lib. Hi. <r. 4.
Three Scottijh Poems, <&'£.
Then, indeed, an inundation of religious orders, chiefly from
England, not only altered the form of their worfhip, but alfo greatly contributed towards the propagation of the Englilh language ajnongft them. The Ciildees (whofe morals were not the moft edi-
•fying, nor their learning the moft extenfive) were perfecuted and
>aboliflied ; Icolomkil was depredated and deferred ; and the newly
'Creded monafteries became the only reputable feminaries of every
•fort of learning. In them were educated the paftor and the prelate,
the lawyer and the gentlemen ; and each of thefe ferved as a vehicle
;to fpread the language of their Englifh teachers.
The attempts of Edward I. and- of Edward III. -on Scotland,
feem to have entirely banifhed the Celtic from all the coafts of
the .eaftern counties, as far as Buchan, and paved the way
for its gradual expulfion from the other parts of the kingdom.
{From the numerous garrifons which he placed in all the principal
towns and faftnefles, was the Englifli diffufled over all the Low-
•lands ; in the fame manner as it has, in latter times, been diffufed
over the Highlands, from the garrifons of Invernefs, Fort George,
iFort William, Fort Auguftus, Ruthven, -Braemar, CargarfF, &c. It
"began, foon after, to be employed in public deeds, in lieu of Latin; and,
in the reign of James I. our ads of Parliament Were written in it.
From this laft period, there are a fufficient number of printed
t>ooks and manufcripts, \vritten in the Scoto-Saxon dialed, to enable us to form ajuft idea of its component parts, and comparative
•excellence.
On analyfing the Scoto-Saxon- dialed, I find it compofed ; Fiift,
and chiefly, of'pure Saxon ; Secondly, of Saxcnized Celtic, whether Welfli, Pidifh, or Erfe ; Thirdlyj of Saxonized Norrriaa or
old French ; Fourthly, of more modern Frenc-h Scoticized;. Fifthly,
- ' -of
416 Three Scoltl/K Poems,
ofDamfh, Dutch, and Flemifh, occafionally incorporated j Sixthly^,
of words borrowed from the learned dead languages. It muft not
however be fuppofed, that all thefe are blended together in the fame
proportion in every Seottifh provincial dialect. The Welfh words
are principally to be found in the mere fouthern provinces, the
Pidifh and Erfe in the more northern,; The Danifh, Dutch,, and
Flemifh all along the eaftern, coafl, efpecially in the trading towns
and fifhing villages* : terms relative to the arts,. politenefs, and
luxury,, are moftly Frenchj and Greek, and Latin words are. rarely
to be found but in authors...
I now proceed to the laft part of my defign j, which is to fhew,,
that the Scoto-Saxon dialed was, at the union of the two nations,
equal in every refpe^t, in fome. refpeds fuperior,,to the Anglo-Saxoa.
diakd..
Three things feem to conftitute the perfection? or rather relative
fuperiority, of a-language : richnefs, energy > and harmony..
A language is-rich in proportion to the copioufnefs of its voea*
bulary; and this will principally depend, Firft, on the number cf
its .primitive or-radical words. Secondly, on the multiplicity of its
derivations and compounds. Thirdly, on the variety of its in-
•flexions.. Now to.me it appears, that in all, or almoft all, thefe refpeds, the Scottifh dialed, of the Saxon, has. fome advantage orer
the Englifh dialed, ..
As to primitives, there is no fort of doubt. All thofe contained;
in our beft Englifh lexicons- are to be- met with, in the Scottifh.
writers,
*• The inhabitants of the latter have, indeed, many words and phrafes, that appear
to-be peculiar to, them. Thqir intermarrying only among themfelves may be one caufc
af this*
Three Scotti/h Poems, &c. 417
writers, and are ftill ufed in the Scottiih colloquial dialeds, and
many hundreds, befides, which are not found in our lexicons ; but
which are as pure Saxon or Teutonic as any of thofe we ufe : not
to mention a confiderable number of Celtic and French radicals,
which, as • have already obierved, have been adopted into the Scottif'i nomencla tire ; without the leaft violence to the genius of the
language, or the fmalleft appearance of heterogeneoufnefs.
On the fame fide is alfo the fuperiority arifing from the multiplicity and multifarioufnefs of. derivatives and compounds*. It is
true, indeed, that neither the Scots nor the Englifh are extremely
rich in this particular : ftill, whatever fuperabundance there is, belongs evidently to the former; In the richeft of all languages, that
of the Greeks, one copious fource of wealth is the great number of
terms that diminifh, augment, or modify that primary idea ; and it
was the great ambition of the beft Latin writers to rival them in
this point. For inftance, from the Greek «»»$«*••« a man, we find
the following diminutives «»»««"•«•»> «'«e«r«e<.», anj «r«g«*-«n».; - which the
Latins tried to imitate by their bomulus, homuncio. and homunculus.
So from *»{» a girl, come *«?«'» *«j««-««r, KO^KH, ««g<e-x» ant| ««gi™i»». for
which the Latins have only pupa, fuel/a, and puellula. It is incredible
what variety, what imagery, and what fweetnefs arife from the proper ufe of fuch diminutives. The well known ode of Adrian to his
dying foul fhall lerve as an example,
Anitnula vagula, blandula! ., . >-..
Hofpes cotnefque corporis!
Q^iac nunc abibis in loca
Pallidida, rigida, nudula,
Nee, ut foles, dabis jocos.
The
* I join thefe together, becaufe it is not eafy t* diftinguifli them. Perhaps, to
fpeak more properly, every derivative is a compound; although in thofe members of a
3 G word,
fhree Scottijh Poems, 6*<r.
The Greeks and Latins not only modified their terms by diminutives, but alfo, though not to fo great an extent, by augmentatives.
Thus, the former called a man with great lips »«*»' from *«<*<>«< a
very rich man »^«»T*| from »*«»«*» &c. So, likewife, ihe latter had
the labro, najb, capita <&c. Hence it is that the Italians, not without realon> boaft of their language, as being the moft copious and
expreffive of modern tongues, and ase wont to give, as an inftance,
the word capello\ from which they have the diminutives capelletto^
capellim, capelluccio, of which the laft two exprefs prettmejs likewife, and the augmentatives cafellone, cap.ellacciot
 of which the laft
brings alfo the idea of uglinejs.
But the Scots feems toe be richer, at leaft m diminutives* than the
Italian ^ and to equal the Greek itfelf. For the word equivalent to
tapello may be diminutively modified after all the following manners. Hat, batty,, hattik, hattiky^ hattiken,* : ner are thefe ufed
indifcriminately> any more than capellettQ. and
Nor were the Scots entirely without augmentatives. Thefe were
formed by adding urn to adjectives, and. o fo fubftantives ; &s grea>-
t.um, goodum^ heado, mano. It is true, they are both become obfolete : yet it is not many years ago, iince 1 heard a farmer's wife
laughing heartily at her neighbour, for calling a horfe o£ a middle
fize a horjje / " He is more like a horfo" laid fhe.
It
irordi which w,e call iafeperable particles, the original meaning isfometimesTo oWture. as
not readily to be perceived, nor eafily afcertaihed. But we are accuftomed to call thofe
words derivatives, which have-feme fuch particle added'; and compounds, fuch as haveit prefixed to them. Thus un-true is called a compound ; but truly.* derivative.. Yet
Iff is only the abbreviation of like or--lickt
 and true-like is as much a, compound as «««
true.
* So- correfgonding to;the Greek examples, txan^tnanny, ntaatiikj mauttify, and
sikift;, kfs, lajy, laffik, lotf'ty) aad la
Three ScottiJJj Poems, &c. 419
It has been remarked by Grammarians, that the Latins, in order
to make their common diminutives ftill more diminutive, fometimes
prefixed the words pawns, minuttis, 8cc. as parva munufctila, tninutae interrogatiuncuiae. So the Scots, a little manikin^ a wee rwijikin)
and a ives-ivee babiky, &c.
With regard to the variety of compounds, both Englifh and Scots
are greatly defective, compared with fome other languages : but the
former, 1 think, is more fo than the latter. When I fpeak of compounds, 1 mean not here, fuch as we have adopted from the Greek
and Latin, as philofophy, mathematics, confecration^ concurrence, &c,
but fuch as are made up of two or more Saxon terms, whether feparable or infeparable, as man f e rvant, maid -fervant,Jlone- cutter, heedlefs, childi/h, untoward, godlike, unjuftly, loathfome, <&c. In all
thefe and other fimilar combinations, the Scots is equally rich with
the Eriglifh, and has in fome of them a variety of forms unknown
to the Englifh. Thus we ufe either ty or tith, as poverty and poortith^ rarefy and raretith ; dam or rikt
 as kingdom and kingrik ; ly of
fum, as ugly or ugfum ; un or tv an, as unlucky, wanchancy, unhappy t
VDanwierdy* And this laft mentioned particle is ufed not only with
adjectives, but alfo with fubftantives ; as ivan-refly wan-hope, wanworth, wan- thrijt, wan-heilt
 wan- thank *,
Of inflexion there is nearly the fame (that is very little) variety,
in both Scots and Engliith. Here we equally feel our wants ; and
the more fo, as 'there is little hope of their ever being fupplied.
How our forefathers could abandon the principles of Saxon gramiiiar, to adopt thofe of one fo inferior to it, is certainly matter of
aftoniftiment ; but fo it is. I am inclined to believe that the authority of Chaucer contributed not a little towards completing this re3 Q z volution
* We have ftill fome veftiges of this fort of combination in Englifh } as untruth,
unreft
420 Three Scotti/h Poems,
volution in Englifh literature: for in Wiclef, who preceded him but
a few years, we find many traces of pure Saxonifm. Some of thefe
the firft Scottifh writers retained ; and many more of them, not half
a century ago, were employed in common fpeech. On the whole,
the iafle6\ions of Scottifli grammar were more varied, and lefs anomalous than thofe of ringlifh gra nmar ; as any one may convince
himJelf, by reading Douglas's Virgil, or the admirable Cathechifin of
Archbifhop Hamilton, of whach I ihall have occaiion to fpeak afterwards.
The fuperior ENERGY of a language (independent of peculiarity
of ftilst ffems to confilt in this, that it can exprefs the fame ientiinents in fewer words, and with fewer fymbols, than any other:
and this, 1 apprehend, is the juft boaft of the Englifli. Our numeyous monofyliahles, rough, rigid, and inflexible as our oaks, are capable of fupporting any burthen ; whilft the polyfyllables of our
fouthern neighbours, tall, fmooth, and flender, like the Lombardy
poplar, bend under the fmalleft weight. From this, no doubt, arifes
the confefled fuperiority of our poetry ; efpecially of the higher
kinds, the epicandtragic. This, alfo, gives a peculiar ftrength to
our apophthegms, and to every fort of compolition, where itrength
is a chief ingredient.
It would be .ridiculous to attempt a general comparifon between
the Scottiih and Engliih poetry: it would be comparing a iVnall
grove to a'n immenfe foreft : yet in thofe kinds of poetry which the
bards of Scotland chiefly cultivated, ihe hiftorical, allegorical, and
fatyrical tale., and the tragic and comic ballad^ I would engage to
pick out, of the few of their compofitions that remain, feveral pieces
in!every refpect equal, in energy far fuperior, to any contemporary
Englifh production. Nay, 1 know not if, in any language whatr
ever, a more energetic compofuion can be produced than the wellknown
Three Scotti/h Poems, 421
known ballad of Hardinknute. It confifts almoft entirely of radical words. In 776 lines there are not above ten trifyllables, and
four of thefe are proper names*.
Although harmony and energy be not altogether incompatible, it
is certdin that they ar
e never found in the fame proportion in the
fame language. Mufcular ftrength and lovely fymmetry are rarely
conjoined: Adonis is not a Hercules, nor Venus a Fhaleftris. The
languages allowed to be the mod harmonious, are the Greek and
lalian ; and the nearer any other approaches to their genius, the
more harmonious it is accounted. In this fcale of eftimation, the
Englifh (like all other northern dialeds) is far from being high»
Its hifling founds, its clufters of uncoalefcing confonants, the little
variety of its inflexions, and the paucity of its polyfyllables, are all
againft its harmony ; and it requires much art and labour in the arrangement of words and leniences,, to make it in any degree melodious.
If it now be alked, whether of the two dialects, the Scoto-Saxor^
or the Anglo-Saxon, I think the leaft unharmonious ; I readily give
Hiy fuffrage, fuch as it isr
 in favour of the former.. For,
Firft, in the Scoto-Saxon dialed, there are fewer hilTing; founds-.
Theft rarely occurs, its place being generally fupplied by s fmgle ;s
, bas, polls, peris., punii, dcminist
 preadmonis, forjhall, bujh,
y perifh. puni/h. deminijh, prtadmonifh. In like manner is the
s itielf, whether fmgle or double, excluded from the Scots, by a
different and often more regular derivation of verbs from the Latinu
For,
* I am well aware that Hardinknute is a modern.production ; but it is fo perfeft an
1
imitation of the beft bcottilh competitions, that it may fairly ierve as an example of
their excellence.
422 Three Scotti/b Poems, &e*
For, whereas the Englifh verb is chiefly derived from the lupine ;
as to fxprefs, deprefs, -compre/s, txpofe, dcpofe, compofe ; the Scots is
formed from the prefent or infinitive, as to expreme, depreme, compreme, expone, depone, compone ; although the other fort of formation
is alfo occafionally ufed.
Secondly, There are not, I mean there were not formerly, in the
Scots fuch harfh combinations of confonants, as in the Englifh bt,
ft, If, Ifth, Im, mn\ net, ng, ngth, pt, mpt, and the like, which, though
in the Latin, whence they were derived, they had nothing difagreeab!e, becaufe they were never final, and could be disjoined in fylla~
bication, cannot certainly, as terminations, be pronounced without an
effort by an ordinary tongue, nor heard without pain by a delicate
ear* All thofe founds the Scots avoided, either by retrenching the
laft letter, and fpeaking and writing neglek, fel', t-wel, precink, deCerp, temp, til, &c. for-neglefl,jelf, twelve, precinfi, decerpt, tempt,
kiln; or by an elifion of the prior confonant, with or without a
change of the preceding rowel ; as perfet, and perfyt, folen, flown,
&c. for per/eft, folemn, m&jloln ; or by changing the fyllable altogether, as in -all the active participles in ing ; which in Scots, ter>
minate in and* ; as docmd, fayand, Jlytand, bytand, &c. And even
here the final d was frequently cut off by writers, and never heard
in fpeech. .
. ' " ! ' ' f ' • - I , *• ' '. •
Thirdly, the Scots, in borrowing words from other language,
feem to have paid a jtift attention to the nicer and lefs difcernible
(hades of found (if I may fo fay), in the commutation and arrangement of confonants, generally preferring the fofteft of the fame
clafs, or thofe that coalefced the mdft readily with the following
letter. Thus they faid dejcryv, luf, haiftoptene, obli/tt; for defcribe^
love,
* Or in ant. This latter ieems to be preferable.
Fhree Scotti/h Pbems, &r, 423;
love, have, obliged. For the fame reafon they frequently
changed the place of the liquids, particularly of r, and for third^
thirty^ tbirft, jirft, dirt, tvart; faid thrid, thritty, thrift, frijl, drit\.
ivrat. The found which we now exprefe by tb, and which almuii
all other nations, except the Spaniards, in vain attempt to utter, was
changed by the Scots into d or dd, or, to fpeak more properly, they
retained the ancient Saxon and Teutonic found and fymbol d\ which
the Engliih have changed into tbt
 s&fader, moder, brodery. bidder*
quhidder*
Fourthly, it is my opinion, that even the vowel founds that pre-»
dominate in the Scottim diale&j are of themfelves more harmonious,
than thofe which are the moft prevalent in Englifli. Thai the open
@r broad #, for example^ is one of the moft harmonious vocalfounds, is clear both from its being the moft common, in almoft all
known languages, European, or Afiatic, from the Italian to the
Hindoo. Yet this found very rarely occurs in Englifh, but in Scots
is'extremely common, even now, and was formerly- ftill more for
Not only did ii take place of the Englilh open fliort a; as in grafst
hand, man, tnafs, <&o. but even of the long flender a as in Jamer
dame^ fpakt, awake, brake^ take, nation, confideration, <&c. , It was
alfo retained in a number of Saxon words, in which we have gradually changed it into o long, asjhaw, knaiv% craw, blaw^ thrawr
fQtJhoiv, knoiv, cro!wy bloiv, tbroiv, &c.
Neither will it be denied, I think by any, but perhaps an Englifliman, that the Italian *, equivalent to our ee, is a more harmonious found than the Englifh i long.. The Scots, accordingly, prefer*
red the former, as in the words admit<?, retire live, furvrve, require,.
&c. which they pronounced, as it they were written admcer, rcteerr
lesvetfurveeve) requeer..
I know
42.4
Three Scottifh Poems^
1 know not if I fhould rank among the peculiar charaden (lies of
the Scottifh dialed, that it loves to place the emphatical accent on.
the laft fyllables of words, or as near to the laft Syllables as it is poffible ; becaufe it appears, not only from Chaucer, but from bhakefpeare, and Spenfer, that there'has latterly been made a confiderable
change in EnglUh accentuation : nor will i pofitivdy affirm, that
the placing of the accent on the lafl fyllable conduces to harmony.
This much, however, I will venture to fay/ in every fort of iambic
meafure, (in which moft of our poems are compofed) the prefent
Soottifh and ancient Englifh mode of accenting couuibutes not a
little to facility in verification.
There is, indeed, one found in the Scotrifh dialed, which muft
appear highly difagreeable to an Fnglifh, French, or Italian ear*, I
mean the guttural ch. Yet, tha' this was an ancient Saxon found, is
hardly to 'be questioned, as it (till prevails in all the other I eutonic
'dialeds. It may be alfo obferved in its favour, that the roundtnouthed Greeks themfelves were fo far from deeming it harfh, that
they frequently combined it with other contonants, efpecially the
liquids*- '»e- as in x**/*^! %'<">> x««,"«J and even in the lemi-guttural',
as in *'«"• Nothftanding all this, I muft confefs, that it appears to
me, even who was early accuftomed to it, an unpleafant lound ; efpecially when it is pronounced with a German or Arabic emphafis,
which the throat muft labour as much to produce, as the tongue to
produce the found of th. Be this as if will, it is certainly a veryfrequent found in the Scottifh tongue ; and is by the Scots, Germans. Swedes, Danes, and Dutch, confidered as having nothing
harfh in it; and that at any -rate it is not fo harlh as k. The truth
. >is,
*•'
* It is remartable that of all the fouthern European nations, the Spaniards only acknowledge this found ; which they exprcfs by x ory, This.feems to be a part of thew
Moorifh inheritance.
Three Scottifh Poems y &>c. 425
is, or at leaft fo to me it appears, that it may occafionally become a
'beauty in the hand of an orator or poet ; who might ufe it to paint
ftrong rough images, and make the found an echo to the fenfe. In
this refped it has been admired even by a French critic, in the following lines of Homer :
Ai ft.it
•%I<TII i; an/ton. On. IX, 71.
which Pope has endeavoured to imitate by
Now here, BOW there, the giddy fhi ps are born j
And all the raffling Jhrouds in fragments torn,
Will the reader pardon me for aiming at a Scottish verfion.
Headlong the {hips are driv'n ! Thick thuds of wind
In threes and fours the faugbandfails refcind!
If the words threes and fours be pronounced with the deep northern
guttural found chrees, fouhrs, the.gh infoughand as the Greek ^/;
and refctnd as it were written rejhiud (ali after the Scottifh pronounciatipn) I flatter myfelf that there will be found a feeble imitation of the original. So might a Scottifh bard avail himfelf of fuch
words as dochty (doughty) maucht (might) roch (rough) fich (figh)
teuch (tough) with a better effed, I think, than would be produced
by their Englifh equivalents. May I be permitted to quote one of
my own lines as an example ? It is the i8th of the tranjQation of
Virgil's" firft eclogue j where I have endeavoured to exprefs the
great difficulty which poor Melibeus had to drag along his goat, by
a word which, if I am not greatly deceived, has no match in
Englifli:
« And en, this en I drekhli drag alyv!"
H h h , There
426 Three Scottijh Poems,
There is yet one thing, in which the dialects of the two nations
may be compared ; namely, their peculiar mode of fpelling the
fame words. This, if I had more leifure, would afford me ample
room for philological difcuflion. As it is, I muft be contented with*
making a few obfervations.
Perhaps there never exifted a nation, which had a confident and
uniform orthography; or, if it were fo at firft, it did not long fo remain. Of the moft ancient Greek and Latin manufcripts, that have
efcaped the wreck of time, there are not any two copies of the fame
author, in which the orthography is entirely the fame : and al^
though, fince the invention of printing, much pains have been employed to reduce both thofe dead languages to fome fort of orthographical fyftem;, it is, at this day, far from being'a fettled point,,
which is the beft orthography* :
With refpeft to Hying tongues, the variety is, and muft be, muchgreater. In the fpace of alrnoft every century,, there are many
changes made in the pronounciation; and this naturally leads to. a
change in orthography. So that, fuppofing the firft writer, in .every
language, to have had the forming of his own alphabet, and to have
fo happily adjufted founds and fymbok, as that in the latter there
was at firft, neither deficiency nor redundancy ; it is impoflible that
this perfect confonance could be of any long duration. But the firft
writers, at leaft in modern tongues, had not this advantage. They
were obliged, or chofe to adapt the Latin alphabet to their vernacular founds; in the fame manner that the Latins themfelves had
adapted the Greek, and the Greeks the Phenician alphabet.
But as there might be, and generally were, founds in the vernacular tongue, which no letter or combination of letters in the Latin
alphabet could exprefs j an approximation was all that could be obtained j
Three Scotti/h Poems, <&c. 427
Sained ; unlefs new characters fhould be invented to fupply the defect. This was fometimes attempted, but did not remove the difficulty. The new character remained ; but the found which it at
firft represented, varied like its parent wind. A few examples will
illuftrate this.
When the Spanifh, formed out of the Latin, began to be a written language, they very naturally adopted the Latin alphabet, and
moft probably found it adequate to the pufpofe. Let us fuppofe
then, what is extremely probable,. that the Latin wordj/b//c/«j, was
according to the genius of their tongue changed mtojbliqfo. In
that cafe, the Latin letters would perfectly exprefs the found. But
when the Moprifti gutturals began to predominate hi the Spanifh
language, the letters^. o.Li. o.f. o. no longer exprefled the founds
which they reprefented ; hence writers were under the neceffity of
fubftituting the guttural afpirate b, for the labial afpiratey"; and the
deep guttural ^ (reprefented by,;) for the liquid /;'; which .produced
the word hojofo.
•In like manner it is fcarcely to be doubted, but the Italians at firft
\viotejagitta; for the hard found of g was as familiar to the northern nations who corrupted the Latin, as to the Latins themfelves.
But, in procefs of time, the found was foftened ; andfagitta no
more exprefied it;: ;fo that the word is now \vrhten fdetta.
So the French in&itre, and the Englifh mafter^ were, doubtlefs, originally magifter; the French evequeand the Englifh hi/hop as certainly ««•««•*«*•! and the French and Englifh beau was bellus. It is
not the leaft curious and entertaining part of etymology, to trace
fuch words up to their roots, and to obferve by what various gradations they have been metamorphofed into their prefent form. In
magiftcr, for inftance, the firft change that happened was in the
H h h 2 found
428 Three Scottijh Poems,
found g, which', when it ceafed to be hard, muft be exprefled by a
fofter element; hence mai'ijler. As this produced a fort of hiatus,
one of the i. i. was foon ejected ; this left mdijler. In time the s
ceafed to be heard ; k was therefore excluded, and the word matter
arofe ; and by a tranfpofition of the e, the prefent maitre: which,
after all, does not exprefs the prefent found of the French word in
any other pronounciation but their own and ours. For an Italian
and a Spaniard would pronounce it maiveetre, and a German
mytre*. The whole French orthography is equally imperfect, notwithftanding the pains that have been taken by their academy to
render it a model.
It has been long the fate of England to be influenced by French
ufages. The Normans firft corrupted our language, and from the
more modern French we have adopted a very erroneous orthography. Our alphabet is at the fame time both deficient and redun*
dant. We are obliged to combine, letters to denote fimple founds,.
a"nd we denote compound founds by fingle letters ; the fame letter,
or combination of letters, reprefents different founds ; and the fame
found is reprefented by different. letters and combinations : we have:
*
founds which none of our letters or combinations of letters can exprefs ; and'our letters, and even the combinations of our letters,
have often no found at all. AH this is fo evident, that exemplification feems unneceflary. Nor is there any well grounded hope of a
reformation. At leaft, thofe who have, from time to time, attempted it, have been, only laughed at for their pains; from the ingenious
Sir Thomas Smith, down to the ingenious Mr Elphinfton. Yet
furely
* To exprefs the found reprefented by maitre, there fliould be only four elements
or letters ; and four letters, which fhould not reprefent any other found. The Oriental
orthography, which European prejudice has reprefented as fo imperfeft, is far more perfeft than any of ours.
Thref Scottijh Poems, 4*9
furely it were a defireable thing, that orthoe'phy and orthography
fhould correfpond ; and that every language had an alphabet fufHcient, and not more than fufficient, to exprefs all its fimple founds.
It is nearly fo with the prefent Italian, and might have been fo with
the prefent Englifh, if our firft writers had retained'the Saxon alphabet, with the Saxon mode of ufmg it.
The Scots, moft certainly, deviated lefs from the Saxon orthography than the Englifh : and hence, their oral and written language
more refembled one another. Their letters and combinations of
letters were much more fimply adapted to their founds, and more •
naturally exprefled them : they generally painted the fame found by
the fame fymbol ; and they generally contented themfelves with •
fymbols that were barely neceflary : fo that a ftranger, once acquainted with their alphabet, might nearly pronounce the word;
and, on hearing the word, as nearly write it. The following inftances taken at random from Archbifhop Hamilton's Catechifm,.,
and contrafted with our Englifh orthography, may ferve as examples., .
S€OTS.
pepil
exerapil
wemen
levit
jugis
tym
epiftil
brak
parabil
fteil
wyfman
fynally
ENGLISH;
people
example
women
levite
judges
time
epiftle
brake
parable
fteal
wifeman
finally
SCOTS.-,
blud
chaft
gudnes
hevin
gret
ydilnes
brekars
tuk
fecund ;
evin
plefure •
ludgin
ENGLISH.
blood
chafte
goodnefs
heaven
great
idlenefs
breakers
took .
fecond
even
pleafure
' lodging.
Let
43® Three Scottlfh Poems,
•Let thefe two tables be preferred to any foreigner, who know«
JTO more of our language than the power of each fingle letter; -I
will venture to fay, that he fhall read the firft in a manner much
lefs unintelligible, even to an Englifh ear, than he Qiall read the
latter. .
On the whole, then, 1 am of opinion, that if a philofophical
grammarian had exifted in Scotland, prior to the reign of Mary, or
about that period, and turned his attention to this object; it would
-have been no hard matter for him to reduce the Scottifh orthogra-
.phy into a fyftem of equal perfection with that of the Italian. But
.1 will go yet a ftep farther; ^and, Tuppofing myfelf to be fuch a
.grammarian, will attempt to do, what I fancy he might have done-;
or rather what I would -do at this day, if I had to reform Jhe Scottish
orthography. If this be accounted a folly, it is at leaft an innocent
one. I do not exped that my fyftem will ever be followed ; but it
pleafes myfelf, and cannot well difpleafe any one befides. It is on
occafions like this, that theory may take its free fwing,; becaufe its
fwings can do no injury.
If the Scottifti were ftill an unwritten language, and if I were permitted to regulate its orthography, I would certainly reduce the
number of our prefent letters, change Tome of their forms, and add
two or three which are wanting : To that my alphabet ihould be aa
fliort at leaft as that of the Hebrews, and yet more comprehenfive
than (lie Englifti one : butfmce the eyes of-my countrymen 'have
been folong familiarised to'the latter, I will not offend them by
making any violent innovation in their horn-book, Contenting
myfelf with the common Tymbols, and their common arrangement,
I will only endeavour to afcertain and diftinguiCh their powers, and
to fuppiy their deficiency, either by diacritic marks, or approximate
combinations.
Three Scottijh Poems, 43*
combinations. The numerical figures in the following Table, refer
to the fubfequent obfervations..
T A B L
SYMBOLS*
Ii
2.
4--
5-
20.-
21.
22.'
23-
24,
a
a
a
A
a.
b
c
7.
8.
9-
10.
n.
12.
'3-
14..
15'
1 6.
*7-
i s;
d
e-
'&
N • -
ei
f*
g
g^
h -
*
*'':
ioi
J
k
kh
1
m
n
POWERS.
a fhort, as in handt
 or nearly To.
a Italian, as in father.
a broad, as in la-w.
a (lender, as in fate, nation.
b.
e fhort, as in element*
e middle, as injend.
e long, as \nfcene.
el German and Italian, nearly-EngUfli
/or.
y conformant.' -
h
i ffiort/as \njin.~
I Italian, or Englifli ee.
iou a found peculiar to the Scots.
j t>r g foft. .
k.-
j^ Greek,1
 ch German, x
m.-
43* Three Scotti/h Poems,
SYMBOLS. POWERS.
.25.
26.
27.
2^8.
29.
3°-
3
1
-
3
2
-
-33-
34-
35-
36.
37-
38.
39-
40.
41.
42.
0
b
P
ph
q
r
s
fh
t
th
u
u
A
U
V
w
. x
y
-Z
0 fhort, as in hot.
o Ipng, as in bone.
f.
/
. 9-
r.
s.
Jh, orfch, German.
t.
th, or 6, Greek. )
u fhort, as \njhnt.
00, or K, Italian.
« Englifh. as injure.
v. . . - .
•w.
:«•.
/ as in byt
 or z\as in ivitie.
z.
OBSERVATIONS .
i. This is not entirely the Englifh a fhort, as in hand, a found
not known in Scotland, till very lately ; but the fhorteft :and moft
indiftindt of all vocal founds, and which might be almoft equally
well exprefled by a very fhort V, and even by e or u. Sir Williarn
Jones informs us, that, in all 'the Indian dialects, " this vowel is con-
" fidered as inherent in every confonant*;" and fo it feems evidently
•'• * See Afiatic Refearches, vol. i. p. 14.
Three Scottijh Poems, <&c* 433
dently to have been by the Hebrews, Ghaldees, Syrians, and Arabs.
I have retained it particularly in all active participles ; as doand,
•writand, &c. where it is plain* that *', e, or », if rapidly pronounced,.
might be readily fubftituted for it.
2; The Scots feem formerly to have known no other found of
this letter, which is indeed the general found all over the world,,
except in England.
3; This is only a prolongation ofthe preceedirig;-
4. This is plainly.a fimple found^ and would be better reprefented by the.Greek n> 1 believe the Scots have -but lately adopted it:
from the Englifh. It approximates to <?, but is longer.
5. This letter is almoft uniformly pronounced over, all Europe,,
though in fome countries it is confounded with v.
6. There is abfolutely no need for this letter j but f have retain-*
ed it to exprefs occasionally the found ' of .r, and, iu combination
with hr
 that of tjh..
7. The Saxons ufed this letter with a daih through it, to exprefs
the Greek 6, or th>
8... E fhort is^lefs common in Scpts.-than in Englifh; the next let*^
ter commonly taking its place.
9. The mean found of £v though not mentioned by grammarians,
is more or lefs an Englifh found : for furely it is.not pronounced
exactly in the fame manner in elegy and lend.- But the difference is
much more apparent in Scots, r . .
lii , so.
4J4
ro. The found of this letter is hardly diftinguifhable from that of
4 or Englifh ce. .' ".
11. The combination ei is not known in England, at leaft in the
"Metropolis. It is the Italian «', and nearly the Englifh ay.
12. This letter Tenders fh unneceffary. See No. 28.
13. This letter was originally z or zeta, but by degrees took
place of c or gamma*. In Englifh it has a hard and foft found;
here it is always hard. , See No. 19.
14. I have cliofen to make this combination exprefs our y confonarit,' both becaufe 1 find it was the old Saxon ufage, and because
our Scottifh writers almoft univerfally adopted it. See No. 42. In
fome. parts of Scotland it is ftill afpirated.
15. This is the fofteft of all afpirates, and might, by the aid of
two diacritic points, ferve to denote -other two harder ones. See
No. 2i.
1 6. This letter has often fo nearly the found of fhoit #, that it
may be ufed forit.
17. This is the true original "found of z, and the only one the Italians, Spaniards, and Germans know. It is often ufed by the northern Scots, Where the Englifli^ronounee it JV as in write , rival,
iS. By tfiis combination I exprefs a found peculiar to the Scots
and northern Englifh, and might in Englifh be written yw, or k
. mighr
'* - In the Gothic alphabet #iiad the found of /.
Three Scottijh Poems, Sfir.
might be exprefled by fome diacritic mark over the preceding coufonant, Jike the Spanifh n. See No. 22.
19. The/ reprefenis fufficiently the found of foft g. It would
have been better, perhaps, to have retained the latter with a diaeritic point.
ao. This letter is the Greek kappa, and renders chard altogether
unneeefFary.
21. 1 choofe to exprefs the hard guttural % by this combination*
See No, 15.
22. This is the fofteft of all the liquids, and the Scots make it
ftill more liquid than the Englifh, by retaining its Gaelic or Celtic i
found; which is alfo common in Spanifh, and exprefled by //. It is
nearly the //in French, and exactly the gl in Italian. It might inmy alphabet have been denoted by a diacritic point ~j but as other
three liquids are liable to a fimiliar modification, and as one combination of vowels, namely iou after the fingle confonant, fuits all the
four, I thought it better to ufe that combination,, than, without neeeflity, to mulriply
23. The liquid found of this letter a-lluded-to above, is found inthe word marw (in Englifh" mew) which is to be pronounced tniau;.
and fo I write it.
24. Liquid n, or Spanifli n, is heard in the word anew, (beneath)
which is pronounced and here written aniou.
25. It has been obferved, that this found when rapidly pronounced, coincides nearly with a fhort.
I i i 2 26.
•three Stftti/h^Poems,
• 26. This found might be exprefled;by oot. for
 {o~ long, is only -a
; protraction of o fhort.
•27. This letter was frequently ufed by the Scots for "A
•#8. I have retained this combination to exprefs the Greek <p, and
Latin ph. It is otherwife entirely fuperfluous.
29. This letter is equally redundant; but I retain it -in fome
words derived from the Latin. The ScCttiuYwriters combined it with
uh to exprefs what the Englifh do by ivh ; as quhen, qhuat, quhy,
which they probably pronounced more gutturally than they now
-do. The prefent found is fufficiently exprefled by hu or hiv, for it
is a folecifm in orthography, to put the iv foremoft.
30. In fome parts of Scotland-this letter is pronounced with an
afpiration, though not fo hard ^s that of Northumberland. The
Greeks feem to have given it the fame found.
31. This found is exactly the fame with ibft c. One of them is
therefore fuperfluous.
"32. That we want a fymbol to denote this fimple found is evident ; for neither the French cht
 nor the Germany^, nor our own
Jh, at all exprefs it. It is the Hebrew.^; and might be diftinguifhed
from s, by a diacritic/point. The neareft found is that ofy£, which,
in Greek and Latin words, might be fubftituted.
33. This letter is, in Scots, combined with i in the fame manner
„as the liquids, as tiav; the long fmall root of heather.
34-
Fbree Scottyh Poems^ 437
•34. This feems alfo to be a fimple found ; badly reprefented by
7.6. The Greek element 6 might be adopted, or / with a diacritic
point might be its fubftitute.
,35. This fhort found of « is peculiar I think to the Scots and
Englifh.
36. This is the genuine found of u. How we came to exprefs k
by oo, it is not eafily conceived. The Scottifh combination ou was
much nearer the found. '
yj. This is in reality a compound of e and u. It is, however, to
be obferved, that it is not founded exactly in the fame manner by the
the 'Scots and English. In the mouths of the latter it feems to be
<:ompofed of i and eu ; while the former pronounce it more like the
Erench u or eu in the vrord.feur.
38. This letter is by the Scots often interchanged with/, and in
fome countries with *wy as in London.
39. This is an unneceflary element,,; I have ufed it only at the
beginning of words in the form of a confonant.
40. This letter is -entirely ufelefs; as its two ihades of the fame
found are perfectly reprefented by gs and ks.
4I.I appropriate this letter, and this alone, to denote the Englifli
z long, or the Italian at. I have not even excepted the pronoun I,
although I know its place will, at firft, feem aukwardly filled .by Y.
42. This fymbol I always ufe to exprefs its fofter found, or that
of s in the Englifh word praife. Its harder found which is that of ds
or
438 Three Scottljh Poems, <&c.
or ts, may be exprefled either by that combination, or by a diacritic
point. The Scbttifh writers generally ufed z inftead of y confonant. But in this I think they were miftaken. The figure which
they found in manufcripts, though refembling an z, was in reality an
abbreviation cfgh, and fo Wiclef, and the Englifh. writers of his day
always wrote. But the ftrong refemblance between the abbreviation
of gh, and the laft letter of the alphabet, made them gradually to be/
taken for the fame. See No. 14.
I admit no fuperfluous or mute vowel, nor improper diphthong
or triphthong. .Whether double confonants fhould alfo be excludedj I have fome doubt. They may ferve occafionally to make the
found more fmart and determinate, and fa to regulate the emphafis :
but this can only happen in middle fyllables.
I am perfectly fenfible that this novel orthography will, at firft,
have an uneouth appearance, even to Scottifh readers ; but I flatter
myfelf, that fuch of them as are capable of reflection, and can read
with both ears and eyes, will foon recover from their aftonifhment j
and confefs that my fymbols reprefent their founds more properly
and diftin£Uy than their prefent orthography.
I have now only to put my theory in practice ; and this the
reader will find done in the two laft of the following pieces. For'
the firft, or epiftle, I have left nearly in the fame form- in which it
was originally written and fent to the Society, It thenceforth became in fome fort their own; and I hardly thought myfelf at liberty to make experiments on it. . I have ventured, however, to make
the orthography a little more uniform, and more agreeable to the
Scottifh. idiom, than the orthography of the prefent day. Thus ou
and (nv are never confounded. The former is equivalent to the
.Englifb. oo, the latter to oiv in town, or ou in bud. Eu and eio
like wife
¥hree Scotti/Jj Poems, <&c. 439
jikewife • exprefs diftindt founds, eu is equivalent to the Englifh £u
<or eio, but env has a found peculiar to Scotland, and which can
hardly be reprefented in Engiifh characters ; perhaps the combination iww pronounced fmartly, will give fome idea of it. The combination ie is always to be pronounced as eet
 and ea like e fhort, or
-•as the Englifh .pronounce ea in death.
Thefe rules are only neceflary for thofe who would read the lines
according to the Scottifh pronounciation. An Englifhman may read
'them according to his own;; only he is to temarfc that the rimes
-muft he pronounced 4 I 'Ecojfoifc.; other wife they will frequently be
-no rimes at all.
/It was-«nce my intention to add a complete glafTary for the whole;
'but this, in my prefent fituation, I find impracticable. A Scoto-Saxon
'Lexicon I take to be a defideratum in Englifh literature^ and would
-earneftly recommend it to the attention of the Scottifh Antiquaries.
-It is .probable that the Society hath members in ;^very county. Thefe
might, with little .pains, collect the words and phrafes that are pecu-
:Kar to the people among whom they live. In the fhires of Forfar,
Kincardine, Aberdeen, Banff, and Elgin, the Scottifh ftill exifts ia
its native purity, of, if you will, in its native rudenefs. But even
there it is every day lofing ground ; and yielding to the Englifh
idiom. Hence the greater expediency of colle&ing the old terms as
foon as poffible, and from the mouths of the oldeft inhabitants.
Although any perfon who has common fenfe and can write,
might be employed to make fuch a collection; yet it were to be
wifhed that men of fome learning would charge themfelves with the
tafk. The minifter of the go/pel would find here a pleafant relaxation from his apoftolic labours ; and the idle gentleman an innocent
and ufeful amufement.
44° Three Scottifh Poems, <&c.
In forming the collections, no word fhould be omitted, however
barbarous it might appear; no phrafe rejected, howfoever vulgar.
The common names of plants, fhrubs, and trees ; of beails, birds,
and fifhes; of brooks, and rivers; of hills, and mountains; of
towns, eaftles, villages, and even fingle homefteads; of every domeftic utenfil ; of every implement of hufbandry; of every tool and
engine peculiar to the manual arts, &c. all fhould be fcrupuloufly
noticed.
 :
The different collections being fent to the Society, fhould be put
into the hands of a perfon capable of digefting them into one body.
That perfon muft have made a previous ftudy of analytical grammar, and general etymology; fo as to be able to trace the fame
term through all the variety of pronounciation which it aflumes in
different provinces, often in the fame province, and fometimes in
the fame parifh. He ought, moreover, to be well acquainted not
only with Latin and Greek ; but alfo with the ancient Saxon and
other Teutonic dialects. The want of this knowledge was one 06
the greateft defects of our great Englifh Lexicographer.
EPISTL E