
The practical farmer's pocket-companion; or A brief account of the husbandry that now prevails in Scotland; in which its errors are pointed out, and better methods proposed. In a letter from a gentleman in the South of Scotland, who had long experience of the rules he prescribes
PRACTICAL FARMER' POCKET.COMPANION', 0R :A Brief AccountA t the Husbandry thit now prevails in ScOt: land; in which its errors are pointed ont and better methods proposed. In a Letter fiom a Gentleman in the South oa Scotland, who had long epierience of the tlilk he prefrribes. .aPrinted b ry F. D aoULAs~ Si peVs ^ S E R ) S E N
1 i
Practlie in Scotland. T HE Common pradife of Husbandry in Scotland is carried on by what they call, out-field and In' field Labour. The Infield is a small portion of the Farm set a part for laying the Dung on, and is sown always with the fame grains, as follows ift. Barley-the Land getting two and sometimes three furrs and Dunged. 2d. Oats- with one furr. qd. Pease, with one furr, and so on in a coa tinued rotation the fame land, and in the fame manner. The Out-field, is the remaining Arable part of the Farm-' a Portion of which, as much as the Farmer can manage, is every year broke from lee-b-he takes three and often more Cropts in Oats fuccefllively, with only one furr to each Cropt, and then leaves it again in lee 'for four, five, or fix years. By the first Method the Ground is never refrelhed nor relied either by Summer-fallowing or Paflure, and being Dunged every third year, is soon filled so full with the Roots and feeds of noxious Weeds, which bad ploughing and not weed- ing the corir helps to encourage, that in a few years it yields little else but Weeds ; and at last comes to disappoint almol: totally the expeCtations of the Husband man ; yet so tenacious are they of their old pradifes, that they go on in this and other bad Methods, to their own ruin or Wretchedness, and to the ruin of their lands. They have, seldom above four, or five, after one Seed. By the other method the land is entirely impoverifhfed, by lowing so many fucceflive scourging cropts, and'to add to the Misfortune, they never sow grafs-feeds with their last Cropt, to help to bring it to a Swarth, which it has not time in it's slate of poverty, and the Cattle always keeping it down, to
gafif to any perfat tior, before it be agaiq tfora up to yief aiothfr Coirfe of hmugry Cropts, which fcldbait exceed two rii very rarely tliee after one. The fields are not iniclofed, iind the Farfhers keep more Cattle than they are etic fully tu mintriiiin ;* they ae on there Accounts allowed to roami over ait'ri the winter season in frofi and in wet' wather, whici perishes and deltroys the land. Inc4/ing. P Herefore the firfi thing necflary in Improvement for " there and l~iny other, obvidus rea-fods i ilcidlfing This the Tenants cannot do themselves on account of: their poverty, bere. Therefore the Land)lrd fholiid be at thi4 expedlfe an :if the Tenant pays fie, fix, or even fevent pr. eti. for the Meney laid out,tto be added for ever after to the Rent of the faran it. will .be to the mtatual- advantage of both ; fuh: intereti to commenfe from the tiine that'each field is declareda tw be compleatly finithed in the way agr'eed upoei SHedge aid' itch is the cheapest and perhaps the best. if SingleDitcrh. : si gle iDiteh be chofert the Ditch should a Ri . be five feet -'wide at top, by. three deeps with a Rail or other fence on the top of the Dyke,. and the hedge planted, on the face : If a Rail' or other dead fence cannot be had, the 'Ditch (hotld he fix feet by four. A row of trees,- Oaks Elms, 'Afh, o others fhauld, or may be plant; ed with the hedge at twelve feet diftarice,. If a double Ditch be chofen-The Ditches should b.e Double Ditch ' by 3 ; the two hedges at the dilance of .. nine feet .fromn one another, the earth of both ditchestmuft be cafl inwards to the middle betwixt the itwo, o as-to for'i one corhmon dyke facing each way, having a hedge on each face well claped' up 'and terminating at about tight' or. twelve inches broad'at top ; A Rol of trees planted in thae middle between the two hedges, observing to put themn ltews of Planting. ' in' when the ditches are half fini'hed, fe S. that the tootsimay be'in the heft fail, and argn of Inclo. the earth that is afterwards call up, keeps them firm. :' he lnclofures thould be from eight to twel~e Scots Acres a piece, more or les--each one hav- ing if poflible water within ifelf. If there be any Spots not arable these should be fenced and planted. And the Angled
,f all the Inclofares should be rounded off with a Sweep lumps in the Angles. oneach Side, and a, Clump of planting s within it. - It would be an advantage, iC ah and Nrth.Lies i the lines that run from South to North, h rows otr the two Ditches be placed at such a Dif. tance from one another as to admitt two, three, or four rows ps planting, *for lhelter from the South weft. Winds bothto the fields and Cattle. If Expence and the immediate loss of si nmuch Arable land be not considered, this may be done quite round every field. Observe in planting the quicks, that firl, Method of Planting the upper surface of the ground, immediately .Qicks.- ' below where the quicks are to be ser for the breadth of about eight Inches, as like wife the upper surface of the whole Ditch is to be thrown backward, so as to be in- tirely covered by the earth that! is afterwards dug from the Ditch, that the roots and feeds of the grass and weeds which are next the furfacd ipay nor il!oot to annoy the growth of the quicks, this whether the ground be ia Swarth or tillage. The place for the qiceks is to be nmade up to it's tormer height with the mould that comes out of the Ditch immediately below and nex! to the upper surface, and well levelled before the quicks be laid, so fhat they may be on a line ; By this means the thorns enjoy the bell earth, whichl is inn:mol, by their roots firetchipg into it, at the fame time that the weeds are pre- rvented from growing. It is advifeable to flrow a little lime Manure to the Qicks. or other inanure upon the place where the quicks are planted, this is of great benefit to haflen their growth and little does it. The young hedges muf be kept clean from weeds, and the Ditches scoured to keep them at their Original depth, for a few years three or four-No Sheep nor Goats mult be kept or allowed to come at the hedges when young : And the Tenant mulf not keep, any Cattle that are remarkable for leaping Dykcs. The Land-loird and Tenant 'lould be bound to these Articles by tack; There are'miany other methods of planting and railing hedges, Iuch as a sod dyke backed with earth, on the one fide, and the hedge planted with a Nairow Gutter on the other as is done in the North of England ; &c, &c. The methods I have mentioned, serve to drain and fence the lands at the f-ame time.
6 ) Improving of land. T And is improved by Tillage, Manures, Reflfing, Pafluring, _, and a judicious Succeflion of change of feed, by sowing those grains that meliorate the ground after thole that scourge it. Summer-fallowing is one of the mofi fubflantial improve' ummler follow. ments in Husbandry. It is in every Farmers power -It Pulverises the Soil if clay and fliff, by conquering its obflinacy and coherence of the Parts ; and it consolidates such as is light and sandy, open and fpungy. It deflroys all roots and feeds of Weeds -Aind by exposing the land to the froff and rains in Winter, and the oun and heat in Summer, it imbibes ihofe Iitreous, aqueous and terrene particles, which by fermentation, and otherways, lo much serve and contribute to vegetation.- All poflible Means (hould be used to bring the Farmers in: Scotland to practile it.-Giving them a Discount of Rent for every Acre of Summer-fallow would perhaps have that Effect. Summer-fallow should be ploughed the firfi time at or be- fore Christmas, with as deep a furr as ppflible, observing that no water fland upon any part of it. In general let no water fland upon Ground at any time unless it be brought over it as a Manure. When spring work is over it mufi be ploughed therofs, and left as rough as pofflble. Immediately before the next ploughing let it be well broken and pulverised with the Brake and fimall harrows : All unevenneffes and old furrows fiiled up and made level, and then ploughed as often thro' the Eoure of the bu:nmer as convenient, three, four, or more times, the oftner the better, In General Land can't be over pioughed, and the drier land be when ploughed or harrowed or any way wrought, the better, Let the Ridges be made as fIraight as a line, and equal, at the breadth ot ifteepr feet : If it be a very wet foil they may he narrower. They should pot be raised high as is the com- 'mon pradife, for it is bhe-number of water furrs, not the height of the ridges, that'drains Land, and what is the furr one Year (hould be the midle of the ridge next. After the Seed is sown and harrowed, the Water furrs thould be all clearer with the Plough and spade, And this in all cropts.
(C7 Of Manures. D; tng enriches the Soil - but encourages Weeds---i fit for all kinds of Ground. Lime does not enrich the Soil, but heats and Polverifes it, e that is taifes a fermentation, and makes Jime from 70 to 0on bells pr. Acre. the Land exert its vegetative faculties, or , enables it so to do-And if not soon re- fremhed after liming, by Dung, a Change of. round Corn to Grass, and paflure ground, or by Summer fallowing, soon wears land out and leaves it in a slate of great poverty.-It does not encourage Weeds--and is good tor tmot Soils efpe. cially to bring in new-ground, or for such Grounds as have been for a long course of Years dunged -In general as a Change of cropts is good for land, so is a Change of Manures. Marles of all kinds are good. They enrich and increase AMarles hould be thick the Soil ; and discourage Weeds. If enough to cover the land be throughly marled, it will need no surface. more Manure for twenty Years and carry great Cropts. It does well on moflt Soils, Particularly light. Sand is good for Stiff clay ground, but must be laid on in Sea Weed. Sufficient quantities to conquer the Stiff- ness of it, otherways it would bind and alt and Salt Water. Cement it. Sea Sand and Shels are excellent : And Sea weed amongst the belt Manures we have, bat laftsfhort time : Salt or Salt-water the fame. The Cleanings of Ponds, Lakes, Ditches, high- ways, Streets and marshy Boggs, Rubbish of houses, alhes and many other things are pretty good Manures.- Where there is a Peat-mofs Peat moss. in an Elfate, which is often inexhauftable, it is frequently burnt for the fake of the Ashes as a Manure. But I thould think it better, if there be no limeflone, to burn Clay with the Moss, which makes a good Manure, You may lay Clay upon light land ; and light or loamiy Earth upon Clay. Of Cropts. Ift. Ummer-fallow, Dunged or limed with as many farrs as possible. ad. Wheat, 3d. Pease and Beans, tares, or Vetches, with one furr. 4th. Barley with 3 furrs, (one of therm a Wintertfallow)
ad fbdn with "rafs(fceds, to refl three, four, tive, or f Years at pleasure. Or Or" X-t". Summer.fallowa . fl. Suimerrt.-Illpw. ad. Wheat. ad. Barley or Wheat. gd. Pease al above. 3d, Turnips, 4th. Barley. 4th. Barley. rth Oats-one ,fur 5th. Oats 'with' Grafe feedrst " 6th. Summer fallow., ref ; or Summrcr fallow K< succeed. And so the fuccefiion m ay be varied at pleature is n.atyi Mdiorating Crpts. other -different way?. Oblfving ji genetal that a Meliorating Cropt floulM intervene betwixt two feourgirng or White Cropts. Th. tmeliorating ones are Peafe-Peafe and beans, Vetches, tares, Turrnips, Potatoes, Greens, and legumes of ail kinds, 'Clver, red, Whitei and Yellows narrow leafed Plantin, St.. foin,. Lr Lucerne &c, &c. And in general all Herbs with Ibrpa leaves, and such as carry Podds. The scourging Cropts, are Wheat, Oats, Barley,: Rye- grafs-and in general all ered long fla'lked Plants that carry the feed upon the top of'the stalk and are moft1Iy'o'f the farrinaceous kind.-Barley may be sown after wheat, hbut .neve wheat after barley, and fometiines one "White cropt imrnedi- ately after another, when the grotnd is 'to be ditrealy rcfrefh. ed by summer fallow and manure-Any of'the Mielioratibi grains rmay be put inflead oftthofeinthe above Sutccefio~ns. Turnip land thould 'be well pulveris'd by ploughing, harro'w. ing and Rolling, and the Turnips sown about the end of :May or beginning of June. In England they reckon the Seed-timte for Turnips from ten days before Mid summer, to ten daya after-The turnips should be thinned as they grow up, and they as well as all grains in general kept clean from weeds-s. they may either be pulled for Cattle, or eaten vpon' "thB ground which enriches it greatly. after which a fine Cropt of Barley is obtained and fine Cropts of grass after that, iffwwa in with grass leeds. Turnip land should have a little Dung oir ther manure, :and be .always rolled after the feed is fowa, This depends upon the richness or poierty oft.he:and- u*ntity- i"f :Sil if. rich, less feed, and if poor -orse "il requi 4 as Acrc citC. I a Midling way tbirceiptle o
C 9 ) wheit, barley or pease; and four of oats is the proportion i If richer, two of the first and three of the. last are fufficient, if very nich, one bushel aed a half.- If the land be poorer, the Seed mnit be increaled in the said proportions. Chufe the beffi grains of all kinds for SeeSr, and fue'l as is Good Seed. freest of all feeds of Weeds -The bes is Good Seed. known by its pluipnefs and clearneft of the skin, but especially by it's weight. Manage your Wheat Seed as foilows -Make a Pickle of Salt and water, strong enoagh to carry an egg ; in this sleep your wheat Seed for a day, or two, or three-Skim of what wbvims above, flirring it always well about from the bottom' till no more rifes-Drain it from the Wa'ter, and then mix it" with powdered lime till it be dry enough to sow -two o'' three bushels may be thus seeped at a rime, or enough for one Day's Lowing, aind so repeat the procefs-This is good to'pre- serve the Wheat from Smutt and blight to which it is fubjecf; 6a likexwife from being deltroyed in the feed by Vermine, and helps it to fheot Loon. This pratilfe is good for Barley tho' fildom pradlited, and for pease. Grass Seeds are generally iown in with Oats or Barley atnd Gdrafs--Seeds, sometimes with Lint-but barley is the bes- .with whatever grain it be sown, the Land mufflt b-e made very fine and well rolled after your feed is sown, the .tones having been picked all off the surface. Tb a Scots Acre fbov-- 6 lb. of red Clover, four of white Quantity to an Acre and two bufhcls of Rye grafs-if you in- tend to paiture iheep, add a few pounds of narrow-leafed.Planten, and if you choose it a few of yellow Clover-In general the more kinds of grafs.feeds the better, as by that means you find what anl'ers befl with the Soil ; and better too thick than too thin-But the Coin that the grass feeds are sown in with thould not be thick, for fear of its growing too rank and falling over Co as to deflroy the grass. It will be a great advantage t& the grass, if the cropi of eoar: n be mowed down with the Scythe rather corn Mowed wlgen than reaped with the Sickle, but if rcapied town with grass. let it be cut low, that is, near the ground; Let to Cattle pallure or trespass upon your rsraff ficld the tirR winter aficr the feelds are fLownk
You may cut Hay in your fields for three Years, taking Mlanagement of but one Cropt every Year, and eating Grass fields. with Cattle, or rotting on the Ground the second growth ; then you may paf[ure it two, three, or four Years before you break it again for Corn. Or You may cut it in Hay one Year and pailure it another. alternately. Or cut it two Years or three, and'immediately after the Hay is cut, which is commonly about the end of June or beginning of July, Plough and cross Plough it in Summer-fallow, for Wheat or Barley and so on. If You churfeto keep the fame Ground longer in Hay, Dung upon the Grass in the.Winter season, which will yield great cropts of Hay, and Excellent Cropts of Corn when you chufe to break it, this being one of the be;l methods of Dunging. Let not the grass fland till it be fully ripe, nor dry it too Of Hay. much in the making ; either of these prac . tifes defiroys the colour and takes the befi juices from the Hay ; Cut it when full in the flower, and put it quickly into large tramp Ricks in the field,- without much turning, no matter tho' it sweat and fmoak a good deal both in the tramp-Rick and the s(ack. This Management preserves both the Colour which should be green, and the juices, and makes it fiveeter and more feeding for all kinds of Cattle. If You judge that it may heat too much in the Stack, carry a hole up the Middle of it, or two if the Rfack be long, by the means of a Barrel, or boards, which will prevent all harm, as the hole will draw the fmoak to it and evaporate any thing that could hurt the Hay. It is a good pratile to firow a little Salt with each firatumr Salt for Hay. of Hay when it is building in the flack, especially if the Hay be damaged by. bad weather ; it preserves the hay, and renders it sweet and feed- ing for Cattle. Hay that is a little spoilt and thus Salted has been found to do more service in the spending, than Whole- feme Hay, too much dryed but not salted, In general Salt is excellent for feeding all kinds of Cattle For Cattle, Sea-water, and is very wholesome : Sea Water will "Weed and Grass. do and is cheaper, can be used amongfl boiled beans or other Corns--as likewifc Sea Weed and Salt Grass is cxecllInt,
( Ii ) St. foin is an excellent fodder either green or dryed, bu St. foin. La Lucerne. little used in Britain. For raising. and managing it, fee Tull, Millar, and the French A:uthors on Hufbandry..-La Lucerne the fame. Tares is anpther excellent fodder either green or dryed, a Tares. green Cropt may be had of them in the be- ginning of Summer, and another for fieed in Autumn. See Millar's Dictionary. Parfnips and Carrots are good for all kinds of Cattle' Turnips for black Cattle and Sheep.-Potatoes good for none but Swine, and these they wont fatten. Of Cattle. H Orfes or Oxen (hould go fcven hours in the Plough or Cart when yoaked but once a Day, and five at a WVork Oxen and time when yoaked twice-Let both kinds horses, have as much fodder as they can eat. The Oxen muff have unthrafh'd sheaves of corn, two or more as they need it each day. To the work horses three forpats of corn.a day when yoaked once, and a peck when yoaked twice. Cart horses require more than Plough ones ; They mult be well 'Well dressed curried twice a Day, and their Stables kept and curried. always clean and sweet. And let them be well Rtbbed down every time they come from work. En- crease their Corn as you find they need it. And have e'm well littered every night. Give them Grass and green fodder !-orfes Green fodder. as soon in Summer as pollible, and as much of it as they can cat ; this cleans them and scours away the Diflempers they may have contract- ed by hard-meat, and labour. It is a good thing to keep loused in heat. them much in the house in Summer especial- ly in the heat of the Day, upon Plenty of cut-grafs, which increases the Dung greatly, if they have plenty of Litter. If they have as much cut-grafs as they can use, they will do a good deal of work with very little Corn., Horses vell 'fed may work every Day in the Year. The Management of Cows is well known, let them have of Cows. plenty of meat and as mtch oet it grcc as poflible.
Donrt houre young Cattle in' Winter, let them have Shades young Cat!tO to run int6 in the florms with racks for hei.r fodder. Where Milk is scarce, or very valuable, Calyes when in- Hay tea and pease bread tended for keeping may, be bred up for keeping Calves. with Hay-tea, and pease bread. I have reared many fo-the Hay is boiled with Water and the broth with a little Milk mixed in it given to the calves apd thgy soon learn to eat pease bread which is very strong and nourishi~ng. Let them always have good Play in a rack by atlb.m, which they soon learn to eat, and put them out to Grass as soon as the Weather permits, continuing theii tea arid bread till they can provide for themselves in the fields, which inay be in ten or twelve Weeks, when the feafqn permits. If Cattle are turned into good Grass in the month of May, Feeding ot Cattle con- And kept wellall fumme', they will bie tinued'in Winter'. good rough beef in the months of INovember and December. If they be kept from that time on Hay and turnips, they will be excellent beef in the spring wvhen Meats arc very Dear. If Cattle be turned into good foggage after harvefl and kept Winter feeding con- pretty well all Winter, giving them fItaw tinned to Summer. in itorms and at nights, they nwill be good beef early in Summer after the Grass comes, and excellent thro' the-courfe of the funmmer when beef is dear. In the above two methods the Cattle run always out, having Shades or fonie other ihelter in Winter. Stall feeding is done with Corn and Hay or turnips in the tal - . 'houfe. Never let them have too much at a time least they loath their meat, but supply them often and make them eat clean up ; keep their houes clean and sweet, and give them plenty of clean litter, currying them with Wool-cards-make use of failt in their fodder or corn, and give tieem plenty of water. This is an excellent method for increating Dung. Sheep feed sooner than Cattle either on grass or turnips, ket them feed on turnips in a movable wooden fold, that they may no6 wafle them': And a week or mo~e'before they be killed let them be on Fgrafs, that the Muttoh niayh't talle too (frong cf turnips. 'Turnips are good for caily lamb, as they supply
( iS'3 plenty of of milk to the Ews. And have Clover or other early. .-grass for your Sheep when the turnips fail. Never milk your Ews more than fufficient to prevent their Udders from feflering, when the lambs are taken from them. Of Trees. A Quaticks grow up the quickell-they require a wet Soil, t but will do likewise upon a dry one, if it be rich. They are very proper for the sides of wet Ditches, and soon beautify an cliate.. The timber they yield being very soft, Aquaticks. is good for many uses in Husbandry, and lalls long. Any Mazrfhy grounds that can't be drained for the purposes of Husbandry, it planted with bal- sker Willows will yield very valuable ciopts every two or three years. Any cut of a branch or of the flock gIrows tho' it have no root, in Willows and the moit part ot the Aquaticks. Limes, Scotch Beech, apd Quacking Ash do well for Ave. Lime, Scotch Beech, nues, and rife very quick, but the timber Quacking Aft and not very valuable, Plain tree for Ave. The Plain tree does likewise very well na:s. for Avenues, yielding an agreeable shade : It rises very quick, and the timber is very valuable for Coach- Makers. Intermix Laburnum or Peafe.cod-tree in your Avenues or Laburnu., other planting. It carries a beautiful yel- - ..low flower and Cods. 'tie timber very hard and valuable in house hold furniture. You may inter. Rown-trees flAowrin, mix likewise the Rown-tree and flowering Shrubs. * Shrubs. Sa Oak, Elm, Ath, and Birch are the molt Birch. . valuable Timbers ; and do well either in hedge rows, or in large plots : with these all banks that are not arrable may be planted, either alone or intermixed in any proportion you please. It is common, and a very good method, to ictcrmix them with Firrs which, nourith and rear up the great tiirber, by defending it when Intemixed with Firrs. young from the blafl, which makes it grow tiraight and beautiful. The Firrs mufi be cut away when you observe that they hurt the growth of the others, at which time these are of Sufficient flrength to support and defend themfelve, ar.d the Firrs are of use in building Ccuntry hsales.
( '4 ) Firrs rife quick, are a Beautiful ever green and the Tin'mer is very valuable in Sotland. They grow in any ground, wet, dry, or rocky-they mnke beautiful plots near a house to defend it againlt the inclemency of it e Weather, or in ftripps about fields, in Angles, or on the Sides and tops of hiils and Mountains, that can't be other ways cultivated, or intermixed with other planting as mentioned above. Al! the above mentioned trees. are raised from the feed in a Raised in Beds for the bed-from thence transplanted to the Nursery and fields. Nursery, and from that to the fields. In general young trees do better taken from the Seed-bed to the fields, than from the Nursery, Seedlings fror a- And Seedlings from the Natural Wood natural Wood. do better than any of them. If the grouid you want to plant be covered with Whinns or furze, with Broom or other natural Whianns good to Rubbih of thefends--don't cut them up, rear planting. but plant your treets of whatever kind they be amongst them ; they keep your planting warzn, and they nourish a'nd rear it up. In general, Plant at ten or twelve feet Distance, and be fore to thin your planting as it grows up, and as you fee it needs. Observe thst there is a proportion between the height and thickness of trees as well as other plants, which the Eye easily ditiinguihes. In trees as in Corn, if they fland too thick, they run up to an unnatural height without the proper thickness or sub- flance ;- And if allowed to go 6 too long without thinning or weeding, they can't bear it ; for depending one upon another T-hinnirg or weeding when their support is taken away, they die of Planting. and fall down. Therefore when it happens thlat they have been allowed to fland too long without weed- ing, it is my opinion that it is better to cut out Avenues, and leave clumps oi? the original thickness, than to thin or weed such planting, this lets the air circulate freer among(t them, which refreihes them and keeps their growth. But you may try to thin a part to fee how it answers. In all cafes cut a- way those trees that are robbed of their growth by their neigh- bours, or that decay or die upon their feet. It is befl to take care to wecd in time, and as the-planting requires it.
C 1y ) Of Fences. L ET your young Plasting be well fenced from Cattle of als kinds-cfpecially heep and black C(atde.-And if the .Grass that grows amongff it be allowed to rit, it is to much the better, it fattens the ground, and keeps thel roots of the young trees warm in the winter, and from waving with the wind : Or Garden tluffamongAt you may allow roots a;nd garden fluffs to young Trees. be railed amongit them ; nothing encourages their growth more, than working among!l them with the spade and hoe ; and the manure that is used for t hefe helps likewise the trees, Digging about old trees ; cutting ,the outlying fibres of their Helps to renew the roots, and putting in ranoure. especially growth of old Trees. dead carcafes, about the roots and looping off the dead limbs and branches, will help to renew their growth ; Particularly in fruit-Trees, giving them as much as possible a free circulation of Air. Those trees that need pruning are well known, but great rn ,care muff be taken that no drop of water Prnnning. mn.y tland upon. that part that the braoch is pruned or cut away from, otherways it will loon rot and hollow the whole tree, which often happens. Plant trees and Quicks from harvelt that the lap begins to Time for Planting. descend, till the spring that it begin to rife. Raise your own Quicks or thorns, and young trees, being both cheaper, and better agreeing with your Soil and Climate, Natural Woods muff be well hoed or cleared from all un- Natural Woods. der growth, as briars, brambles, Broom Naturaland bruh of all inds. It oon pays fch expence, and these fell well to Bakers &c, And thin as yoa fee ncceifary. Cattle mull not go in them till about ten years old, or sooner if you find the trees cannot he hurt by them, Oak, Ash and Birch, when cut grow again from the flock without being planted anew. Many are the other kinds of trees that are used in pDitintg for thede, fee Millar's DiQionary and other backs,
( . ) SOs Ploughs. .T HiE Iloderine, and Common English or Yorkshire pf6ug's are the bell, having a broad, flatt, or feathered Shard which cuts the furrow below. They are fit for molt kinds es Land ; except it be very (tony, in which cafe you thould eaufe put a long point to the share, which keeps it steady in the ground. These Ploughs fliould run square upon their Bottom, the flow to set the Iren.; Culter having it's point as lo]w as the bot- of the Plough. tom of the share and plough, all three being in a line, which the ploughman' regulates with a Rule, or the Shaft of his Whip, and the Cultcr ftould stand directly before the point of the Share. The Furrows which these Ploughs cai s(hould h'e square Square Furrows and and set upon their edge when turned over crea. so as to fland ere&. Plough as deep Soughing. as possible, it increases the quantity of' " lSoil, for the roots of Plants to spread and seek their pasture in. Observe that when the furrows are regular, so as you can True ploughing. trace them with your Eye in a line frotm one end of the Ridge to the other fepa- rately; and when there are no baulks or places miffed by the plough, but all the furrows fairly cut and regularly set up, that then your Ploughman makes good and true Work. Three good flout horses; yoaked on end (which is the belt Jdorfes in a Plough. way) are fufficient for ahliofi any land iri one of these Ploughs, and often two. Or yoak two Oxen behind and one or two horses before. It is a good way when you keep two ploughs, to yoak one o pghs., with two Oxen and a horse or .two, and the 'Two ploughs. other with three hores.- In winter plough" ing the first ploughs the middle of the Ridge, and the other the fufrs-which saves the land from poaching or champing with the feet of the Catr !e, the middle of the Ridge being dryeft where the Cattle go on the unploughed ground, and the horses where the Land is weteft, to wit in the furrs of the Jidges, go all in the furrow,
.( '7 3) Brake-Harrows are large heavy and firong harrows, with 'Brake-harrows. long teeth cither .Culter.idor square, ivey fit, for breaking or pulverifiug (tiff and clod- dy ground, and that quite to the bottom of the furrow '- They encreafe'the mould for the Paflure of Plants. And every farmer (hould have one or more of them.-Some take tw6 horses, some four and others fix to work them, according to their weight and length of their teeth. Common harrows are lighter, and are principally for har- Common Harrows. rowing in the Seed. S " Good Rollers are likewise necessary.- Use of Rolling. Rolling, breaks the clods that the Harrows miss, and helps to keep in the sap and to exclude drought at the fame time that it pulverises. Roll after, Barly, Grass feeds, Lint, Turnips, and all small :. feeds are sown and harrowed in. Roll Barley &c. Roll your Hay fields in the spring, and Hay fields. '- after the Hay is ,cut. In general wheat Land is not the better for rolling unless But not Wheat Land. there be some particular reason for it, such as if the land be so fpungy that you're a- fraid the frosts and thaws may spew out the feed. Wheat land is the better that it have many small clods, which keep the plant warm thro' Winter-and these are reduced by the frost. It often happens in the spring, that the surface of the n th Lan is round is crufled over when sudden crulted droughts succeed great rains both before and after the corns are come out-in both cafes this binding or crufling of the surface hinders the growth of the corn, and is cured by harrowing and Rolling. .Tho' the Corn, whether wheat or other grain, be come up-fear not to put the light harrows upon it, and Roll immediately .after-The curing this diltemper, will secure your Cropt, when other ways you might have had none or a very bad one. SIt is likewise often useful, when you observe that a rush of weeds, are like to get the better of young Whenweeds choak Corns to put the harrows upon them, but young Corn. let there be a warm funny dky between the harrowing and rolling to deflroy the Weeds.--in both the bove cafes, Harrow and Roll dry.,
( i8 ) 1 forgot to Mention a few things which are here .Adcded. IN the Management of Horses, there is nothing of greater service to them, nor easier procured, than Chopt or cut Straw mixed with their Corn, as likewise Citor ut straW at other times ; but let them always have :i with their Corn ; it makes them chew it throughly, to as it does them the more good, for the Corn that passes thro' them whole does them no service, and it is very wholesome, as appears by its keeping them always of a Clear and of a bright Skin The Instrument for this purpose is easily got any where, and is no great Labour to work. It is likewise very advifeable, not to keep horses always Early for Horses in upon Oats, but to change their feed often Winter. to Barley, or mix it with Barley. Oatt And Oats in Summer. are a hot and drying feed and ready to bring on Diflempers. Barley is cooling, refreshing and loosening tho' not so flrong as Oats. Therefore good for a change to Horses in winter season when they are totally on hard meat. But in Summer Oats are better, the Grass cleansing and keeping the Horses cool. As the Management of work Hotrfes is of the utmofl moment, nothing relating to it can be triviial to a Farmer. On Sundays or Days that they may happen to lie idle, let .eed oni Idle Days them have the fame feed as when tley Wiork. And let their times of feeding,. be as regular as possible, never giving them to wafle for that is hurtful to all kinds of Cattle, inaking them loath their food, but supply with fodder always as they need. Dung or other Manures cannot always be had in such quantities as to keep pace with the improvements by Tillage. Therefore when Land has been properly and throughly Allhes on Grass. wrought by the Plough &c, it is advifeable to lay it soon into grals to supply the want of Manure by refling and pafluring, in which cafe it is a good faccedanctum, to few upon your young Grass after harvcPl
( 19 ) when the corn is taken from the field, a Quanrity of Ashes or Soot, the lalt cannot be got in any fufficient quantity, therefore ife peat ashes, and a few baggs pt. Acre does it, not too thick, but so as to touch the whole ground, sowing it from the hand like feed ; repeat the fame in the beginning of the spring, by this Means you'll have tolerable good cropts of Hay and Grass, and this you may do likewise upon o!d Grass, it deflroys Moss, keeps the Grals warm in Winter, and helps it's vegetation. Pigeons Dung, or the Dung of other Fowls is good for sowing oh Lint Land, turnips 6r any Lint, turnips, &e other Cropt, after the feed is sown, where you have not other Manure. And these are of excellent use on Wheat, the beginning of Winter and S pring. Lint Land thould be made very fine, freed from all stones, Lint Land. Clods, and roots or wtack, in ithe fame way as turnip land. It should be sown in a low deep and moji Soil in the month of March or beginning of April, and very thick if you want your flax fine. It is a good way to spread your Dung upon the land you intend for Lint the beginning of winter and let it soak in upon the surface till Spring that you work it for the Seed. For the method of burning Peat-AlIies, and their excellent use as a superficial Drefling to Different Croput. See Mufeumn Ruflicum & Commerciale, Vol rt. Num. i. Where there are several good papers on Husbandry. F I N I S
N . B. The aboveis. Printed fromi an Original Manu1cript: at the Desire of some Gentlemen Who read and ,much approv- .e.d:ofit,:and thao" it contains matter ienough to have made an eighteen pence pamphlet, it is fold .at three pence, that -Gentlemen at a very fmnall expence may put mmibcrs of them into the harnds of their tenan.ts. Those who incline to beflow them in this way, iay order them from the publisher by their .carriers. They who order fifty Copics, ,wilI have them at the :rste of one Cuinoa per IHundred, '