Dedication
[John Home (sometimes spelled ‘Hume’) was a distant relative of David
Hume’s, and a Presbyterian minister. His Douglas was vastly successful
in Scotland and England, his other plays much less so.]
To the Reverend John Home, author of Douglas, a Tragedy
My dear Sir, It was the practice of the ancients to address
their compositions only to friends and equals, and to make
their dedications monuments of regard and affection, not
of servility and flattery. In those days of open and candid
liberty, a dedication did honour to the person to whom it
was addressed without degrading the author. Any partiality
towards the patron was at least the partiality of friendship
and affection.
Another instance of true liberty, of which only ancient
times can provide us with an example, is the liberty of
thought that engaged men of letters, however different in
their abstract opinions, to maintain a mutual friendship
and regard; and never to quarrel about principles while they
agreed in inclinations and manners. Science was often the
subject of disputation, never of animosity. Cicero, a Platonist,
addressed his philosophical treatises sometimes to the Stoic
Brutus, sometimes to the Epicurean Atticus.
I have a strong desire to renew these laudable practices
of antiquity by addressing the following dissertations to you,
my good friend; for such I will always call and esteem you,
despite our opposition regarding many of our speculative [see
Glossary] tenets. These differences of opinion I have found
only to enliven our conversation; while our common passion
for science and letters served as a cement to our friendship.
I still admired your genius [see Glossary] even when I imagined
that you lay under the influence of prejudice; and you have
told me that you excused my errors on account of the candor
and sincerity that you thought accompanied them.
But to tell truth, it is less my admiration of your fine
genius that has brought me to make this address to you
than my esteem for your character and my affection for your
person. The generosity of mind that always accompanies
you, the cordiality of friendship, your spirited honour and
integrity, have made me desire that a monument to our
mutual friendship should be publicly erected and if possible
preserved for posterity.
I also have the ambition to be the first who publicly
expresses his admiration for your noble tragedy of Douglas,
one of the most involving and affecting pieces that was
ever exhibited on any stage. If I expressed a preference
for it over Maffei’s Merope and over Voltaire’s Mérope, which
it resembles in its subject; if I affirmed that it contains
more fire and spirit than the former, more tenderness and
simplicity than the latter; I might be accused of partiality.
And how could I entirely acquit myself, after the professions
of friendship I have made to you? But the unfeigned tears
that flowed from every eye in the numerous performances of
it on this stage, the unparalleled command you appeared to
have over every affection [see Glossary] of the human breast,
are incontestible proofs that you possess the true theatrical
genius of Shakespeare and Otway, refined from the unhappy
barbarism of the one and the licentiousness of the other.
You know that my enemies have reproached me with
the love of paradoxes and singular opinions, and I admit
that even my friends have sometimes said the same; and
I expect to be exposed to the same accusation on account
of my praise for your Douglas. I shall be told, no doubt,
that I had artfully chosen the only time when this high
esteem for that piece could be regarded as a paradox, namely
before its publication; and that not being able to contradict
in this particular the sentiments of the public, I have at
least resolved to get in before them. But I shall be amply
1
David Hume Natural History of Religion
compensated for all these jokes at my expense if you accept
this testimony of my regard, and believe me to be, with the
greatest sincerity, dear Sir, your most affectionate friend and
humble servant, David Hume.
Introduction
As every enquiry concerning religion is of the utmost importance, two questions especially challenge our attention: (i)
the question concerning its foundation in reason, and (ii) the
question concerning its origin in human nature. Happily,
question (i), which is the more important, admits of the
more obvious solution, or at least the clearer one. The
whole frame of nature bespeaks a thinking author; and
no rational enquirer can after serious reflection suspend
for a moment his belief regarding the primary principles of
genuine theism and religion. But question (ii) concerning
the origin of religion in human nature is exposed to more
difficulty. The belief in invisible, thinking power has been
very generally diffused over the human race, in all places
and in all ages; but it has perhaps not been •so universal as
to have no exceptions or •even slightly uniform in the ideas
it has suggested. If travellers and historians may be credited,
some nations have been found that had no religious beliefs;
and no two nations—indeed, hardly any two men—have ever
agreed precisely on religious matters. So it seems that this
·religious· preconception does not arise from an original
instinct or primary impression of nature such as gives rise
to
•self-love,
•affection between the sexes,
•love of progeny,
•gratitude, and
•resentment;
since every instinct of this kind has been found to be absolutely universal in all nations and ages, and has always a
precise determinate object which it inflexibly pursues. The
first religious principles [see Glossary] must be secondary; such
as may easily be perverted by various accidents and causes,
and whose operation may sometimes by an extraordinary
concurrence of circumstances be altogether prevented. My
present enquiry addresses two questions: What are the
principles that give rise to the original belief? What are
the accidents and causes that direct its operation?
1. Polytheism was the primary religion of men
It appears to me that if we consider the improvement of
human society from its crude beginnings to a state of greater
perfection, polytheism or idolatry must have been the first
and most ancient religion of mankind. I shall try to confirm
this by the following arguments.
It is an incontestable matter of fact that about 1700 years
ago all mankind were polytheists. The doubtful and sceptical
principles of a few philosophers, or the not entirely pure
theism of one or two nations, do not constitute an objection
worth regarding. Behold, then, the clear testimony of history.
The further back we go into antiquity, the more we find
mankind plunged into polytheism. No marks, no symptoms
of any more perfect religion. The most ancient records of
human race still present us with polytheism as the popular
and established creed. The north, the south, the east, the
west, give their unanimous testimony to the same fact. What
can be opposed to so full an evidence?
As far as writing or history reaches, mankind in ancient
times seem universally to have been polytheists. Shall we
assert that in more ancient times, before the knowledge of
letters or the discovery of any art or science, men entertained
2
David Hume Natural History of Religion
the principles of pure theism? That would mean that while
they were ignorant and barbarous they discovered truth, but
they fell into error as soon as they acquired learning and
politeness [see Glossary].
This would contradict not only all appearance of probability but also our present experience concerning the principles
and opinions of barbarous nations. The savage tribes of
America, Africa and Asia are all idolaters. Not a single
exception to this rule. If a traveller transported himself
into any unknown region, and found inhabitants cultivated
with arts and science, he could not without further inquiry
say whether they were theists (though the odds are that they
would not be); but if he found them ignorant and barbarous,
he could immediately declare them to be idolaters, with
scarcely any possibility of his being mistaken.
It seems certain that, according to the natural progress
of human thought, the ignorant multitude must first entertain some low and humdrum notion of superior powers,
before they stretch their conception to the perfect Being who
bestowed order on the whole frame of nature. To assert that
•they regarded the deity as a pure spirit—omniscient,
omnipotent and omnipresent—before regarding him
as a powerful though limited being, with human
passions and appetites, limbs and organs,
would be as unreasonable as to imagine that
•men inhabited palaces before huts and cottages, or
studied geometry before agriculture.
The mind rises gradually from inferior to superior. By
abstracting from what is imperfect, it forms an idea of
perfection; and, slowly distinguishing the nobler parts of
its own frame from the grosser parts, it learns to transfer
only the former—much elevated and refined—to its divinity.
The only thing that could disturb this natural progress of
thought would be an obvious and invincible argument that
immediately led the mind into the pure principles of theism,
making it overleap at one bound the vast chasm between
the human and the divine nature. But though I accept
that the order and frame of the universe, when carefully
examined, provides such an argument, I cannot think that
this consideration had an influence on mankind when they
formed their first crude notions of religion.
The causes of familiar objects never strike our attention
or curiosity; and however extraordinary or surprising these
objects are in themselves, the raw and ignorant multitude
passes them over without much examination or enquiry.
Adam, rising straight into paradise in the full perfection
of his faculties, would naturally be (as Milton represents
him) astonished at the glorious appearances of nature, the
heavens, the air, the earth, his own organs and limbs; and
would be led to ask where this wonderful scene came from.
But a barbarous, necessitous animal such as a man is on
the first origin of society, pressed by so many wants and
passions, has no leisure to wonder at the regular face of nature or enquire into the cause of the objects he has gradually
become accustomed to since his infancy. On the contrary,
the more regular and uniform—i.e. the more perfect—nature
appears, the more familiar it is to him and the less inclined
he is to scrutinise and examine it. A monstrous birth excites
his curiosity, and is regarded as a prodigy. Its novelty alarms
him and immediately sets him trembling, sacrificing, and
praying. But an animal that is complete in all its limbs and
organs is for him an ordinary spectacle, and produces no
religious opinion or attitude. Ask him where that animal
came from; he will tell you that it came from the copulation
of its parents. And these? From the copulation of theirs.
A few removes satisfy his curiosity, and set the objects at
such a distance that he entirely loses sight of them. Don’t
think that he will so much as start the question of where
3
David Hume Natural History of Religion
the first animal came from, much less what the origin was
of the whole system or united fabric of the universe. And if
you do raise such a question with him, don’t expect him to
employ his mind with any anxiety about such a remote and
uninteresting subject lying far outside his intellectual limits.
Furthermore, if men were at first led by reasoning from
the frame of nature into believing in one supreme being, they
could never have left that belief in order to accept polytheism.
The principles of reason which at first produced and diffused
over mankind such a magnificent opinion would have to
be able even more easily to preserve it. The first invention
and proof of any doctrine is much more difficult than the
supporting and retaining of it.
There is a great difference between historical facts and
speculative opinions; and knowledge of them is propagated in
different ways. When an historical fact is being passed along
by oral tradition from eye-witnesses and contemporaries, it
is disguised in each narration, and may eventually retain
little if any resemblance to the original truth it was based on.
If men’s
•frail memories,
•love of exaggeration, and
•lazy carelessness
are not corrected by books and writing, they soon pervert the
account of historical events. The result is something where
argument or reasoning has little or no place, and the truth
cannot be recovered. That is how the fables of Hercules,
Theseus and Bacchus are supposed to have been originally
based on true history, corrupted by tradition. But the case
is quite different with regard to speculative opinions. If these
opinions are based on arguments so clear and obvious as
to carry conviction with people in general, the arguments
that at first spread the opinions will still preserve them in
their original purity. If the arguments are more abstruse and
further from what ordinary folk can understand, the opinions
will always be confined to a few persons; and as soon as men
stop thinking about the arguments, the opinions will be
buried in oblivion. Whichever side of this dilemma we take,
it seems impossible that theism could through reasoning
have been the primary religion of human race and then
through corruption given birth to polytheism and to all the
superstitions of the heathen world. When reason is obvious,
it prevents these corruptions; when it is abstruse, it keeps
the principles entirely from the knowledge of the vulgar [see
Glossary], who are the only ones liable to corrupt any principle
or opinion.
2. The origin of polytheism
So if we want to indulge our curiosity by enquiring into
the origin of religion, we must turn our thoughts towards
polytheism, the primitive religion of uninstructed mankind.
If contemplation of the works of nature led men to the
thought of invisible, thinking power, they could not possibly
entertain any conception except that of one being, who gave
existence and order to this vast machine and adjusted all
its parts according to one regular plan or connected system.
Persons of a certain turn of mind don’t find it altogether
absurd to suppose that several independent beings, endowed
with superior wisdom, might work together in devising and
executing one regular plan; but this a merely arbitrary
supposition that must be admitted to be supported neither
by probability nor by necessity, if indeed it is even possible.
All things in the universe are evidently of a piece. Each
thing is adjusted to each other thing. One design prevails
throughout the whole. And this uniformity leads the mind to
acknowledge one author; because the thought of different authors where there is no difference of attributes or operations
4
David Hume Natural History of Religion
serves only to perplex the imagination without bringing any
satisfaction to the understanding. Pliny tells us that the
statue of Laocoon was the work of three artists. But if we
had not been told this, we would never have imagined that a
group of figures cut from one stone and united in one plan
was not the work and design of one sculptor. It is surely
not natural and obvious to ascribe any single effect to the
combination of several causes.
On the other hand, if we leave the works of nature
and trace the footsteps of invisible power in the various
and contrary events of human life, we are inevitably led
to polytheism—the acknowledgment of several limited and
imperfect deities. Storms and tempests ruin what is nourished by the sun. The sun destroys what is fostered by the
moisture of dews and rains. War may be favourable to a
nation, whom the inclemency of the seasons afflicts with
famine. Sickness and pestilence may depopulate a kingdom
amidst the most profuse plenty. The same nation is not
equally successful by sea and by land at the same time. And
a nation that now triumphs over its enemies may soon be
vanquished by them. In short, the course of events. . . .is
so full of variety and uncertainty that if we suppose it to
be immediately ordered by any thinking beings, we must
acknowledge a contrariety in their designs and intentions;
either
•a constant combat of opposite powers, or
•a single power which, being weak or light-minded,
keeps regretting what it has done and changing its
plans.
Each nation has its tutelar deity [see Glossary]. Each element
is subjected to its invisible power or agent. The province of
each god is separate from that of the others. And the operations of any one god are uncertain and variable. Today he
protects; tomorrow he abandons us. Prayers and sacrifices,
rites and ceremonies, well or ill performed, are the sources of
his favour or enmity, and produce all the good or ill fortune
that are to be found among mankind.
We may conclude, therefore, that in all the nations that
embraced polytheism the first ideas of religion arose not from
contemplating the works of nature but from a concern with
the events of life and the human mind’s incessant hopes
and fears. Accordingly, we find that all idolaters—having
separated the provinces of their deities—have recourse to
the invisible agent to whose authority they are immediately
subjected, and whose province it is to superintend the
activity they are currently engaged in. Juno is invoked at
marriages, Lucina at births. Neptune receives the prayers
of seamen, and Mars of warriors. The farmer cultivates
his field under the protection of Ceres, and the merchant
acknowledges the authority of Mercury. Each natural event
is supposed to be governed by some thinking agent, and
any prosperous or adverse event in life can be the subject of
special prayers or thanksgivings.
For men’s attention to be carried beyond the present
course of things and led into any inference concerning invisible thinking power, they must be actuated by some passion
that prompts their thought and reflection—some motive that
spurs their first enquiry. But what passion can it be that has
such a mighty consequence? Surely not speculative curiosity,
or the pure love of truth. That motive is too refined for such
gross minds. It would lead men into enquiries into the frame
of nature, a subject too comprehensive for their narrow
capacities. So the only passions that can be supposed to
work on such barbarians are the ordinary affections [see
Glossary] of human life: the anxious concern for happiness,
the dread of future misery, the terror of death, the thirst for
revenge, the appetite for food and other necessaries. Agitated
by hopes and fears of this nature, especially the last, men
5
David Hume Natural History of Religion
look with trembling curiosity into the course of future causes,
and examine the various and contrary events of human life.
And in this disordered scene, with eyes still more disordered
and astonished, they see the first obscure traces of divinity.
3. The same subject continued
We are placed in this world, as in a great theatre, where
the true springs and causes of every event are entirely
concealed from us; and we do not have sufficient wisdom
to foresee the ills we are continually threatened with, or
any power to prevent them. We hang in perpetual suspense
between life and death, health and sickness, plenty and
want; which are distributed among the human species
by secret and unknown causes whose operation is often
unexpected and always unaccountable. So these unknown
causes become the constant object of our hope and fear;
and while the •passions are kept in perpetual alarm by an
anxious expectation of the events, the •imagination is equally
employed in forming ideas of the powers we so entirely
depend on. If men could anatomise nature according to the
most probable philosophy—or at least the most intelligible
one—they would find that these causes are nothing but the
particular constitution and structure of the minute parts
of their own bodies and of external objects; and that all
the events about which they are so much concerned are
produced by a regular and constant machinery. But this
philosophy is too hard for the ignorant multitude, who can
only conceive the unknown causes in a general and confused
manner; though their imagination, perpetually at work on
the same subject, must try to form some particular and
distinct idea of them. The more they consider these causes
themselves, and the uncertainty of their operation, the less
satisfaction they meet with in their researches; and they
would eventually have abandoned this arduous project if it
were not for a propensity in human nature which leads into
a system that gives them some satisfaction.
There is a universal tendency among mankind to think of
all things as being like themselves, and to transfer to every
object the qualities they are familiarly acquainted with and
intimately conscious of. We find human faces in the moon,
armies in the clouds; and, if not corrected by experience
and reflection, our natural tendency leads us to ascribe
malice or good-will to everything that hurts or pleases us.
Hence the frequency and beauty of the devices in poetry
where trees, mountains and streams are personified, and the
inanimate parts of nature acquire sentiment and passion.
These poetical figures and expressions have no effect on what
we believe, but they are evidence of a certain tendency in the
imagination, without which they could neither be beautiful
nor natural. And a river-god is not always taken to be a mere
poetical or imaginary personage, but may sometimes enter
into the belief-system of the ignorant vulgar; while each grove
or field is represented as possessed by a particular spirit or
invisible power that inhabits and protects it. Indeed, even
philosophers cannot entirely exempt themselves from this
natural frailty: they have often ascribed to inanimate matter
the horror of a vacuum, sympathies, antipathies, and other
affections of human nature. The absurdity is not less when,
as all too often happens, we look upwards and transfer human passions and infirmities to the deity, representing him
as jealous and revengeful, capricious and partial—in short,
a wicked and foolish man in every respect but his superior
power and authority. No wonder, then, that mankind, being
placed in such an absolute ignorance of causes, and being
at the same time so anxious concerning their future fortune,
should immediately acknowledge a dependence on invisible
powers that have thought and feeling. The unknown causes
6
David Hume Natural History of Religion
that continually occupy men’s thought, appearing always in
the same way, are all taken to be of the same kind or species.
And before long we ascribe to them thought and reason and
passion, and sometimes even the limbs and shapes of men,
so as to bring them nearer to a resemblance with ourselves.
The more a man’s course of life is governed by chance
events, the more superstitious he is. This can be particularly
observed in gamblers and sailors, who are of all mankind
the least capable of serious reflection and the most given
to frivolous and superstitious beliefs. An ancient warrior
said that the gods have an influence in every affair, but
above all in war, where the outcome is so uncertain. All
human life, especially before the institution of order and good
government, is subject to chance events; so it is natural that
in barbarous ages superstition should prevail everywhere,
setting men to enquire earnestly concerning the invisible
powers who distribute their happiness or misery. Ignorant
of astronomy and the anatomy of plants and animals, and
too little curious to observe the admirable adjustment of
final causes [see Glossary], they remain ignorant of the first
and supreme creator, and of that infinitely perfect spirit
who alone bestowed order on the whole frame of nature.
Such a magnificent idea is too big for their narrow conceptions, which cannot see the beauty of the work or grasp
the grandeur of its author. They think of their deities as
being, however potent and invisible, nothing but a species of
human creatures, perhaps raised from among mankind and
retaining all human passions and appetites, together with
bodily limbs and organs. Since each of these limited beings
is incapable of extending his influence everywhere, there
must be vastly many of them to answer the variety of events
that happen over the whole face of nature. Thus, every place
is crammed with local deities; and that is how polytheism did
and still does prevail among most of uninstructed mankind.
Any of the human affections may lead us into the notion
of invisible, thinking power—hope as well as fear, gratitude
as well as affliction. But if we examine our own hearts or
observe the conduct of others, we shall find that men are
thrown onto their knees much oftener by the melancholy
passions than by the agreeable ones. Prosperity is easily
received as our due, and few questions are asked concerning
its cause or author. It begets cheerfulness, activity, alacrity,
and a lively enjoyment of every social and sensual pleasure;
and when men are in this state of mind they have little leisure
or inclination to think of the unknown invisible regions. On
the other hand, every disastrous event alarms us and starts
us wondering about what caused it; fears spring up regarding
the future; and the mind—sunk into diffidence, terror, and
melancholy—has recourse to every method of appeasing
those secret thinking powers that our fortune is supposed to
depend on.
No topic is more usual with all popular divines than
to display the advantages of affliction in bringing men to
a due sense of religion by subduing the confidence and
sensuality which in times of prosperity make them forgetful
of a divine providence. Not only moderns but also ancients
have pursued this line of thought. A Greek historian [Diodorus
Siculus] said that fortune has never bestowed a happiness
on mankind without a mixture of envy; she has always
combined her gifts with some disastrous circumstance, in
order to chastise men into a reverence for the gods they are
apt to forget if they have uninterrupted prosperity.
What age or period of life is the most addicted to superstition? The weakest and most timid. What sex? The
same answer must be given. The leaders and examples of
every kind of superstition, says ·the ancient Greek writer·
Strabo, are the women. They arouse the men to devotion and
supplications, and the observance of religious days. It is rare
7
David Hume Natural History of Religion
to meet with a man who lives apart from females and yet is
given to such practices. . . . This would lead us to entertain
a bad idea of the devotion of monks if we did not know—
through an experience that may have been less common in
Strabo’s time—that one may practise celibacy and profess
chastity while maintaining the closest connections and most
entire sympathy with that timorous and pious sex.
4. Deities not considered as creators or formers of
the world
The only point of theology in which we find almost all
mankind in agreement is that the world contains some
invisible, thinking power; but
•whether this power is supreme or subordinate,
•whether it is confined to one being or distributed
among several, and
•what attributes, qualities, connections, or principles
[see Glossary] of action should be ascribed to ·that being
or· those beings,
—concerning all these points the popular systems of theology
differ widely. Our ancestors in Europe, before the revival of
letters, believed (as we do now) that there was one supreme
God, the author of nature, whose power was often exerted by
the interposition of his angels and subordinate servants who
furthered his sacred purposes. But they also believed that
nature was full of other invisible powers—fairies, goblins,
elves, sprites—beings mightier than men but much inferior
to the celestial natures who surround the throne of God.
Now, suppose that someone in those ages had denied the
existence of God and of his angels; could not his impiety have
fairly been called ‘atheism’ even if by some odd capricious
reasoning he had still allowed that the popular stories of
elves and fairies were just and well-grounded? Such a
b person would differ from any a genuine theist infinitely
more than he would differ from c someone who absolutely
excluded all invisible thinking power ·such as elves and
fairies·. It is a fallacy, merely from the casual resemblance
of names—·a ‘theism’· and b ‘polytheism’—to rank such opposite opinions under the same general label.
To anyone who thinks soundly about this matter, it will
appear that the ‘gods’ of all polytheists do not deserve pious
worship or veneration any more than did the elves or fairies
of our ancestors. These pretended religionists are really a
kind of superstitious atheists, and acknowledge no being
answering to our idea of a deity. No first principle of mind
or thought; no supreme government and administration; no
divine planning or intention in the structure of the world.
The Chinese, when their prayers are not answered, beat
their idols. [Hume gives a reference for each custom reported in this
paragraph.] The deities of the Laplanders are any large stone
they find that has an extraordinary shape. The Egyptian
mythologists, in order to account for animal worship, said
that the gods, pursued by the violence of earth-born men,
who were their enemies, had once had to disguise themselves
as beasts. The Caunii, a nation in Lesser Asia, periodically
walked to their frontiers, fully armed, beating the air with
their lances to drive out foreign deities. Some German
nations told Caesar that not even the immortal gods are
a match for the Suevi. When (in Homer) Venus has been
wounded by Diomedes, her mother Dione says: ‘Many ills,
my daughter, have the gods inflicted on men; and many ills
have men inflicted on the gods in return.’
If we open any classic author we’ll meet with these gross
representations of the deities; and Longinus was right to
say that such ideas of the divine nature, if taken literally,
contain a true atheism.
8
David Hume Natural History of Religion
Some writers have been surprised that the impieties of
•Aristophanes should have been tolerated—indeed publicly
performed and applauded—by the Athenians, who were so
superstitious and so protective of the public religion that at
that same time they put Socrates to death for his imagined
incredulity. What these writers do not consider is this:
The ludicrous, familiar images under which the gods
are represented by •that comic poet, rather than
appearing impious, were the genuine lights in which
the ancients conceived their divinities.
What conduct can be more criminal or mean than that of
Jupiter in the Amphitryon? Yet that play, which showed his
gallant [here = ‘sexual’] exploits, was supposed to be so agreeable to him that it was acted in Rome by public authority
whenever the state was threatened with pestilence, famine,
or any general calamity. The Romans supposed that he, like
all old lechers, would be highly pleased with the recital of
his former feats of prowess and vigour, and that this was the
best topic on which to flatter his vanity. . . .
It never enters into the head of any polytheist or idolater
to ascribe the origin and fabric of the universe to these
imperfect beings. Hesiod, whose writings (with Homer’s)
contained the canonical system of the heathens, supposes
that gods and men sprang equally from the unknown powers
of nature. And throughout that author’s Theogony, the only
instance of creation or a voluntary production is the creation
of Pandora; and she too was formed by the gods merely
out of indignation against Prometheus, who had furnished
men with fire stolen from the celestial regions. The ancient
mythologists, indeed, seem throughout to have embraced the
idea of •generation rather than that of •creation or formation;
and to have accounted in that way for the origin of this
universe.
Ovid, who lived in a learned age and had been instructed
by philosophers in the principles of a divine creation or
formation of the world, finds that such an idea would not
agree with the popular mythology that he is presenting. So
he leaves it loose and detached from his system: ‘Whichever
of the gods it was’, he says, that dissipated the chaos and
introduced order into the universe. He knew that it could
not be Saturn or Jupiter or Neptune or any of the received
deities of paganism. His theological system had taught him
nothing about this, and he leaves the matter undetermined.
Diodorus Siculus, beginning his work with an enumeration of the most reasonable opinions concerning the origin
of the world, makes no mention of a deity or thinking mind;
though his history shows that he was much more prone to
superstition than to irreligion.
And in another passage, talking of a certain nation in
India, he says, that because there is so much difficulty
in accounting for their descent we must conclude them to
be aborigines, without any beginning of their generation,
propagating their race from all eternity. . . . He adds: ‘But in
such subjects as these, which exceed all human capacity, it
may well happen that those who say the most know the least,
reaching a plausible appearance of truth in their reasonings
while extremely wide of the real truth and matter of fact.’
A strange sentiment in our eyes, to be embraced by a
professed and zealous religionist! But it was merely by
accident that the question of the origin of the world ever
did in ancient times enter into religious systems, or was
treated by theologians. Only the philosophers delivered
systems of this kind, and it was pretty late before even
they thought to avail themselves of a mind or supreme
intelligence as the first cause of everything. So far was
it from being thought profane in those days to account for
the origin of things without a deity that philosophers who
9
David Hume Natural History of Religion
did so—Thales, Anaximenes, Heraclitus and others—went
unchallenged; whereas Anaxagoras, the first undoubted
theist among the philosophers, may have been the first to be
accused of atheism.
Sextus Empiricus tells us that Epicurus, when a boy,
read with his preceptor these verses of Hesiod:
‘Eldest of beings, chaos first arose;
Next earth, wide-stretch’d, the seat of all’,
and the young scholar first revealed his genius for inquiry
by asking ‘And where did chaos come from?’ His preceptor
told him that he must look to the philosophers for a solution
of such questions; and from this hint Epicurus left philology
and all other ·bookish· studies, in order to pursue that
science from which alone he expected satisfaction with
regard to these lofty subjects.
The common people were never likely to push their
researches so far, or derive their systems of religion from
reasoning, given that philologists and mythologists hardly
ever revealed that much penetration. And even the philosophers who did talk of such topics readily assented to the
crudest theory, admitting the joint origin of gods and men
from night and chaos; or from fire, water, air or whatever
they took to be the ruling element.
Nor was it only on their first origin that the gods were
supposed to depend on the powers of nature. Throughout
their whole existence, it was thought, they were at the mercy
of fate or destiny. ‘Think of the force of necessity’, says
Agrippa to the Roman people, ‘that force to which even the
gods must submit’. And the younger Pliny tells us that
amidst the darkness, horror, and confusion after the first
eruption of Vesuvius some people concluded that all nature
was going to wrack and that gods and men were perishing in
one common ruin.
It is indeed extremely generous to dignify with the name
‘religion’ such an imperfect system of theology, putting it
on a level with later systems that are based on sounder
and loftier principles. The principles of Marcus Aurelius,
Plutarch, and some other Stoics and Academics were much
more refined than the pagan superstition, but for my part I
can scarcely allow even them the honourable label ‘theism’.
For if the mythology of the heathens resembles the ancient
European system of spiritual beings, excluding God and
angels and leaving only fairies and sprites, the creed of these
philosophers may justly be said to exclude a deity and to
leave only angels and fairies.
5. Various forms of polytheism: allegory, heroworship
[In this chapter, ‘hero-worship’ is meant very literally: worshipping heroic
men after they have been elevated to the status of gods.]
But my chief present business is to consider the crude
polytheism of the vulgar, and to trace all its various appearances in the principles of human nature from which
they are derived.
Anyone who learns by argument the existence of invisible
thinking power must reason from the admirable design of
natural objects, and must suppose the world to be the
workmanship of that divine being, the original cause of all
things. But the vulgar polytheist in stark contrast deifies
every part of the universe, and conceives all the conspicuous
productions of nature to be themselves so many real divinities. The sun, moon and stars are all gods according to his
system; fountains are inhabited by nymphs, and trees by
hamadryads [= wood nymphs]; even monkeys, dogs, cats and
other animals often become sacred in his eyes, and strike
him with a religious veneration. And thus, however strong
10
David Hume Natural History of Religion
men’s propensity to believe there is invisible, thinking power
in nature, they are just as strongly inclined to rest their
attention on sensible, visible objects; and to reconcile these
opposite inclinations they are led to unite the invisible power
with some visible object.
The allotting of distinct realms to the various deities is
apt to cause some allegory, both physical and moral, to enter
into the vulgar systems of polytheism. The god of war will
naturally be represented as furious, cruel and impetuous;
the god of poetry as elegant, polite and amiable; the god
of merchandise, especially in early times, as thievish and
deceitful. Admittedly, some of the allegories supposed in
Homer and other mythologists have been so strained that
men of sense are apt entirely to reject them, and to consider
them as mere products of the whims of critics and commentators. But it is undeniable, even on the least reflection, that
allegory really has place in the heathen mythology.
•Cupid, the son of Venus,
•the Muses, the daughters of Memory,
•Prometheus, the wise brother, and Epimetheus the
foolish,
•Hygieia, the goddess of health, descended from
Æsculapius, the god of physic;
who does not see in these and many other instances the
plain traces of allegory? When a god is supposed to preside
over any passion, event, or system of actions, it is almost unavoidable to give him a genealogy, attributes, and adventures
suitable to his supposed powers and influence. . . .
We ought not to expect ignorance and superstition to
produce entirely perfect allegories, there being no work of
intellect that requires a more precise hand, or has more
rarely met with success. That Fear and Terror are the sons
of Mars is just; but why by Venus? That Harmony is the
daughter of Venus is regular; but why by Mars? That Sleep
is the brother of Death is suitable; but why describe him
as enamoured of one of the Graces? And since the ancient
mythologists fall into such gross and palpable mistakes, we
have no reason surely to expect such refined and long-spun
allegories as some have tried to draw from their fictions.
Lucretius was plainly seduced by the strong appearance
of allegory observable in the pagan fictions. He first addresses himself to Venus as to the generating power that
animates, renews and beautifies the universe. But he is
soon betrayed by the mythology into incoherency when he
prays to that allegorical personage to appease the furies of
her lover Mars. This idea is drawn not from allegory but from
the popular religion, which Lucretius as an Epicurean could
not consistently accept.
The deities of the vulgar are so little superior to human
creatures that where men are affected with strong sentiments
of veneration or gratitude for any hero or public benefactor
nothing can be more natural than to convert him into a
god, in this way filling the heavens with continual recruits
from among mankind. Most of the divinities of the ancient
world are supposed to have once been men, and to have
owed their apotheosis [= elevation to divine status] to the admiration and affection of the people. The real history of
their adventures—corrupted by tradition and elevated by the
marvellous—became a plentiful source of fable, especially in
passing through the hands of poets, allegorists and priests
who successively improved on the wonder and astonishment
of the ignorant multitude.
Painters and sculptors also came in for their share of
profit in the sacred mysteries; and furnishing men with sensible representations of their divinities, whom they clothed in
human figures, greatly increased public devotion and fixed
its object. It was probably for lack of painting and sculpture
in rude and barbarous ages that men deified plants, animals,
11
David Hume Natural History of Religion
and even brute, unorganised matter, affixing divinity to such
ungainly forms rather than being without a sensible object
of worship.
If any Syrian sculpture in early times could have made a
good figure of Apollo, the conic stone called Elagabulus would
never have become the object of such profound adoration
and been accepted as a representation of the solar deity.
Stilpo was banished ·from Athens· by the council of
Areopagus for affirming that the Minerva in the citadel was
not a divinity but the workmanship of the sculptor Phidias.
What degree of reason must we expect in the religious belief
of the vulgar in other nations, when Athenians and their
council could entertain such gross conceptions?
These, then, are the general principles of polytheism,
founded in a human nature and depending little if at all
on b caprice or c accident [i.e. on b episodic thoughts of individual
people or on c external events, these being in contrast to a human
nature.] The causes that bestow happiness or misery are
in general very little known and very uncertain; so our
anxious concern tries to get a determinate idea of them,
and finds no better expedient than to represent them as
thinking voluntary agents—like ourselves except somewhat
superior in power and wisdom. The limited influence of
these agents, and their great proximity to human weakness,
leads to their being assigned different roles, which gives
rise to allegory. The same principles naturally deify mortals
who are superior in power, courage or understanding, and
produce hero-worship, together with fabulous history and
mythological tradition, in all its wild and unaccountable
forms. And as an invisible spiritual intelligence is too
refined an object for the vulgar to grasp, men naturally
affix it to some sensible representation, such as •the more
conspicuous parts of nature or •the statues, images and
pictures that a more refined age forms of its divinities.
Almost all idolaters, of whatever age or country, concur
in these general principles and conceptions; and even the
particular characters and domains that they assign to their
deities are not very different. The Greek and Roman travellers and conquerors had little difficulty finding their own
deities everywhere, saying ‘This is Mercury, that Venus’, ‘This
is Mars, that Neptune’, whatever names the strange gods
had in their own country. According to Tacitus, the goddess
Hertha of our Saxon ancestors seems to be no other than
the Mater Tellus of the Romans; and his conjecture was
evidently just.
6. How theism came from polytheism
The doctrine of one supreme deity, the author of nature, is
very ancient, has spread over great and populous nations,
and among them has been embraced by all ranks and conditions of men. But if you think it has owed its success to the
power of the invincible reasons on which it is undoubtedly
founded, you show yourself to be little acquainted with the
ignorance and stupidity of the people, and their incurable
prejudices in favour of their particular superstitions. Even at
this day, and even in Europe, ask any of the vulgar why he
believes in an omnipotent creator of the world. He will never
mention the beauty of final causes [see Glossary], of which he
is wholly ignorant; he will not hold out his hand and tell
you to contemplate the suppleness and variety of joints in
his fingers, their bending all one way, the counterpoise they
receive from the thumb, the softness and fleshy parts of the
inside of his hand and all the other details that fit the hand
for its destined use. He has long been accustomed to all
these, and beholds them with listlessness and unconcern.
He will tell you of
•this person’s sudden and unexpected death,
12
David Hume Natural History of Religion
•that one’s fall and bruising,
•the excessive drought of this season,
•the cold and rains of another.
He ascribes these to the immediate operation of providence.
Events that good reasoners see as the chief difficulties in
admitting a supreme intelligence are with him the sole
arguments for it!
Many theists—even the most zealous and refined of
them—have denied a particular providence, and have asserted that the Sovereign mind or first principle [see Glossary]
of all things, having fixed general laws by which nature is
governed, gives free and uninterrupted course to these laws
and does not keep disturbing the settled order of events by
particular interventions. They say that
we get the chief argument for theism from the beautiful connection and rigid observance of established
rules, which also enables us to answer the principal
objections against it.
But so little is this understood by the generality of mankind
that when someone ascribes all events to natural causes
and denies the particular interposition of a deity, they are
apt to suspect him of the grossest infidelity [see Glossary].
A little philosophy, says Lord Bacon, makes men atheists; a
great deal reconciles them to religion. For men are taught
by superstitious prejudices to lay the stress on a wrong
place; and when that fails them, and a little reflection shows
them that the course of nature is regular and uniform, their
whole faith totters and falls to ruin. But being taught by
more reflection that this very regularity and uniformity is
the strongest proof of design and of a supreme intelligence,
they return to the belief they had deserted; and now they
can establish it on a firmer and more durable foundation.
Convulsions in nature, disorders, prodigies, miracles,
though quite opposite to the plan of a wise superintendent,
impress mankind with the strongest sentiments of religion
because these are events whose causes seem the most
unknown and unaccountable. Madness, fury, rage, and
an inflamed imagination, though they sink men nearest to
the level of beasts, are for a similar reason often thought
to be the only states in which we can have any immediate
communication with the Deity.
So we can conclude, on the whole, that since the vulgar
in nations that have embraced the doctrine of theism still
base it on irrational and superstitious principles, they are
never led into it by any process of argument but by a certain
train of thinking more suitable to their genius [see Glossary]
and capacity.
It can easily happen in an idolatrous nation that though
men admit the existence of several limited deities, there is
some one God whom they make the special object of their
worship and adoration. They may suppose that a in the
distribution of power and territory among the gods, their
nation was subjected to the jurisdiction of that particular
deity; or they may b think of one god as the prince or supreme
magistrate of the rest, having the same nature as them but
ruling them with an authority like what an earthly sovereign
exercises over his subjects and vassals. Therefore, whether
this god is considered as a their special peculiar patron
or as b the general sovereign of heaven, his votaries will
try by every art to insinuate themselves into his favour;
and—supposing him to be pleased with praise and flattery,
as they are—will spare no eulogy or exaggeration in their
addresses to him. As men’s fears or distresses become more
urgent, they invent new strains of adulation; and even he
who outdoes his predecessor in swelling up the titles of his
divinity is sure to be outdone by his successor in newer
and more pompous epithets of praise. Thus they proceed,
until eventually they arrive at infinity itself, beyond which
13
David Hume Natural History of Religion
there is no further progress. If they try to get further and
represent a magnificent simplicity, they risk running into
inexplicable mystery and destroying their deity’s thinking
nature, the only possible basis for any rational worship or
adoration. While they confine themselves to the notion of
a perfect being, the creator of the world, they happen to
coincide with the principles of reason and true philosophy;
though they are guided to that notion not by reason—of
which they are largely incapable—but by the adulation and
fears of the most vulgar superstition.
We often find among barbarous nations, and even sometimes among civilised ones, that when every strain of flattery
has been exhausted towards human princes, when every
human quality has been applauded to the utmost, their
servile courtiers finally represent them as real divinities, and
point them out to the people as objects of adoration. How
much more natural is it, therefore, that a limited deity who at
first is taken to be only the immediate author of the particular
goods and ills in life should eventually be represented as
sovereign maker and modifier of the universe?
Even where this notion of a supreme deity is already
established, though it ought naturally to lessen every other
worship and lower the status of every ·other· object of reverence, if a nation has believed in some subordinate tutelar
divinity, saint or angel, their addresses to that being are
gradually elevated and encroach on the adoration due to
their supreme deity. The Virgin Mary, before being checked
by the Reformation, had risen from being merely a good
woman to usurping many attributes of the Almighty; and in
all the prayers and petitions of the Muscovites, God and St.
Nicholas go hand in hand.
Thus the deity who lustfully converted himself into a bull
in order to carry off Europa, and ambitiously dethroned
his father, Saturn, became the Optimus Maximus of the
heathens. Thus, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
became the supreme deity or Jehovah of the Jews.
[After a complex paragraph on the politics of the belief
in the immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary, Hume
continues:] Rather than relinquish this propensity to adulation, religionists in all ages have involved themselves in the
greatest absurdities and contradictions.
Homer in one passage calls Oceanus and Tethys ‘the
original parents of all things’, conformably to the established
mythology and tradition of the Greeks; yet in other passages
he could not forbear complimenting Jupiter, the reigning
deity, by calling him ‘the father of gods and men’. He forgets
that every temple, every street, was full of the ancestors,
uncles, brothers and sisters of this Jupiter; who was in
reality nothing but an upstart parricide and usurper. A
similar contradiction can be seen in Hesiod; and is less
excusable because his professed intention was to deliver a
true genealogy of the gods.
If there were a religion (and we may suspect Mahometanism to be one) which sometimes a painted the Deity
in the most sublime colours as the creator of heaven and
earth; sometimes b degraded him nearly to a level with
human creatures in his powers and faculties, while also ascribing to him suitable infirmities, passions and partialities
of the moral kind; that religion, after it was extinct, would
also be cited as an instance of the contradictions that arise
from the b gross, vulgar, natural conceptions of mankind,
opposed to their continual propensity towards a flattery and
exaggeration. Nothing indeed would prove more strongly the
divine origin of any religion than to find it to be free from
a contradiction that is so incident to human nature. And
happily this is the case with Christianity.
14
David Hume Natural History of Religion
7. Confirmation of this doctrine
It appears certain that although the original notions of the
vulgar represent the Divinity as a limited being, and consider
him only as the particular cause of health or sickness, plenty
or want, prosperity or adversity, yet when more magnificent
ideas are urged on them they think it dangerous to refuse
their assent. Will you say that your deity •is finite and
bounded in his perfections? •may be overcome by a greater
force? •is subject to human passions, pains and infirmities?
•has a beginning, and may have an end? They dare not answer Yes to this. Thinking it safest to go along with the higher
praises, they try by an affected ravishment and devotion to
ingratiate themselves with him. As confirmation of this, we
may observe that in this case the assent of the vulgar is
merely verbal, and that they are incapable of conceiving the
sublime qualities that they seemingly attribute to the Deity.
Their real idea of him, despite their pompous language, is
still as poor and frivolous as ever.
The Magians [see Glossary] say that the original intelligence
who is the first principle of all things reveals himself immediately to the mind and understanding alone; but has placed
the sun as his image in the visible universe, and when the
sun diffuses its beams over the earth and the firmament it is
a faint copy of the glory that resides in the higher heavens. If
you want to escape the displeasure of this divine being, you
must be careful never to set your bare foot on the ground,
or spit into a fire, or throw any water on it, even if it is
consuming a whole city. Who can express the perfections
of the Almighty? say the Mahometans. Even the noblest of
his works are but dust and rubbish compared to him. How
much more must human conception fall short of his infinite
perfections? His smile and favour makes men for ever happy;
and the best method to obtain it for your children is to cut
off from them, while they are infants, a little bit of skin
about half the width of a farthing. The Roman Catholics say:
take two bits of cloth about an inch and a half square, join
them by the corners with two strings or pieces of tape about
sixteen inches long, throw this over your head making one
of the bits of cloth lie on your breast and the other on your
back, keeping them next your skin: There is not a better
secret for recommending yourself to the infinite Being who
exists from eternity to eternity!. . . .
8. Rise and fall of polytheism and theism
It is remarkable that the principles of religion have a kind
of flux and reflux in the human mind, and that men have
a natural tendency to rise from idolatry to theism, and to
sink again from theism into idolatry. Because the vulgar—
i.e. all mankind with a few exceptions—are ignorant and
uninstructed, they never
•elevate their contemplation to the heavens, or
•dig into the secret structure of vegetable or animal
bodies
far enough to discover a supreme mind or original providence that bestowed order on every part of nature. They
take a more confined and selfish view of these admirable
works: finding their own happiness and misery to depend
on the secret and unforeseen influence of external objects,
they constantly attend to the unknown causes that govern
all these natural events and distribute pleasure and pain,
good and ill, by their powerful but silent operation. The
unknown causes are still appealed to on every occasion; and
this general appearance or confused image embraces the
perpetual objects of human hopes and fears, wishes and
anxieties. The active imagination of men, uneasy in this
abstract conception of objects that it is incessantly thinking
15
David Hume Natural History of Religion
about, gradually begins to make them more particular and to
give them shapes more suitable to the imagination’s natural
grasp. It represents them as sensible, thinking beings, like
mankind; actuated by love and hatred, and capable of being
swayed by gifts and entreaties, by prayers and sacrifices.
Hence the origin of religion, and hence the origin of idolatry
or polytheism.
But the anxious concern for happiness that creates
the idea of these invisible, thinking powers does not allow
mankind to remain long with the first simple conception of
them as
•powerful but limited beings,
•masters of human fate but slaves to destiny and the
course of nature.
Men’s exaggerated praises and compliments still swell their
idea, so that—elevating their deities to the utmost bounds
of perfection—they eventually beget the attributes of unity
and infinity, simplicity and spirituality. Such refined ideas
are not a good fit for vulgar comprehension, so they don’t
remain long in their original purity but have to be supported
by the notion of inferior mediators or subordinate agents
that interpose between mankind and their supreme deity.
These demi-gods or middle beings, partaking more of human
nature and being more familiar to us, become the chief
objects of devotion and gradually bring back the idolatry
that had formerly been banished by the ardent prayers and
panegyrics of fearful and poverty-stricken mortals. But as
these idolatrous religions continually fall into grosser and
more vulgar conceptions, they at last destroy themselves and,
by the vile representations they form of their deities, make
the tide turn again towards theism. But in this alternate
revolution of human sentiments the propensity to return
to idolatry is so strong that the utmost precaution cannot
effectively prevent it. And some theists—particularly the
Jews and Mahometans—have been aware of this, as can
be seen in their banishing all the arts of statuary and
painting, and not allowing sculptures or pictures even of
human figures lest the common infirmity of mankind should
lead from them to idolatry. The feeble apprehensions of men
cannot be satisfied with conceiving their deity as a pure spirit
and perfect intelligence, but their natural terrors keep them
from attributing to him the least limitation or imperfection.
They fluctuate between these opposite sentiments. Their
infirmity drags them downwards from •an omnipotent and
spiritual deity to •a limited and corporeal one, and from that
to •a statue or visible representation. And their endeavour at
elevation pushes them upwards from •the statue or material
image to •the invisible power, and from that to •an infinitely
perfect deity, the creator and sovereign of the universe.
9. Comparing the two with regard to persecution
and toleration
Polytheism or idolatrous worship, being based entirely on
vulgar traditions, is liable to the great inconvenience that any
practice or opinion, however barbarous or corrupted, may be
authorised by it; and full scope is given for knavery to impose
on credulity until morals and humanity are expelled from
the religious systems of mankind. At the same time, idolatry
also has the evident advantage that by limiting the powers
and functions of its deities it naturally admits the gods of
other sects and nations to a share of divinity, and makes
all the various deities—as well as rites, ceremonies and
traditions—compatible with one another. Theism is opposite
in both its advantages and its disadvantages. Because it
supposes one sole deity who is the perfection of reason and
goodness, it should banish from religious worship everything
frivolous, unreasonable or inhuman, and set before men
16
David Hume Natural History of Religion
the most illustrious example of justice and benevolence as
well as the most powerful motives for them. These mighty
advantages could not be outweighed but they are somewhat
diminished by inconveniences arising from the vices and
prejudices of mankind. With only one object of devotion
being acknowledged, the worship of other deities is regarded
as absurd and impious. Indeed, this unity of object seems
naturally to require the unity of faith and ceremonies, and
provides scheming men with a pretence for representing
their adversaries as profane and as the objects of divine
as well as human vengeance. Each sect is positive that
its own faith and worship are entirely acceptable to the
deity, and none can conceive that the same being should be
pleased with different and opposite rites and principles; so
the various sects naturally fall into animosity and discharge
on each other the most furious and implacable of all human
passions—sacred zeal and rancour.
The tolerating spirit of both ancient and modern idolaters
is very obvious to anyone with the least knowledge of the
writings of historians or travellers. When the oracle of Delphi
was asked ‘What rites or worship are most acceptable to
the gods?’, it replied: ‘Those that are legally established in
each city.’ It seems that even priests in those ages could
allow salvation to those of a different communion. The
Romans commonly adopted the gods of the conquered people,
and never disputed the attributes of the local and national
deities in whose territories they resided. The religious wars
and persecutions of the Egyptian idolaters are indeed an
exception to this rule, but ancient authors explain them
as arising from singular and remarkable causes. Different
species of animals were the deities of the different sects
among the Egyptians; and the deities were in continual
war, engaging their votaries in the same quarrels. The
worshippers of dogs could not for long remain at peace with
the adorers of cats or wolves. But where that factor was not
at work, the Egyptian superstition was not so incompatible
as is commonly imagined, since we learn from Herodotus
that very large contributions were given by ·the Egyptian
pharaoh· Amasis towards rebuilding the temple of Delphi.
The •intolerance of almost all religions that have maintained the unity of God is as remarkable as the •contrary
principle of polytheists. The implacably narrow spirit of the
Jews is well known. Mahometanism set out with still more
bloody principles, and even today it deals out damnation—
though not fire and faggot—to all other sects. And if among
Christians the English and Dutch have embraced the principles of toleration, this has come from the steady resolution
of the civil magistrate in opposition to the continued efforts
of priests and bigots.
The disciples of Zoroaster shut the doors of heaven
against all but the Magians. Nothing could obstruct the
progress of the Persian conquests more than the Persia’s
furious zeal against the temples and images of the Greeks.
And after the overthrow of that empire we find the polytheist
Alexander immediately re-establishing the worship of the
Babylonians, which their former monotheist princes had
carefully abolished. Even that conqueror’s blind and devoted
attachment of to the Greek superstition did not stop him from
sacrificing according to the Babylonian rites and ceremonies.
I venture to affirm that few corruptions of idolatry and
polytheism are more pernicious to society than this corruption of theism, ·namely, religious intolerance·, when
carried to the utmost height. The (i) human sacrifices of
the Carthaginians, Mexicans and many barbarous nations
scarcely exceed (ii) the Inquisition and persecutions of Rome
and Madrid. For one thing, less blood may be spilled in (i)
than in (ii). Also, the human victims in (i), being chosen by
lot or by some exterior signs, do not affect the rest of the
17
David Hume Natural History of Religion
society in as considerable a degree as (ii) does, where virtue,
knowledge and love of liberty are the qualities that call down
the fatal vengeance of inquisitors, the loss of them leaving
the society in the most shameful ignorance, corruption and
bondage. The illegal murder of one man ·picked out for this·
by a tyrant is more pernicious than the death of a thousand
by pestilence, famine or any undistinguishing calamity.
10. . . . with regard to courage or abasement
From the comparison of theism and idolatry we can form
some other observations that will also confirm the vulgar
opinion that the corruption of the best things gives rise to
the worst.
Where the deity is represented as infinitely superior to
mankind, this belief—though altogether just—is apt when
joined with superstitious terror to sink the human mind
into the lowest submission and abasement, and to represent
the monkish virtues of mortification, penance, humility and
passive suffering as the only qualities acceptable to him.
Whereas where the gods are conceived to be only a little
superior to mankind, many of them having been advanced
from that inferior rank, we are more at our ease in our
addresses to them, and may even without profaneness aspire
sometimes to rivalry with them. This leads to activity, spirit,
courage, magnanimity, love of liberty, and all the virtues that
make a people great.
The heroes in paganism correspond exactly to the saints
in popery and the holy dervishes in Mahometanism. The
place of Hercules, Theseus, Hector and Romulus is now filled
by Dominic, Francis, Anthony and Benedict. The means of
obtaining celestial honours among mankind, which used
to involve the destruction of monsters, the subduing of
tyrants and the defence of our native country, now involves
whippings and fastings, cowardice and humility, abject
submission and slavish obedience.
One great incitement to the pious Alexander in his warlike
expeditions was his rivalry towards Hercules and Bacchus,
whom he rightly claimed to have excelled. After that generous
and noble Spartan Brasidas fell in battle, the inhabitants
of Amphipolis, whose defence he had embraced, paid him
heroic honours, ·declaring him to have become a minor god.·
And in general, all founders of states and colonies among the
Greeks were raised to this inferior rank of divinity by those
who reaped the benefit of their labours.
This gave rise to the observation of Machiavelli that the
doctrines of the Christian religion (meaning the Roman
Catholic, for he knew no other) which recommend only
passive courage and suffering had subdued the spirit of
mankind and fitted them for slavery and subjection. This
would certainly be right if there were not many other circumstances in human society that control the genius and
character of a religion.
Brasidas seized a mouse and, being bitten by it, let it go.
‘There is nothing so contemptible’, he said, ‘that it cannot be
safe if it only has the courage to defend itself.’ Bellarmine
patiently and humbly allowed fleas and other odious vermin
to prey on him. He said: ‘We shall have heaven to reward us
for our sufferings; but these poor creatures have nothing but
the enjoyment of the present life.’ Such difference there is
between the maxims of a Greek hero and those of a Catholic
saint.
11. . . . with regard to reason or absurdity
Here is another observation to the same effect, and new
evidence that the corruption of the best things begets the
worst. If without prejudice we examine the ancient heathen
18
David Hume Natural History of Religion
mythology, as contained in the poets, we shall not find in
it any such monstrous absurdity as we may at first tend to
expect. Where is the difficulty in conceiving that the same
powers or principles [see Glossary], whatever they were, that
formed this visible world, men and animals, also produced a
species of thinking creatures of more refined substance and
greater authority than the rest? It is easy to conceive that
these creatures may be capricious, revengeful, passionate
and voluptuous, and among ourselves nothing is more likely
to engender such vices than the licence of absolute authority.
In short, the whole mythological system is so natural that
it seems more than probable that somewhere in the vast
variety of planets and worlds contained in this universe it is
really carried into execution.
The chief objection to it with regard to this planet is that
it is not warranted by any sound reason or authority. The ancient tradition insisted on by heathen priests and theologians
is a weak foundation; and it has been transmitted by so many
contradictory reports, all supported by equal authority, that
it became absolutely impossible to fix a preference among
them. So a few volumes must contain all the polemical
writings of pagan priests, and their whole theology must
consist more of traditional stories and superstitious practices
than of philosophical argument and controversy.
But where the fundamental basis of any popular religion
is theism, that tenet is so agreeable to sound reason that
philosophy is apt to combine with such a system of theology.
And if the other dogmas of that system are contained in a
sacred book such as the Koran, or are determined by any
visible authority like that of the Roman pope, speculative reasoners naturally go on assenting to a theory that •has been
instilled into them by their earliest education and •possesses
some degree of consistency and uniformity. But as these
appearances will certainly all prove deceitful, philosophy
will soon find herself very unequally yoked with her new
associate; and instead of regulating each principle as they
advance together, she is constantly being diverted to serve
the purposes of superstition. For besides the unavoidable
incoherences that must be reconciled and adjusted, it is safe
to say that all popular theology—especially the scholastic—
has a kind of appetite for absurdity and contradiction. If
that theology didn’t go beyond reason and common sense, its
doctrines would appear too easy and familiar. Amazement
must be raised, mystery affected, darkness and obscurity
sought after, and a foundation of merit provided for the
devout votaries who want an opportunity to subdue their
rebellious reason by believing unintelligible sophisms.
Ecclesiastical history sufficiently confirms these reflections. When a controversy is started, some people always
claim with certainty to foretell the outcome. Their view is:
Whichever opinion is most contrary to plain sense is
sure to prevail, even where the general interest of the
system does not require that decision. The reproach
of ‘heresy’ may for a while be bandied about among
the disputants, but it always ends up being held
against the side of reason. Anyone who has enough
learning of this kind merely to know the definitions
of ‘Arian’, ‘Pelagian‘, ‘Erestian’, ‘Socinian’, ‘Sabellian’,
‘Eutychian’, ‘Nestorian’, ‘Monothelite’—not to mention
‘Protestant’, whose fate is still uncertain—will be convinced of the truth of this observation.
This is how a system becomes more absurd in the end, merely
from being reasonable and philosophical in the beginning.
Opposing the torrent of scholastic religion by such feeble
maxims as that
•it is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be,
•the whole is greater than a part,
•two and three make five
19
David Hume Natural History of Religion
is trying to stop the ocean with a bull-rush! Will you set
up profane reason against sacred mystery? No punishment
is great enough for your impiety. And the fires kindled for
heretics will serve also for the destruction of philosophers.
12. . . .with regard to doubt or conviction
We frequently meet with people who are •so sceptical with
regard to history that they assert it to be impossible for any
nation ever to believe anything as absurd as the principles
of Greek and Egyptian paganism, and at the same time •so
dogmatic with regard to religion that they think that no other
communion is guilty of the same absurdities. Cambyses entertained such prejudices, and very impiously ridiculed—and
even wounded—Apis, the great god of the Egyptians, who
appeared to his profane senses to be nothing but a large
spotted bull. Herodotus judiciously ascribes his passionate
outburst to a real madness or disorder of the brain, because
if Cambyses had been sane he never would have openly
affronted any established worship; for on that head every
nation are best satisfied with their own, and think they have
the advantage over every other nation.
The Roman Catholics are a very learned sect; apart from
the church of England, no one communion can dispute their
claim to be the most learned of all the Christian churches.
Yet Averroes, the famous Arabian, who surely had heard
of the Egyptian superstitions, declares that of all religions
the most absurd and nonsensical is the one whose votaries
create their deity and then eat him.
I believe, indeed, that no tenet in all paganism would give
so fair a scope to ridicule as this of the real presence ·of
the body and blood of Christ in the bread and wine of the
Eucharist·. For it is so absurd that it eludes the force of
all argument. There are even some funny stories about it,
which are commonly told by the Catholics themselves. [He
tells two: One relates that a communicant was mistakenly
given a counter instead of a wafer, and complained to the
priest: ‘I wish you had not given me God the Father; he is
so hard and tough there is no swallowing him.’ The other
concerns a newly converted Turk who, the day after his
first communion, was asked how many Gods there are and
replied: ‘None. You have told me all along that there is but
one God, and yesterday I ate him.’]
Such are the doctrines of our brethren the Catholics.
But we are so accustomed to these doctrines that we never
wonder at them; though in a future age it will probably
become difficult to persuade some nations that any human
creature could ever embrace such principles. And it is a
thousand to one that these nations will themselves have
something just as absurd in their own creed, to which they
will give a most implicit and most religious assent.
[Hume recalls observing a Turkish ambassador and a
French Capuchin friar beholding one another in astonishment. He comments:] Thus all mankind stand staring at one
another; and there is no beating it into their heads that the
turban of the African is as good or as bad a fashion as the
cowl of the European. . . .
We can imagine this conversation between a scholar from
the Sorbonne and a priest of ancient Egypt:
•‘How can you worship leeks and onions?’
•‘If we worship them, at least we do not at the same
time, eat them.’
•‘But what strange objects of adoration are cats and
monkeys?’
•‘They are at least as good as the relics or rotten bones
of martyrs.’
•‘Are you not mad to cut one another’s throat about
the preference of a cabbage or a cucumber?’
20
David Hume Natural History of Religion
•Yes, I will agree, if you will admit that it is even
madder to fight about the preference among volumes
of sophistry, ten thousand of which are not equal in
value to one cabbage or cucumber.
Every bystander will easily judge (though unfortunately
there are few bystanders) that if any popular system could
be established merely by exposing the absurdities of other
systems, every votary of every superstition could give a
sufficient reason for his blind and bigoted attachment to the
principles he has been brought up with. But even without
this support, there is still plenty of religious zeal and faith
among mankind. Diodorus Siculus reports a remarkable
example of this, of which he was himself an eye-witness.
While Egypt lay under the greatest terror of the Roman name,
a Roman soldier was accidentally guilty of the sacrilegious
impiety of killing a cat; and the whole people rose upon him
with the utmost fury, all the efforts of the prince not being
enough to save him. I’m sure that the senate and people of
Rome would not have been so delicate with regard to their
national deities. A little time after that episode, they very
frankly voted Augustus a place in the celestial mansions,
and they would have dethroned every god in heaven for his
sake, if had he seemed to want this. . . .
‘Despite the sanctity of our holy religion,’ says Cicero, ‘no
crime is more common with us than sacrilege; but was it
ever heard of that an Egyptian violated the temple of a cat,
an ibis, or a crocodile?’ In another place he says: ‘There is
no torture an Egyptian would not undergo rather than injure
an ibis, an aspic, a cat, a dog or a crocodile.’ Thus, what
Dryden observes in Absolom and Achitophel is true:
Of whatsoe’er descent their godhead be,
Stock, stone, or other homely pedigree,
In his defence his servants are as bold
As if he had been born of beaten gold.
Indeed, the baser the materials of which a divinity is composed, the greater the devotion he is likely to arouse in
the breasts of his deluded votaries. They exult in their
shame, and think their deity regards it as meritorious in
them to brave for his sake all the ridicule and abuse of his
enemies. Ten thousand Crusaders enlist under the holy
banners, and openly triumph in the parts of their religion
that their adversaries regard as the most disgraceful.
There is admittedly a difficulty in the Egyptian system
of theology, as indeed few systems of that kind are entirely
free from difficulties. Given their method of propagation, a
couple of cats could in fifty years stock a whole kingdom;
and in twenty more years, if religious veneration were still
paid to them, not only would it be easier in Egypt to find
a god than a man (which Petronius says was the case in
some parts of Italy), but the gods would eventually starve
the men, leaving themselves neither priests nor votaries. It
is probable, therefore, that this wise nation—the most celebrated in antiquity for prudence and sound policy—foresaw
such dangerous consequences and reserved all their worship
for the full-grown divinities, drowning the holy spawn or
little unweaned gods without any scruple or remorse. So the
practice of warping the tenets of religion in order to serve
worldly interests is emphatically not to be regarded as an
invention of these later ages.
When the learned and philosophical •Varro was discoursing about religion, he did not claim to be delivering anything
beyond probabilities and appearances—-such were his good
sense and moderation! But the passionate and zealous
Augustine insults •the noble Roman on his scepticism and
reserve, and professes the most thorough belief and assurance. Yet a heathen poet, contemporary with Augustine,
regards his religious system as being so false that even the
credulity of children could not get them to believe it.
21
David Hume Natural History of Religion
Is it strange, when mistakes are so common, to find
everyone positive and dogmatic? And that the zeal often
rises in proportion to the error? Spartian writes: ‘At this
time the Jews began a war, because they had been forbidden
to mutilate the genitals.’
If there was ever a nation or a time in which the public
religion lost all authority over mankind, we might expect
•infidelity in Rome during the time of Cicero would openly
have erected its throne, and that Cicero himself would in
every speech and action have been •its most open supporter.
But whatever sceptical liberties that great man might take in
his writings or in philosophical conversation, in the common
conduct of life he seems to have avoided the charge of irreligion and profaneness. Even in his own family, and to his wife
Terentia whom he highly trusted, he was willing to appear a
devout religionist; and there remains a letter addressed to
her in which he seriously asks her to offer sacrifice to Apollo
and Æsculapius in gratitude for the recovery of his health.
Pompey’s devotion was much more sincere: in all his
conduct during the civil wars he paid a great regard to
auguries, dreams and prophesies. Augustus was tainted
with superstition of every kind. As it is reported of Milton that
his poetical genius never flowed with ease and abundance
in the spring, so Augustus observed that his own genius
for dreaming was never as perfect or as reliable during
that season as during the rest of the year. That great and
able emperor was also extremely uneasy when in changing
his shoes he happened to put the right shoe on the left
foot. In short, it cannot be doubted that the votaries of the
established superstition of antiquity were as numerous in
every state as those of the modern religion are today. Its
influence was as universal ·as the modern religion’s·, though
it was not as great. It was assented to by as many people,
though that assent seems not to have been so strong, precise,
and affirmative.
We may observe that despite the dogmatic, imperious
style of all superstition, the conviction of the religionists
in all ages is more pretended than real, and hardly ever
comes anywhere near the solid belief and persuasion that
governs us in the common affairs of life. Men dare not admit,
even to their own hearts, the doubts they entertain on such
subjects. They make a merit of implicit faith, and disguise
to themselves their real infidelity by the strongest assertions
and most positive bigotry. But nature is too hard for all their
endeavours, and doesn’t allow the dim flickering light offered
in those shadowy regions to equal the strong impressions
made by common sense and by experience. The usual course
of men’s conduct belies their words, and shows that their
assent in religious matters is some inexplicable operation of
the mind between disbelief and conviction, but coming much
closer to the former than to the latter.
Thus, given that the mind of man appears to have such a
loose and unsteady texture that even today when so many
persons earn their livings using the hammer and chisel on it,
they cannot engrave theological tenets on it with any lasting
impression; how much more must this have been the case
in ancient times when so many fewer people were dedicated
to the holy function? No wonder that the appearances were
then very inconsistent, with men sometimes seeming to be
determined infidels and enemies to the established religion,
without being so in reality—or at least without knowing their
own minds in that respect.
Something else that made the ancient religions much
looser than the modern ones is that the former were
•traditional and the latter are •scriptural; and the ancient
tradition was complex, contradictory, and often doubtful, so
that it could not possibly be reduced to any standard and
canon or yield any determinate articles of faith. There were
22
David Hume Natural History of Religion
countless stories of the gods, as there are popish legends;
and though almost everyone believed some of these stories,
no-one could believe or know all of them; while at the same
time they must all have admitted that no one story stood on
a better foundation than the rest. The traditions of different
cities and nations were often directly opposite, and no reason
could be given for preferring one to another. And as there
were countless stories that were not firmly embedded in the
tradition, there was an insensible gradation from the most
fundamental articles of faith to those loose and precarious
fictions. So the pagan religion, whenever one got close to it
and examined it piecemeal, seemed to vanish like a cloud.
It could never be pinned down by any fixed dogmas and
principles. And though this did not convert the general run
of mankind from this absurd faith—for when will the people
be reasonable?—it did make them falter and hesitate more
in maintaining their principles, and was even apt to produce,
in certain frames of mind, some practices and opinions that
had the appearance of settled infidelity.
To which we may add that the fables of the pagan religion
were in themselves light, easy, and familiar; without devils,
or seas of brimstone, or any object that could much terrify
the imagination. Who could refrain from smiling when he
thought of the loves of Mars and Venus, or the amorous
frolics of Jupiter and Pan? In this respect it was a true
poetical religion, except that it had too much levity for the
graver kinds of poetry. We find that it has been adopted by
modern bards, who have not talked with greater freedom
and irreverence of the gods they regarded as fictions than
the ancients did of the gods they regarded as real.
Here is an inference that might be thought to be sound:
A certain system of religion made no deep impression
on the minds of a people; therefore it was positively
rejected by all men of common sense, and opposite
principles were generally established by argument and
reasoning, in spite of the prejudices of education.
This is certainly not sound; indeed, I think that a contrary
inference may be more probable. The less pushy and dogmatic any sort of superstition appears to be, the less will
it provoke men’s anger and indignation, or provoke them
into enquiring into its foundation and origin. Anyway, his
much is obvious: the command of any religious faith over
the understanding is wavering and uncertain, subject to
every variety of mood and dependent on present events that
strike the imagination. Religions differ in this respect only in
degree. An ancient will alternate clear signs of impiety with
clear signs of superstition alternately throughout a whole
discourse;1 a modern often thinks in the same way, though
he may be more guarded in his expression.
Lucian tells us explicitly that anyone who did not believe
the most ridiculous fables of paganism was regarded by the
people as profane and impious. And, indeed, why would
that agreeable author have employed the whole force of his
wit and satire against the national religion if that religion
had not been generally believed by his countrymen and
contemporaries?
1 Witness this remarkable passage of Tacitus: ‘Besides the manifold vicissitudes of human affairs, there were prodigies in heaven and earth, the
warning voices of the thunder, and other intimations of the future, auspicious or gloomy, doubtful or not to be mistaken. Never surely did more
terrible calamities of the Roman people, or evidence more conclusive, prove that the Gods take no thought for our happiness, but only for our
punishment.’ Augustus’s quarrel with Neptune is an instance of the same kind. If the emperor did not believe Neptune to be a real being with
dominion over the sea, what was his anger based on? And if he did believe it, what madness to provoke that deity still further!
23
David Hume Natural History of Religion
Livy acknowledges, as frankly as any divine would do
today, the common incredulity of his age; but then he
condemns it as severely. Who can imagine that a national
superstition which could delude such an able man would
not also impose on the general run of the people?
The Stoics bestowed many magnificent and even impious
epithets on their ·ideal· sage—that he alone was rich, free,
a king, and equal to the immortal gods. They forgot to
add that he was no more prudent or intelligent than an
old woman. For surely nothing can be more pitiful than
that sect’s views on religious matters, when they seriously
agree with the common augurs that when a raven croaks
from the left it is a good omen, but a rook’s making a noise
from the same direction is a bad one. Panaetius was the
only Greek Stoic who so much as doubted with regard to
auguries and divinations. Marcus Antoninus tells us that
he himself had received many admonitions from the gods
in his sleep. It is true that Epictetus forbids us to pay any
attention to the language of rooks and ravens; but it is not
because they do not speak truth; it is only because they
can foretell nothing but the breaking of our neck or the
forfeiture of our estate—which he says are circumstances
that nowise concern us. Thus the Stoics join a philosophical
enthusiasm to a religious superstition. The force of their
mind, being all turned to the side of morals, unbent itself in
that of religion. . . .
The same Cicero who in his own family put on an appearance of being a devout religionist does not scruple in a public
court of judicature to treat the doctrine of a future state as
a ridiculous fable to which nobody could give any attention.
Sallust reports Caesar as speaking the same language in the
open senate.
But that all these freedoms did not imply a total and
universal infidelity and scepticism among the people is too
obvious to be denied. Though some parts of the national
religion hung loose on the minds of men, other parts adhered
to them more closely; and it was the chief business of
the sceptical philosophers to show that there was no more
foundation for one than for the other. This is the procedure of
Cotta in the dialogues concerning the nature of the gods. He
refutes the whole system of mythology by leading orthodox
readers from •the more momentous stories that were believed
to •the more frivolous ones that everyone ridiculed, doing
this gradually: from the gods to the goddesses, from the
goddesses to the nymphs, from the nymphs to the fauns
and satyrs. His master, Carneades, had employed the same
method of reasoning.
Upon the whole, the greatest and most observable differences between •a traditional, mythological religion and •a
systematic, scholastic one are two. (i) The former is often
more reasonable, as consisting only of a multitude of stories
which, however groundless, do not involve outright absurdity
and demonstrative contradiction. (ii) The former also sits so
easily and lightly on men’s minds that, though it may be as
universally accepted ·as the latter·, it fortunately makes no
such deep impression on the affections and understanding.
13. Impious conceptions of the divine nature in
popular religions of both kinds
The primary religion of mankind arises chiefly from an
anxious fear of future events; and it is easy to conceive what
ideas will naturally be entertained of invisible, unknown
powers when men are subject to dismal anxieties of any
kind. Every image of vengeance, severity, cruelty and malice
must occur, and must increase the ghastliness and horror
that oppresses the dazzled believer. Once a panic has seized
the mind, the active imagination still further multiplies the
24
David Hume Natural History of Religion
objects of terror; while the profound darkness—or, worse,
the glimmering light—we are surrounded by represents the
spectres of divinity in the most dreadful forms imaginable.
And no idea of perverse wickedness can be formed that those
terrified devotees do not unhesitatingly apply to their deity.
This appears to be the natural state of religion when
surveyed in one light. But if instead we consider the spirit of
praise and eulogy that necessarily has a place in all religions
and is the consequence of these very terrors, we must
expect a quite contrary system of theology to prevail. Every
virtue, every excellence, must be ascribed to the divinity,
and no exaggeration will be regarded as sufficient to reach
the perfections he is endowed with. Whatever strains of
praise can be invented are immediately embraced, without
consulting any arguments or phenomena. They are regarded
as sufficiently confirmed by the fact that they give us more
magnificent ideas of the divine objects of our worship and
adoration.
Here therefore is a kind of contradiction between the
different principles [see Glossary] of human nature that enter
into religion. Our natural terrors present the notion of a
devilish and malicious deity; our propensity to adulation
leads us to acknowledge one that is excellent and divine. The
influences of these opposite principles are various, according
to the different situations of the human understanding.
In very barbarous and ignorant nations, such as the
Africans and Indians—indeed, even the Japanese—who can
form no extensive ideas of power and knowledge, worship
may be paid to a being whom they admit to be wicked and
detestable; though they may be cautious about uttering this
admission in public, or in his temple, where he may be
supposed to hear their reproaches.
Such rough and imperfect ideas of the Divinity stay for
a long time with all idolaters, and it is safe to say that the
Greeks themselves never entirely got rid of them. Xenophon
remarks, in praise of Socrates, that this philosopher did not
accept the vulgar opinion that the gods know some things
and are ignorant of others; he maintained that they knew
everything—what was done, said, or even thought. But as
this was a strain of philosophy much above the conception
of his countrymen, it is not surprising that in their books
and conversation they very frankly blamed the deities whom
they worshipped in their temples. Herodotus in particular
often freely ascribes envy to the gods, the most suitable
sentiment of all to a mean and devilish nature. The pagan
hymns, however, sung in public worship, contained nothing
but epithets of praise; even while the actions ascribed to the
gods were the most barbarous and detestable. When the poet
Timotheus recited a hymn to Diana, enumerating with the
greatest eulogies all the actions and attributes of that cruel,
capricious goddess, one of his audience said: ‘May your
daughter become such as the deity whom you celebrate.’
As men further exalt their idea of their divinity, it is their
notion of his power and knowledge that is enlarged, not
their notion of his goodness. On the contrary, their terrors
naturally increase in proportion to the supposed extent of his
knowledge and authority; while they believe that no secrecy
can conceal them from his scrutiny, and that even the inmost
recesses of their hearts lie open before him. So they must
be careful not to form explicitly any sentiment of blame
and disapproval. All must be applause, ravishment, extasy.
And while their gloomy anxieties make them ascribe to him
measures of conduct that would be highly blamed in human
creatures, they must still purport to praise and admire that
conduct in the object of their devotional addresses. So it is
safe to say that popular religions are, in the conception of
their more vulgar votaries, really a kind of demonism; and the
higher the deity is exalted in power and knowledge, the lower
25
David Hume Natural History of Religion
he is automatically depressed in goodness and benevolence,
no matter what epithets of praise may be bestowed on him by
his dazzled adorers. Among ·low-level· idolaters a the words
may be false, and belie b the secret opinion. But among
higher-level religionists b the opinion itself contracts a kind
of falsehood and belies c the inward sentiment. The c heart
secretly detests such measures of cruel and implacable
vengeance; but b the judgment doesn’t dare not to pronounce
them perfect and adorable. The additional misery of this
inward struggle worsens all the other terrors by which these
unhappy victims to superstition are for ever haunted.
Lucian observes that a young man who reads the history
of the gods in Homer or Hesiod, and finds their factions,
wars, injustice, incest, adultery and other immoralities so
highly celebrated, is much surprised when he later comes
into the world and finds that punishments are inflicted by
law on the very actions he had been taught to ascribe to
superior beings. The contradiction is perhaps even stronger
between the representations given us by some later religions
and our natural ideas of generosity, lenience, impartiality
and justice; and in proportion to the multiplied terrors of
these religions the barbarous conceptions of the divinity
are multiplied on us. Nothing can preserve untainted the
genuine principles of morals in our judgment of human
conduct but the absolute necessity of these principles to
the existence of society. If common conception can indulge
princes in a system of ethics somewhat different from what
should regulate private persons, how much more those
superior beings whose attributes, views, and nature are
so totally unknown to us? The gods have maxims of justice
peculiar to themselves.
14. Popular religions’ bad influence on morality
Here I cannot refrain from mentioning a fact that may be
worth the attention of students of human nature. It is certain
that in every religion, however sublime the verbal definition
it gives of its divinity, many and perhaps most of the votaries
will still seek the divine favour not through virtue and good
morals, which alone can be acceptable to a perfect being,
but by
•frivolous observances,
•intemperate zeal,
•rapturous ecstasies, or
•believing mysterious and absurd doctrines.
The least part of the Jewish prayer-book, as well as of
the Pentateuch, consists in precepts of morality; and we
can be sure that that part was always the least observed
and regarded. When the old Romans were attacked with
a pestilence, they never ascribed their sufferings to their
vices or dreamed of repentance and amendment. They never
thought that they were the general robbers of the world,
whose ambition and avarice made the earth desolate and
reduced rich nations to want and beggary. They only created
a dictator to drive a nail into a door, thinking that this will
have sufficiently appeased their angry deity. . . .
It never happens, but just suppose that a popular religion
were found in which it was explicitly declared that nothing
but morality could gain the divine favour, and that an
order of priests was instituted to inculcate this doctrine
in daily sermons and with all the arts of persuasion. So
inveterate are the people’s prejudices that for lack of some
other superstition they would regard the essential thing in
religion not as •virtue and good morals but as •attendance
on these sermons. . . .
26
David Hume Natural History of Religion
Why are people like that? Well, people everywhere degrade
their deities into something like themselves, and consider
them merely as a species of human creatures, somewhat
more potent and thinking. But this does not answer the
question; for there is no man so stupid that he would not,
judging by his natural reason, regard virtue and honesty
as the most valuable qualities any person could possess.
Why not ascribe the same sentiment to his deity? Why not
make all religion, or the chief part of it, consist in these
attainments?
Nor is it satisfactory to say that the practice of morality
is rejected because it is more difficult than the practice of
superstition. For, not to mention the excessive penances of
the Buddhist monks, it is certain that the Ramadan of the
Moslems—
during which the poor wretches, for many days, often
in the hottest months of the year and in some of the
hottest climates of the world, remain without eating
or drinking from sunrise to sunset
—must be more severe than the practice of any moral duty,
even for the most vicious and depraved of mankind. The
four Lents of the Muscovites, and the austerities of some
Roman Catholics, appear more disagreeable than meekness
and benevolence. In short, all virtue is agreeable, when men
are reconciled to it by ever so little practice; whereas all
superstition is always odious and burdensome.
Perhaps the following account may be received as a true
solution of the difficulty. The duties a man performs as
a friend or parent seem to be something he owes to his
benefactor or his children, and he cannot fail in these duties
without breaking through all the ties of nature and morality.
A strong inclination may prompt him to the performance;
a sentiment of order and moral obligation joins its force
to these natural ties; and the whole man, if he is truly
virtuous, is drawn to his duty without any effort or endeavour.
Even with regard to the virtues that are more austere and
more founded on reflection—such as public spirit, filial duty,
temperance or integrity—the moral obligation removes, we
think, all claim to religious merit; and the virtuous conduct is
regarded as merely what we owe to society and to ourselves.
A superstitious man finds nothing in all this that he has
performed for the sake of this deity or that can specially
recommend him to the divine favour and protection. He does
not consider that the most genuine method of serving the
divinity is to promote the happiness of his creatures. He still
looks out for some more immediate service of the supreme
Being, in order to allay the terrors that haunt him. And
any practice that is recommended to him and that either
•serves no purpose in life or •offers the strongest violence
to his natural inclinations he will the more readily embrace
precisely because of those very circumstances that should
make him absolutely reject it. It seems ·to him· more purely
religious because no other motive or consideration comes
into it. And if for its sake he sacrifices much of his ease
and quiet, his claim of merit appears to be strengthened
in proportion to the zeal and devotion he exhibits. When
he restores a loan or pays a debt, this does nothing for his
divinity, because these acts of justice are what he was bound
to perform—and what many would have performed—if there
were no god in the universe. But if he fasts for a day or
gives himself a sound whipping, he sees this as having a
direct reference to the service of God. No other motive could
draw him to such austerities. By these distinguished marks
of devotion he has now acquired the divine favour, and he
may expect to be rewarded with protection and safety in this
world and eternal happiness in the next.
Hence the greatest crimes have often been found compatible with a superstitious piety and devotion. Hence it is
27
David Hume Natural History of Religion
rightly regarded as unsafe to draw confident conclusions
about a man’s morals from the fervour or strictness of his
religious exercises, even if he himself believes them to be
sincere. Indeed, it has been observed that enormities of the
blackest dye have been apt to produce superstitious terrors
and increase the religious passion. Bomilcar, having formed
a conspiracy to assassinate the whole senate of Carthage
and invade the liberties of his country, lost the opportunity
because of a continual regard to omens and prophecies.
Those who undertake the most criminal and most dangerous
enterprises are commonly the most superstitious; as an
ancient historian remarks on this topic, ‘Their devotion
and spiritual faith rise with their fears.’ Catiline was not
contented with the established deities and accepted rites of
the national religion. His anxious terrors made him seek new
inventions of this kind, which he would probably never have
dreamed of if he had remained a good citizen and obedient
to the laws of his country.
To which we may add that after the commission of crimes
there arise remorses and secret horrors, which give no rest to
the mind but make it resort to religious rites and ceremonies
as expiations of its offences. Whatever weakens or disorders
the internal frame •promotes the interests of superstition;
and nothing is more •destructive to them than a manly,
steady virtue, which preserves us from disastrous and melancholy accidents or else teaches us to bear them. During
such calm sunshine of the mind, these spectres of false
divinity never make their appearance. On the other hand,
while we abandon ourselves to the natural undisciplined
suggestions of our timid and anxious hearts, every kind of
barbarity is ascribed to the supreme Being, because of the
terrors we are agitated by; and every kind of caprice because
of the methods we adopt to appease him. a Barbarity and
b caprice; these qualities, however disguised verbally, can be
seen to form the ruling character of the deity in all popular
religions. Even priests, instead of correcting these depraved
ideas of mankind, have often been found ready to foster
and encourage them. The more a tremendous the divinity is
represented as being, the more tame and submissive men
become to his ministers; and the more b unaccountable the
measures of acceptance he requires, the more necessary it
becomes to abandon our natural reason and yield to the
ministers’ ghostly guidance and direction. Thus it may
be allowed that the artifices of men worsen our natural
infirmities and follies of this kind but never originally beget
them. Their root strikes deeper into the mind, and springs
from the essential and universal properties of human nature.
15. General corollary
Though the stupidity of barbarous and uninstructed men
is so great that they may fail to see a sovereign author
in the more obvious works of nature that are so familiar
to them, it scarcely seems possible that anyone of good
understanding should reject that idea once it has been
suggested to him. A purpose, an intention, a design is
evident in everything; and when our thinking broadens
enough to contemplate the first rise of this visible system,
we must adopt with the strongest conviction the idea of
some thinking cause or author. The uniform regularities
that prevail throughout the universe lead us—naturally, if
not necessarily—to conceive this intelligence as single and
undivided, where the prejudices of education do not oppose
such a reasonable theory. Even the contrarieties of nature,
by revealing themselves everywhere, become proofs of some
consistent plan and establish one single purpose or intention,
however inexplicable and incomprehensible.
28
David Hume Natural History of Religion
Good and ill are universally intermingled and confounded;
happiness and misery, wisdom and folly, virtue and vice.
Nothing is pure and entirely of a piece. All advantages are
accompanied by disadvantages. . . . It is not possible for us
by our most chimerical wishes to form the idea of a station
or situation that is altogether desirable. According to the
poet’s fiction, the draughts of life are always mixed from the
vessels on each hand of Jupiter; or if any cup is presented
altogether pure ·and unmixed·, it is drawn (as the same poet
tells us) from the vessel on the left.
Few exceptions are found to this uniform law of nature:
The more exquisite any good is of which a small specimen is
provided for us, the sharper is the evil allied to it.
•The most sprightly wit borders on madness;
•the highest effusions of joy produce the deepest melancholy;
•the most ravishing pleasures are accompanied by the
most cruel lassitude and disgust;
•the most glittering hopes make way for the severest
disappointments.
And, in general, no course of life has as much safety as the
temperate and moderate course, which maintains as far as
possible the middle of the road and a kind of insensibility
in everything. (I say ‘safety’ because happiness is not to be
dreamed of.)
As the good, the great, the sublime and the ravishing
are found eminently in the genuine principles of theism,
it may be expected, from the analogy of nature ·described
in the preceding paragraph·, that the base, the absurd, the
mean and the terrifying will be equally discovered in religious
fictions and chimeras.
The universal propensity to believe in invisible, thinking
power, if not an original instinct, is at least a general attendant of human nature and so may be considered as a kind of
mark or stamp that the divine workman has set on his work;
and surely nothing can more dignify mankind than to be
thus selected from all other parts of the creation, and to bear
the image or impression of the universal Creator. But consult
this image as it appears in the popular religions of the world.
How is the deity disfigured in our representations of him!
What caprice, absurdity, and immorality are attributed to
him! How much is he degraded even below the character we
would naturally in common life ascribe to a man of sense
and virtue!
What a noble privilege is it of human reason to attain the
knowledge of the supreme Being, and to be enabled to infer
from the visible works of nature such a sublime principle [see
Glossary] as its supreme Creator? But look at the back of the
medal. Survey most nations and most ages. Examine the
religious principles that have in fact prevailed in the world.
You will scarcely be persuaded that they are anything but
sick men’s dreams; or perhaps you’ll regard them as the
playful whimsies of monkeys in human shape rather than
the serious, positive, dogmatic assertions of a being who
dignifies himself with the label ‘rational’.
Hear the verbal protestations of all men: Nothing so
certain as their religious tenets. Examine their lives: You will
scarcely think they have the smallest confidence in them.
The greatest and truest zeal gives us no security against
hypocrisy. The most open impiety is accompanied by a secret
dread and compunction.
No theological absurdities are so glaring that they have
never been embraced by men of the greatest and most cultivated understanding. No religious precepts are so rigorous
that they have not been adopted by the most voluptuous and
most abandoned of men.
Ignorance is the mother of devotion—a maxim that is
proverbial, and confirmed by general experience. Look out
29
David Hume Natural History of Religion
for a people with no religion at all; if you find them, be
assured, that they are only a few degrees above brutes.
What is so pure as some of the morals included in some
theological systems? What is so corrupt as some of the
practices these systems give rise to?
The comfortable views exhibited by the belief in a future
life are ravishing and delightful. But how quickly they vanish
on the appearance of that life’s terrors, which keep a more
firm and durable possession of the human mind!
The whole thing is a riddle, an enigma, an inexplicable
mystery. Our most careful scrutiny of this subject produces
nothing but doubt, uncertainty and suspense of judgment.
But such is the frailty of human reason, and such the
irresistible contagion of opinion, that even this deliberate
doubt could scarcely be upheld if we didn’t enlarge our view,
oppose one species of superstition to another, and set them
quarrelling, while we happily make our escape, into the calm
though obscure regions of philosophy.