*  JAMES  BJEATTIE- 


AN 

ESSAY 

ON  THE 

NATURE  AND    IMMUTABILITY 

OF 

TRUTH, 

IN  OPPOSITION  TO 

SOPHISTRY  AND  SCEPTICISM. 


BY  JAMES  BEATTIE,  LL.D. 

PROFESSOR  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AND  LOGIC  IN  THE  MARISCHAt 
COLLEGE  AND    UNIVERSITY   OF  ABERDEEN. 


NVNQFAM  ALIVD  NXTURA,  ALIUD  SAPIENTIA  DIGIT. JUVEXAT,, 


EDINBURGH: 

PRINTED  FORDENHAM  &  DICK,  NO.  19.  COLLEGE  STREET, 

BY  THOMAS  TURNBULL,  CANONGATE, 


THE 

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S. 


Page. 
INTRODUCTION, 7 

PART    I. 

OF  THE  STANDARD  OF  TRUTH 20 

CHAP.     I. 

Of  the  Perception  of  Truth  in  general    21 

C  H  A  P      II. 

All  reasoning  terminates  in  first  princi 
ples.  All  evidence  ultimately  intuitive. 
Common  sense  the  standard  of  truth 

to  man 35 

Sect.  1.  Of  Mathematical  Reasoning,. ...      3G 
Sect.  2.    Of   the   evidence   of    External 

Sense,  . 40 

Sect.  3.  Of  the  evidence  of  Internal  Sense y 

or  Consciousness, 45 

Sect.  4.   Of  the  evidence  of  Memory, ....      59 
Sect.  5.   Of  Reasoning  from  the  effect  to 

the  cause, 65 

Sect.  6.   Of  Probable    or    Experimental 

Reasoning, %      78 

Sect.  7-  Of  Analogical  Reasoning, 82 

Sect.  8.   Of  Faith  in  Testimony, 84 

Sect.  9.    Conclusion    of    this     Chapter. 

Further  Proof.      General  remarks  on 

Scepticism,  . , 90 

A. 


CONTENTS^ 

P  A  R  T    II. 

Page. 

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  THE  PRECEDING  DOC 
TRINE,  WITH  INFERENCES, 100- 

C  H  A  P.     I. 

Confirmation  of  this  Doctrine  from   the 

Practice, 

Sect.  1.  Of  Mathematicians, 102" 

Sect.  2.   Of  Natural  Philosophers, 110 

Sect.  3.  The  subject  continued.      Intuitive 

Truths  distinguishable  Into  Classes, ....    133> 

CHAP.    II. 

This  Doctrine  rejected  by  Sceptical  Philo 
sophers, 

Sect.  1.  General  Observations.     Rise  and 

'progress   of   Modern   Scepticism. — Of 

Des  Cartes  and  Malebranche. — Locke 

and   Berkeley. — General  view  of  Mr 

Hume's    Theory    of   the    Understand- 

149 
ing, • 

Sect.  2.   Of  the  non-existence  of  Matter  >     171 
Sect.  3,  Of  Liberty  and  Necessity , .  . . , .    193 

CHAP.     III. 

Recapitulation  and  Inference.     Criterion 
of   Truth, •   240 

PART    HI, 

OBJECTIONS  ANSWERED.  ...... 


CONTENTS, 

CHAP.    I. 


The  principles  of  this  Essay  consistent  with 
the  interests  of  Science,  and  the  rights 
of  mankind.  Imperfection  of  the  School- 
logic,  ".  > 245 

C  H  A  P.    II. 

The  subject  continued.     Estimate  of  Me- 
taphysic     and    Metaphysical    writers. 
Causes  of  the  present   degeneracy   of 
Moral  Science, 261 

CHAP.     III. 

Consequences  of  Metaphysical  Scepticism, 
POSTSCRIPT,  . ,. , , , . ,.., ... , , ....... 


INTRODUCTION. 

TO  those  who  love  learning  and  mankind,  and  who 
are  more  ambitious  to  distinguish  themselves  as 
men,  than  as  disputants,  it  is  matter  of  humiliation  and 
regret,  that  names  and  things  have  so  oft  been  mista 
ken  for  each  other  ;  that  so  much  of  the  philosopher's 
time  must  be  employed  in  ascertaining  the  signification 
of  words ;  and  that  so  many  doctrines,  of  high^  repu 
tation,  and  of  ancient  date,  when  traced  to  their  first 
principles,  have  been  found  to  terminate  in  verbal  am 
biguity.  If  I  have  any  knowledge  of  my  own  heart, 
or  of  the  subject  I  propose  to  examine,  I  may  venture 
to  assure  the  reader,  that  it  is  no  part  of  the  design  of 
this  book,  to  encourage  verbal  disputation.  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  my  sincere  purpose  to  avoid,  and  to  do 
every  thing  in  my  power  to  check  it ;  convinced  as  I 
am,  that  it  never  can  do  any  good,  and  that  it  has  been 
the  cause  of  much  evil,  both  in  philosophy  and  in  com 
mon  life.  And  I  hope  I  have  a  fairer  chance  to  escape 
it,  than  some  who  have  gone  before  me  in  this  part  of 
science.  I  aim  at  no  paradoxes  ;  my  prejudices  (If 
certain  instinctive  suggestions  of  the  understanding 
may  be  so  called )  are  all  in  favour  of  truth  and  virtue ; 
and  I  have  no  principles  to  support,  but  those  which 
seem  to  me  to  have  influenced  the  judgment  of  a  great 
majority  of  mankind  in  all  ages  of  the  world. 

Some  readers  may  think,  that  there  is  but  little  me 
rit  in  this  declaration  ;  it  being  as  much  for  my  own 
credit,  as  for  the  interest  of  mankind,  that  I  guard  a- 
gainst  a  practice,  which  is  acknowledged  to  be  always 
unprofitable,  and  generally  pernicious.  A  verbal  dis 
putant  !  what  claim  can  he  have  to  the  title  of  philo 
sopher  !  what  has  he  to  do  with  the  laws  of  nature, 
with  the  observation  of  facts,  with  life  and  manners  ! 
Let  him  not  intrude  upon  the  company  of  men  of 
science  ;  but  repose  with  his  brethren  Aquinas  and 
Suarex,  in  the  corner  of  some  Gothic  cloister,  dark  as 

A 


O  INTRODUCTION. 

his  understanding,  and  cold  as  Iris  heart.  Men  are  nt>w 
become  too  judicious  to  be  amused  with  words,  and  too 
firm-minded  to  be  confuted  with  quibbles. — Many  of 
my  contemporaries  would  readily  join  in  this  apo 
strophe,  who  yet  are  themselves  the  dupes  of  the  most 
egregious  dealers  in  logomachy  that  ever  perverted  the 
faculty  of  speech.  In  fact,  from  some  instances  that 
have  occurred  to  my  own  observation,  I  have  reason 
to  believe,  that  verbal  controversy  has  not  always, 
even  in  this  age,  been  accounted  a  contemptible  thing : 
and  the  reader,  when  he  comes  to  be  better  acquainted 
with  my  sentiments,  will  perhaps  think  the  foregoing 
declaration  more  disinterested  than  at  iirst  sight  it  may 
appear. 

They  who  form  opinions  concerning  the  manners 
and  principles  of  the  times,  may  be  divided  into  three 
classes.  Some  will  tell  us,  that  the  present  age  tran 
scends  all  that  have  gone  before  it,  in  politeness, 
learning,  and  good  sense  ;  will  thank  Providence  (or 
their  stars)  that  their  lot  of  life  has  been  cast  in  so 
glorious  a  period  ;  and  wonder  how  men  could  support 
existence  amidst  the  ignorance  and  barbarism  of  former 
days.  By  others  we  are  accounted  a  generation  of 
triflers  and  profligates  ;  sciolists  in  learning,  hypocrites 
in  virtue,  and  formalists  in  good -breeding  ;  wise  only 
when  wre  follow  the  ancients,  and  foolish  whenever  we 
deviate  from  them.  Sentiments  so  violent  are  gener 
ally  wrong  :  and  therefore  I  am  disposed  to  adopt  the 
notions  of  those  who  may  be  considered  as  forming  an 
intermediate  class  ;  who,  though  not  blind  to  the  fol 
lies,  are  yet  willing  to  acknowledge  the  virtues,  both 
of  past  ages,  and  of  the  present.  And  surely,  in  every 
age,  and  in  every  man,  there  is  something  to  praise, 
as  well  as  something  to  blame. 

When  I  survey  the  philosophy  of  the  present  age,  I 
find  much  matter  of  applause  and  admiration.  Ma 
thematics,  Natural  Philosophy,  and  Natural  History, 
ia  all  their  branches,  have  risen  to  a  pitch  of  perfection, 
that  does  signal  honour  to  human  capacity,  and  far  sur- 


INTRODUCTION.  9 

passes  what  the  most  sanguine  projectors  of  former  times 
had  any  reason  to  took  for  :  and  the  paths  to  further  im 
provement  in  those  sciences  are  so  clearly  marked  out,  that 
nothing  but  honesty  and  attention  seems  requisite  to  en~ 
sure  the  success  of  future  ad  venturers.  Moral  Philosophy 
and  Logic  have  not  been  so  fortunate.  Yet,  even  here,  we 
have  happily  got  rid  of  much  pedantry  and  jargon  ;  our 
systems  have  more  the  appearance  of  liberal  senti 
ments,  good  taste,  and  correct  composition,  than  those 
ef  the  schoolmen  ;  we  disclaim  (at  least  in  words)  all- 
attachment  to  hypothesis  and  party  ;  profess  to  study 
men  and  things,  as  well  as  books  and  words  ;  and  as 
sert,  with  the  utmost  vehemence  of  protestation,  our 
love  o£  truth,  of  candour,  and  of  sound  philosophy, 
Bat  let  us  net  be  deceived  by  appearances.  Neither 
Moral  Philosophy,  nor  the  kindred  sciences  of  Logic 
and  Criticism,  are  at  present  upon  the  most  desjrable 
footing.  The  rage  of  paradox  and  system  has  tro.n£~ 
formed  them  (although  of  all  sciences  these  ought  to 
be  the  simplest  and  the  clearest)  into  a  mass  of  confu 
sion,  darkness,  and  absurdity.  One  kind  of  jargon  is 
laid  aside  ;  but  another  has  been  adopted,  more  fashi 
onable  indeed,  but  not  less  frivolous.  Hypothesis^ 
though  verbally  disclaimed,  is  really  adhered  to  with 
as  much  obstinacy  as  ever.  Words  have  been  defined, 
but  their  meaning  still  remains  indefinite.  Appeab 
have  been  made  to  experience  ;  but  with  such  misre 
presentation  of  fact,  and  in  such  equivocal  language,  as 
plainly  shew  the  authors  to  have  been  more  concerned 
for  their  theory,  than  for  the  truth.  All  sciences,  and 
especially  Moral  Philosophy,  ought  to  regulate  human 
practice  :  practice  is  regulated  by  principles,  and  all 
principles  suppose  conviction  :  yet  the  aim  of  our  most 
celebrated  moral  systems  is,  to  divest  the  mind  of  every 
principle,  and  of  all  conviction  ;  and,  consequently,  to 
disqualify  man  for  action,  and  to  render  him  as  useless, 
and  as  wretched,  as  possible.  In  a  word,  SCEPTICISM 
is  now  the  profession  of  every  fashionable  inquirer  intc 
A  2 


1C  IKTRODUCTION. 

human  nature  ;  a  scepticism  which  is  not  confined  ta 
points  of  mere  speculation,  but  has  been  extended  to 
practical  truths  of  the  highest  importance,  even  to  the 
principles  of  morality  and  religion.  Proofs  of  all  these 
assertions  will  appear  in  the  seqrtel. 

I  said  that  my  prejudices  are  all  in  favour  of  truth 
and  virtue.  To  avow  any  s.ort  of  prejudice,  m^y  per 
haps  startle  some  readers.  If  it  should,  1  must  here 
intreat  all  such  to  pause  a  moment,  and  ask  of  their 
own  hearts  these  simple  questions  :  Are  virtue  and 
truth  useful  to  mankind  ?  Are  they  matters  of  in 
difference  ?  Or  are  they  pernicious  ?  If  any  one  finds 
himself  disposed  to  think  them  pernicious,  or  matters 
of  indifference,  I  would  advise  him  to  lay  my  book 
aside  ;  for  it  does  not  contain  one  sentiment  in  which 
he  can  be  interested  ;  nor  one  expression  with  which 
he  can  be  pleased.  But  he  who  believes  that  virtue 
and  truth  are  of  the  highest  importance,  that  in  them 
is  laid  the  foundation  of  human  happinebs,  and  that  on 
them  depends  the  very  existence  of  human  society,  and 

of  human  creatures, that  person  and  I  are  of  the 

same  mind  ;  I  have  no  prejudices  that  he  would  wish 
me  not  to  have  :  he  may  proceed  ;  and  I  hope  he  will 
proceed  with  pleasure,  and  encourage,  by  his  approba 
tion,  this  honest  attempt  to  vindicate  truth  and  virtue  ; 
and  to  overturn  that  pretended  philosophy  which  sup 
poses,  or  which  may  lead  us  to  suppose,  every  dictate 
of  conscience,  every  impulse  of  understanding,  ancle- 
very  information  of  sense,  questionable  and  ambiguous. 

This  sceptical  philosophy  (as  it  is  called)  seems  to 
me  to  be  dangerous,  not  because  it  is  ingenious,  but 
because  it  is  subtle  and  obscure.  Were  it  rightly  un 
derstood,  no  confutation  would  be  necessary  ;  for  it 
does  in  fact,  confute  itself,  as  I  hope  to  demonstrate.. 
But  many,  to  my  certain  knowledge,  have  read  it,  and 
admitted  its  tenets,  who  do  not  understand  the  grounds 
of  them  ;  and  many  more,  swayed  by  the  fashion  of  the 
times,  have  greedily  adopted  its  conclusions,  without 
any  knowledge  of  the  premises,  or  any  concern  about 


INTRODUCTION.  It 

them.  An  attempt  therefore  to  expose  this  pretended^ 
philosophy  to  public  view,  in  its  proper  colours,  will 
net,  I  hope,  be  censured  as  impertinent  by  any  whose 
opinion  I  value  :  if  it  should,  I  shall  be  satisfied  with 
the  approbation  of  my  own  conscience,  which  will  ne 
ver  reproach  me  for  intending,  to  do  good. 

J  am  sorry,  that  in  the  course  of  this  inquiry,  it  will 
not  always  be  in  my  power  to  speak  of  some  celebrated 
names  with  that  deference,  to  whkh  superior  talents^ 
and  superior  virtue,  are  always  entitled.  Every  friend 
to  civil  and  religious  liberty,  every  lover  of  mankind, 
every  admirer  of  sincerity  and  simple  manners,  every 
heart  that  warms  at  the  recollection  of  distinguished 
virtue,  must  consider  LOCKE  as  one  of  the  most  amiable^ 
and  most  illustrious  men,  that  ever  our  nation  pro 
duced.  Such  he  is,  such  he  will  ever  be,,  in  my  esti 
mation*  The  parts  of  his  philosophy  to  which  truth 
obliges  me  to  object,  are  but  few,  and,-  compared  with 
the  extent  and  importance  of  his  other  writings,  ex 
tremely  inconsiderable.  I  object  to  them,  because  I 
think  them  erroneous  and  dangerous  ;  and  I  am  con* 
vinced,  that  their  author,  if  he  had  lived  to  see  the  in 
ferences  that  have  been  drawn  from  them,  would  have 
been  the  first  to  declare  them  absurd,  and  would  have 

expunged  them   from    his'  works  with  indignation - 

BERKELEY  was  equally  amiable  in  his  life,  and  equally 
a  friend  to  truth  and  virtue.  In  elegance  of  composition 
he  was  perhaps  superior.  I  admire  his  virtues  :  I  c?,n 
never  sufficiently  applaud  his  zeal  in  the  cause  of  reli 
gion  :  but  some  of  his  reasonings  on  the  subject  of  hu 
man  nature  I  cannot  admit,  without  renouncing  my 
claim  to  rationally — There  is  a  writer  now  alive,  of 
whose  philosophy  I  have  much  to  say.  By  his -philo 
sophy,  I  mean  the  sentiments  he  has  published  in  a 
book  called,  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature^  in  three 
volumes,  printed  in  the  year  1739  ;  the  principal  and 
most  dangerous  doctrines  of  which  he  has  since  repub- 
lished  again,  and  again,  under  the  title  of,  Essays  Mo 
ral  aad  Political,  13 c.  Of  his  other  works  I  say  no- 

A  3 


12  INTRODUCTION. 

thing ;  nor  have  1  at  present  any  concern  with  them. 
Vrirgil  is  said  to  have  been  a  bad  prose- writer  ;  Cicero 
was  certainly  a  bad  poet  :  and  this  author,  though  not 
much  acquainted  with  human  nature,  and  therefore  not 
well  qualified  to  write  a  treatise  upon  it,  may  yet  be 
an  excellent  politician,  financier,  and  historian.  His 
merit  in  these  three  respects  is  indeed  generally  allow 
ed  :  and  if  my  suffrage  could  add  any  thing  to  the  lustre 
of  his  reputation,  1  should  here,  with  great  sincerity 
and  pleasure,  join  my  voice  to  that  of  the  public,  and 
make  such  an  encomium  on  the  author-of  the  History 
of  England  as  would  not  offend  any  of  his  rational  ad 
mirers.  But  why  is  this  author's  character  so  replete 
with  inconsistency  !  why  should  his  principles  and  his 
talents  extort  at  once  our  esteem  and  detestation,  our 
applause  and  contempt  !  That  he,  whose  manners  in 
private  life  are  said  to  be  so  agreeable  to  many  of  his 
acquaintance,  should  yet  in  the  public  capacity  of  an 
author,  have  given  so  much  cause  of  just  offence  to  all 
the  friends  of  virtue  and  mankind,  is  to  me,  matter  of 
astonishment  and  sorrow,  as  well  as  of  indignation. 
That  he,  who  succeeds  so  well  in  describing  the  fates 
of  nations,  should  yet  have  failed  so  egregiously  in  ex 
plaining  the  operations  of  the  mind,  is  one  of  those  in- 
congruities  in  human  genius,  for  which  perhaps  philo 
sophy  will  never  be  able  fully  to  account.  That  he, 
who  has  so  impartially  stated  the  opposite  pleas  and 
principles  of  our  political  factions,  should  yet  have  a- 
dopted  the  most  illiberal  prejudices  against  natural  and 
revealed  religion :  that  he,  who  on  some  occasions  has 
displayed  even  a  profound  erudition,  should  at  other 
times  when  intoxicated  with  a  favourite  theory,  have 
•suffered  affirmations  to  escape  him,  which  would  have 
fixed  the  opprobrious  name  of  Sciolist  on  a  less  cele 
brated  author :  and  finally,  that  a  moral  philosopher, 
who  seems  to  have  exerted  his  utmost  ingenuity  in 
searching  after  paradoxes,  should  yet  happen  to  light 
on  none,  but  such  as  are  all,  without  exception,  on  the 
side  of  licentiousness  and  scepticism  ;-~these  are  incon- 


INTRODUCTION.  13 

sistencies  perhaps  equally  Inexplicable  ;  atledstthey 
are  such  as  I  do  not  at  present  chuse  to  explain.  And 
yet,  that  this  author  is  chargeable  with  all  these  incon 
sistencies,  will  not,  I  think,  be  denied  by  any  person  of 
sense  and  candour,  who  has  read  his  writings  with  at 
tention.  His  philosophy  has  done  great  harm,  Its 
admirers,  J.  know,  are  very  numerous  ;  but  1  have  not 
as  yet  met  with  one  person,  who  both  admired  and  un 
derstood  it.  We  are  prone  to  believe  what  we  wish 
to  be  true  :  and  most  of  this  author's  philosophical 
tenets  are  so  well  adapted  to  what  I  fear  I  may  call  the 
fashionable  notions  of  the  times,  that  those  who  are 
ambitious  to  conform  to  the  latter,  will  hardly  be  dis 
posed  to  examine  scrupulously  the  evidence  of  the  for 
mer. Having  made  this  declaration,  which  I  do  in 

the  spirit  of  an  honest  man,  i  must  take  the  liberty  to 
treat  this  author  with  that  plainness,  which  the  cause 
of  truth,  the  interests  of  society,  and  my  own  con 
science,  require.  The  same  candour  that  prompts  me 
to  praise,  will  also  oblige  me  to  blame.  The  incon* 
sistency  is  not  in  me,  but  in  him.  Had  I  done  but  half 
as  much  as  he,  in  labouring  to  subvert  principles  which 
ought  ever  to  be  held  sacred,  I  know  not  whether  the 
friends  of  truth  would  have  granted  me  any  indulgence  : 
I  am  sure  they  ought  not.  Let  me  be  treated  with  the 
lenity  due  to  a  good  citizen,  no  longer  than  I  act  as  be 
comes  one. 

If  it  shall  be  acknowledged  by  the  candid  and  intelli 
gent  reader,  that  I  have  in  this  book  contributed  some 
thing  to  the  establishment  of  old  truths,  I  shall  not  be 
much  offended,  though  others  should  pretend  to  discover 
that  I  have  advanced  nothing  new.  Indeed  I  would 
not  wish  to  say  any  thing  on  these  subjects,  that  has 
not  often  occurred  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind. 
In  Logic  and  Morals,  we  may  have  new  treatises,  and 
new  theories  ;  but  we  are  not  now  to  expect  newr  disco 
veries.  The  principles  of  moral  duty  have  long  been  un 
derstood  in  these  enlightened  parts  of  the  world  ;  and 
mankind,  in  the  time  that  is  past,  have  had  more  tenth 


14  INTRODUCTION. 

under  their  consideration,  than  they  will  probably  have 
in  the  time  to  come.      Yet  he  who  makes  these  sciences 
the   study  of  his  life,   may  perhaps  collect  particulars 
concerning   their   evidence,  which    though  known  to  a 
few,  are  unknown  to  many  ;  may  set  some  principles  in 
a  more  striking  light  than  that  in  which  they  have  been 
formerly  viewed  ;    may  devise  methods  of  confuting 
ne  v  errors,  and  exposing  new  paradoxes  ;  and  may  hit 
upon  a  more  popular  way  of  displaying  what  has  hith 
erto  been  exhibited  in  too  dark  and  mysterious  a  form* 
It  is  commonly  allowed,  that  the  science  of  human 
nature  is  of  all  human  sciences  the  most  curious  and 
important.       To  know   ourselves,  is  a  precept  which- 
the  wise  in  all  ages  have  recommended,  and  which  is 
enjoined  by  the  authority  of  revelation  itself.       Can 
any   thing   be   of  more   consequence   to  man,  than    to 
know  what  is  his  duty,  and  how  he  may  arrive  at  hap 
piness  ?  It  is  from  the  examination  of  his  own  heart 
that  he  receives  the  first  intimations  of  the  one,  and 
the  only  sure  criterion  of  the  other. — What  can  be 
more  useful,  more  delightful,  and  more  sublime,  than 
to  contemplate  the  Deity  ?  It  is  in  the  works  of  nature, 
particularly  in  the  constitution  of  the  human  soul,  that 
we  discern  the  first  and  most  conspicuous  traces  of  the  - 
Almighty  ;  for    without  some  previous    acquaintance 
with  our  own  moral  nature,  we  could  not  have  any  cer-  - 
tain  knowledge  of  His — Destitute  of  the  hope  of  im 
mortality,  and  a  future  retribution,  how  contemptible, 
how  miserable  is  man  !   And  yet,  did  not  our  moral 
feelings,  in  concert   with   what  reason  discovers  of  the 
Deity,  evidence  the  necessity  of  a  future  state,  in  vain 
should  we  pretend  to  judge  rationally  of  that  revelation 
by  which  life  and  immortality  have  been  brought  to 
light. 

How  then  is  this  science  to  be  learned  ?  In  what 
manner  are  we  to  study  human  nature  ?  Doubtless  by 
examining  our  own  hearts  and  feelings,  and  by  attend 
ing  to  the  conduct  of  other  men.  But  are  not  the 
writings  of  philosophers  useful  towards  the  attainment 


INTRODUCTION'.  IJ 

of  this  science  ?  Most  certainly  they  arc  :  for  whatever 
improves  the  sagacity  of  judgment,  the  sensibility  of 
moral  perception,  or  the  delicacy  of  taste  ;  whatever 
renders  our  knowledge  of  moral  and  intellectual  facts, 
more  extensive  ;  whatever  impresses  our  minds  with 
more  enlarged  and  more  powerful  sentiments  of  duty, 
with  more  aifecting  views  of  God  and  Providence,  and 
with  greater  energy  of  belief  in  the  doctrines  of  natural 
religion  ; — every  thing  of  this  sort  either  makes  us 
more  thoroughly  acquainted,  or  prepares  us  for  becom- 
ingmore  thoroughly  acquainted  with  our  ownnature,and 
with  that  of  other  beings,  and  with  the  relations  which 
they  and  we  bear  to  one  another.  But  I  fear  we  shall 
not  be  able  to  improve  ourselves  in  any  one  of  these 
respects,  by  reading  the  modern  systems  of  scepticism. 
What  account  then  are  we  to  make  of  those  systems 
and  their  authors  ?  The  following  Dissertation  is  parti/ 
designed  a*  an  answer  to  this  question.  But  it  has  a 
further  view  :  which  is,  to  examine  the  foundations  of 
this  scepticism,  and  see  whether  these  be  consistent 
with  what  ail  mankind  must  acknowledge  to  be  the 
foundations  of  truth  ;  to  inquire,  whether  the  cultiva 
tion  of  scepticism  be  salutary  or  pernicious  to  science  and 
mankind  ;  and  whether  it  may  not  be  possible  to  devise 
certain  criteria,  by  which  the  absurdity  of  its -conclu 
sions  may  be  detected,  even  by  those  who  may  not  have 
leisure  or  subtlety,  or  metaphysical  knowledge,  suf 
ficient  to  qualify  them  for  a  logical  confutation  of  all 
its  premises.  If  it  be  confessed,  that  the  present  a;;e 
has  some  tendency  to  licentiousness,  both  in  pri 
and  practice,  and  that  the  \*oiks  oi  sceptical  writers 
have  some  tendency  to  favour  that  licentiousness  ;  it 
will  also  be  confessed,  that  this  design  is  neither  absurd 
nor  unseasonable. 

A  celebrated  writer  *  on  human  nature  has  observed, 
that  "  if  truth  be  at  all  within  the  reach  of  human  ca- 
"  pacity,  it  is  certain  it  mast  lie  very  deep  and  ab-J 
"  struse  :"  and  a  little  after  he  adds,  "  that  he  would 
**  esteem  it  a  strong  presumption  against  the  philoso- 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  3,  4. 


1 6  INTRODUCTION. 

*'  phy  he  is  going  to  unfold,  were  it  so  very  easy  and 
"  obvious."  I  am  so  far  from  adopting  this  opinion, 
that  I  declare,  in  regard  to  the  few  things  I  have  to  say 
on  human  nature,  that  I  should  esteem  it  a  very  strong 
presumption  against  them,  if  they  were  not  easy  and 
obvious.  Physical  and  mathematical  truths  are  often 
abstruse  ;  but  facts  and  experiments  relating  to  the  hu 
man  mind,  when  expressed  in  proper  words,  ought  to 
be  obvious  to  all.  I  find  that  those  poets,  historians,, 
and  novelists,  who  have  given  the  most  lively  displays 
of  human  nature,  and  who  abound  most  in  sentiments 
easily  comprehended,  and  readily  admitted  as  true,  are 
the  most  entertaining,  as  well  as  the  most  useful. 
How  then  should  the  philosophy  of  the  human  mind  be 
so  difficult  and  obscure  ?  Indeed,  if  it  be  an  author's 
determinate  purpose  to  advance  paradoxes,  some  of 
which  are  incredible,  and  others  beyond  comprehension; 
if  he  be  willing  to  avail  himself  ail  he  can  of  the  na 
tural  ambiguity  of  language  in  supporting  those  para 
doxes  ;  or  if  he  enter  upon  inquiries  too  refined  for  hu 
man  understanding  ;  he  must  often  be  obscure,  and  of 
ten  unintelligible.  But  my  views  are  very  different, 
I  intend  only  to  suggest  some  hints  for  guarding  the 
mind  against  error  ;  and  these,  I  hope,  will  be  found  to 
be  deduced  from  principles  which  every  man  of  com 
mon  capacity  may  examine  by  his  daily  experience. 

It  is  true,  that  several  subjects  of  intricate  specu 
lation  are  treated  of  in  this  book.  But  I  have  endea 
voured,  by  constant  appeals  to  fact  and  experience,  by 
illustrations  and  examples  the  most  familiar  I  could 
think  of,  and  by  a  plainness  and  perspicuity  of  expres 
sion  which  sometimes  may  appear  too  much  affected, 
to  treat  of  them  in  a  way,  that  I  hope  cannot  fail  to 
render  them  intelligible,  even  to  those  who  are  not  much 
conversant  in  studies  of  this  kind.  Truth,  like  virtue, 
to  be  loved,  needs  only  to  be  seen.  My  principles  re^ 
quire  no  disguise  ;  on  the  contrary,  they  will,  if  I 
mistake  not,  be  most  easily  admitted  by  those  who  best 
understand  them.  And  I  am  persuaded,  that  the  seep- 


INTRODUCTION.  l^f 

tical  system  would  never  have  made  such  an  alarming 
progress,  if  it  had  been  well  understood.  The  ambi 
guity  of  its  language,  and  the  intricacy  and  length  of 
some  of  its  fundamental  investigations,  have  unhappily 
been  too  successful  in  producing  that  confusion  of 
thought,  and  indistinctness  of  apprehension,  in  the 
minds  both  of  authors  and  readers,  which  are  so  fa 
vourable  to  error  and  sophistry. 

Few  men  have  ever  engaged  in  controversy,  religious, 
political,  or  philosophical,  without  being  in  some  de- 
.gree  chargeable  with  misconception  of  the  adversary's 
meaning.  That  I  have  never  erred  in  this  way,  I  dare 
not  affirm.  But  I  am  conscious  of  having  done  every 
thing  in  my  power  to  guard  against  it.  The  greater 
part  of  these  papers  have  lain  by  me  for  several  years. 
They  have  been  repeatedly  perused  by  some  of  the  a- 
cutest  philosophers  of  the  age,  whom  I  have  the  honour 
to  call  my  friends,  and  to  whose  advice  and  assistance, 
on  this,  as  on  other  occasions,  I  am  deeply  indebted. 
I  have  availed  myself  all  I  could  of  reading  and  con 
versation  ;  and  endeavoured,  with  all  the  candour  I 
am  master  of,  to  profit  by  every  hint  of  improvement, 
and  to  examine  to  the  bottom  every  objection,  that  o- 
thers  have  offered,  or  myself  could  devise.  And  may 
I  not  be  permitted  to  add,  that  every  one  of  those  who 
have  perused  this  essay,  has  advised  the  author  to 
publish  it ;  and  that  many  of  them  have  encouraged 
him  by  this  insinuation,  to  hkn  the  most  flattering  of 
all  others,  That  by  so  doing,  he  would  probably  be 
of  some  service  to  the  cause  of  truth,  virtue,  and  man 
kind  ?  In  this  hope  he  submits  it  to  the  public.  And 
it  is  this  hope  only  that  could  have  induced  him  to  at 
tempt  polemical  disquisition  :  a  species  of  writing, 
which,  in  his  own  judgment,  is  not  the  most  creditable  ; 
which  he  knows,  to  his  cost,  is  not  the  most  pleasing  ; 
and  of  which  he  is  well  aware  that  it  cannot  fail  to 
draw  upon  him  the  resentment  of  a  numerous,  power 
ful  and  fashionable  party.  But, 


l8  INTRODUCTION. 

Welcome  for  tlee,  fair  Virtue  !  all  tie  past ; 
For  tbee,  fair  Virtue  !   we/come  even  the  last. 

If  these  pages,  which  he  hopes  none  will  condemn 
who  have  not  read,  shall  throw  any  light  on  the  first 
principles  of  moral  science  ;  if  they  shall  suggest,  to 
the  young  and  unwary,  any  cautions  against  that  so 
phistry,  and  licentiousness  of  principle,  which  too  much 
infect  the  conversations  and  compositions  of  the  age  ;  if 
they  shall,  in  any  measure,  contribute  to  the  satisfac 
tion  of  any  of  the  friends  of  truth  and  virtue  ;  his  pur 
pose  will  be  completely  answered  :  and  he  will,  to  the 
end  of  his  life,  rejoice  in  the  recollection  of  those  pain 
ful  hours  which  he  passed  in  the  examination  of  this 
most  important  controversy. 
January,  1770. 


AH 

ESSAY 

ON  THE 

NATURE  AND  IMMUTABILITY  OF  TRUTH, 

IN  OPPOSITION  TO 

SOPHISTRY  AND  SCEPTICISM. 


T  PURPOSE  to  treat  this   subject  in  the  following 
-*-  manner. 

FIRST,  I  shall  endeavour  to  trace  the  several  kinds 
of  Evidence  and  Reasoning  up  to  their  £rst  principles  ; 
with  a  vkw  to  ascertain  the  Standard  of  Truth,  and 
explain  its  immutability. 

SECONDLY,  I  shall  show  that  my  sentiments  on  this 
head,  however  inconsistent  with  the  genius  of  scepti 
cism,  and  with  the  practice  and  principles  of  sceptical 
writers,  are  yet  perfectly  consistent  with  the  genius  of 
true  philosophy,  and  with  the  practice  and  principles  of 
those  who  are  universally  allowed  to  have  been  the 
most  successful  in  the  investigation  of  truth  :  conclud 
ing  with  some  inferences  or  rules,  by  which  the  more 
important  fallacies  of  the  sceptical  philosophy  may  be 
detected  by  every  person  of  common  sense,  even  though 
lie  should  not  possess  acuteness  or  metaphysical  know 
ledge  sufficient  to  qualify  him  for  a  logical  confutation 
of  them. 

THIRDLY,  I  shall  answer  some  objections  ;  and  make 
some  remarks,  by  way  of  Estimate  of  Scepticism  and 
sceptical  writers. 

I  divide  my  discourse  in  this  manner,  chiefly  with 
a  view  to  the  reader's  accommodation.  An  exact  ar 
rangement  of  parts  is  necessary  to  confer  elegance  on  a 
whole  ;  but  I  am  more  studious  of  utility  than  of  ele 
gance.  And  though  my  sentiments  might  have  been 
exhibited  in  a  more  systematic  order,  I  am  apt  to  think, 
that  the  order  in  which  they  first  occurred  to  me  is  the 
most  natural,  and  may  be  the  most  effectual  for  accom 
plishing  my  purpose. 

B 


30  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART    I. 

PART     I. 

OF  THE  STANDARD  OF  TRUTH. 

rrPHE  love  of  truth  has  ever  been  accounted   a  gocd 
-*•     principle.     Where  it  is  known  to  prevail,  we  ex 
pect  to  find  integrity  and  steadiness  ;  a  temper  of  mind 
favourable  to  every  virtue,  and  tending  in  an    eminent 
degree  to  the  advancement  of  public  utility.     To   have 
no  concern  for  the  truth,  to  be  false  and  fallacious,   is 
a  character  which  no  person  who  is  not   utterly   aban 
doned  would  chuse  to  bear  ;  it  is  a  character  from  which 
we  expect  nothing  but  levity  and  inconsistence.  Truth 
seems  to  be  considered  by  all  mankind  as   something 
fixed,  unchangeable^  and  eternal  ;  it   may   therefore   be 
thought  that  to  vindicate  the  permanency  of  truth  is  to 
dispute  with  an  adversary.     And  indeed,  if  these  ques 
tions  were  proposed  in  general  terms, — Is  there  such  a 
thing  as  truth  ?   Are  truth  and  falsehood  different  and 
opposite?  Is  truth  permanent  and  eternal? — few  persons 
would  be   hardy  enough  to  answer  in   the   negative. 
Attempts,  however,  have  been  made,  sometimes  through 
inadvertence,  and  sometimes   (I  fear)  from  design   to 
undermine  the  foundations  of  truth,  and  to  render  their 
stability  questionable  ;  and  these  attempts  have  been  so 
vigorously  forwarded,  and  so  often  renewed,  that  they 
now  constitute  a  great  part  of  what  is  called  the  philo 
sophy  of  the  human  ?nind. 

It  is  difficult,  perhaps  impossible,  to  give  a  logical 
definition  of  Truth.  But  we  shall  endeavour  to  give 
such  a  description  of  it,  as  may  make  others  understand 
what  we  mean  by  the  word.  The  definitions  of  former 
writers  are  not  so  clear,  nor  so  accurate,  as  could  be 
wished.  These  therefore  we  shall  overlook,  without 
seeking  either  to  explain  or  to  correct  them  ;  and  shall 
satisfy  ourselves  with  taking  notice  of  some  of  tlie* 
mental  phenomena  that  attend  the  perception  of  truth. 
This  seems  to  bz  the  safest  way  of  introducing  tbs 
subject. 


CHAP.  I.  AN   ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

CHAPTER   I. 

Of  tie  Perception  of  Truth   in   general. 

ON  hearing  these  propositions  :  I  exist,  —  Things  e- 
qual  to  one  and  the  same  thing  are  equal  to  one  a- 
nother,  —  The  sun  rose  to-day,  —  There  is  a  God,  —  Ingra 
titude  ought  to  be  blamed  and  punished,  —  The  three 
angles  of  a  triangle  are  equal  to  two  right  angles,  &c. 
_  1  am  conscious,  that  my  mind  readily  admits  and  as- 
qutesces  in  them.  I  say,  that  I  beVieve  them  to  be  true  ; 
that  is,  I  conceive  them  to  express  something  confor 
mable  to  the  nature  of  things  *.  Of  the  contrary  pro 
positions  I  should  say,  that  my  mind  does  not  acquiesce 
in  them,  but  disbelieves  them,  and  conceives  them  to 
express  something  not  conformable  to  the  nature  of 
things.  My  judgment  in  this  case,  I  conceive  to  be 
the  same  which  1  should  form  in  regard  to  these  pro 
positions,  if  I  were  perfectly  acquainted  with  ail  nature,. 
in  all  its  parts,  and  in  all  its  laws  f. 

If  I  be  asked,  what  I  mean  by  the  nature  of  things, 
I  cannot  otherwise  explain  myself,  than  by  saying,  that 
there  is  in  my  mind  something  which  induces  me  to 
think,  that  every  thing  existing  in  nafttre,  is  determined 
to  exist,  and  to  exist  after  a  certain  manner  in  conse 
quence  of  established  laws  ;  and  that  whatever  is  agree 
able  to  thoss  laws  is  agreeable  to  the  nature  of  things, 
because  by  those  laws  the  nature  of  all  things  is  deter 
mined.  Of  those  laws  I  do  not  pretend  to  know  any 
thing,  except  so  far  as  they  seem  to  be  intimated  to 
me  by  my  own  feelings,  and  by  the  suggestions  of  my 
own  understanding.  But  these  feelings  and  suggestions 
are  such,  and  affect  me  in  such  a  manner,  that  I  cannot 
help  receiving  them,  and  trusting  in  them,  and  believing 


OVTU       ryiz  a/«£. 
Ariost.  Metaph.  lib.  2.  cap.  1. 

f  This  remark,  when  applied  to  truth  in  general,  is  subject 
to  certain  limitations  5  for  which  see  part  2.  chap.  1.  sect.  3, 
B    2 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I, 

that  their  intimations  are  not  fallacious,  but  such  as  I 
should  approve  if  I  were  perfectly  acquainted  with 
every  thing  in  the  universe^  and  such  as  I  may  ap 
prove,  and  admit  of,  and  regulate  my  conduct  by,  with 
out  danger  of  any  inconvenience. 

It  is  not  easy  on  this  subject  to  avoid  identical  ex 
pressions.  I  am  not  certain  that  I  have  been  able  to 
avoid  them.  And  perhaps  I  might  have  expressed  my 
meaning  more  shortly  and  more  cleaily,  by  baying,  that 
i  account  That  to  be  truth  which  the  constitution  of 
our  nature  determines  us  to  believe,  and  That  to  be 
falsehood  which  the  constitution  of  our  nature  deter 
mines  us  to  disbelieve.  Believing  and  disbelieving  are 
.simple  acts  of  the  mind  j  I  can  neither  define  nor  de 
scribe  them  in  words  ;  and  therefore  the  reader  must 
judge  of  their  nature  from  his  own  experience.  We 
often  believe  what  we  afterwards  find  to  be  false  ;  but 
while  belief  continues,  v/e  think  it  true  ;  when  we  dis 
cover  its  falsity,  we  believe  i:  no  longer. 

Hitherto  we  have  used  the  word  belief  to  denote  that 
act' of  the  mind  which  attends  the  perception  of  truth 
in  general.  But  truths  are  of  different  kinds;  some 
are  certain,  others  only  probable  :  and  we  ought  not  to 
call  that  act  of  the  mind  which  attends  the  perception, 
of  certainty,  and  t  that  which  attends  the  perception 
of  probability,  by  one  and  the  same  name.  Some 
have  called  the  former  conviction,  and  the  latter  assent* 
All  convictions  are  equally  strong  :  but  assent  admits 
of  innumerable  degrees,  from  moral  certainty,  which 
is  the  highest  degree,  downward,  through  the  several 
stages  of  opinion,  to  that  suspense  of  judgment  which 
is  called  doubt. 

We  may,  without  absurdity,  speak  of  probable 
truth  as  well  as  of  certain  truth.  Whatever  a  ra 
tional  being  is  determined,  by  the  constitution  of  his 
nature,  to  admit  as  probable,  may  be  called  probable 
truth  ;  the  acknowledgment  of  it  is  as  universal  as  ra 
tional  nature,  and  will  be  as  permanent.  But,  in  this 
,  we  propose  to  confine  ourselves  chiefly  to  that 


CHAP.  I.  AN  ESSAY  OF  TRUTH.  23 

kind  of  truth  which  may  be  called  certain,  which  en 
forces  our  conviction,  and  the  belief  of  which,  in  a 
sound  mind,  is  not  tinctured  with  any  doubt  or  uncer 
tainty. 

The  investigation  and  perception  of  truth  is  com 
monly  ascribed  to  our  rational  faculties  :  and  these  have 
by  some  been  reduced  to  two  ;  Reason,  and  Judgment ; 
the  former  being  supposed  to  be  conversant  about  cer 
tain  truths,  the  latter  chiefly  about  probabilities.  But 
certain  truths  are  not  all  of  the  same  kind  ;  some  be 
ing  supported  by  one  sort  of  evidence,  and  others  by 
another  :  different  energies  of  the  understanding  must 
therefore  be  exerted  in  perceiving  them  ;  and  these  dif 
ferent  energies  must  be  expressed  by  different  names, 
if  we  would  speak  of  them  distinctly  and  intelligibly. 
The  certainty  of  some  truths,  for  instance,  is  perceiv 
ed  intuitively  ;  the  certainty  of  others  is  perceived, 
not  intuitively,  but  in  consequence  of  a  proof.  Most 
of  the  propositions  of  Euclid  are  of  the  latter  kind  ; 
the  axioms  of  geometry  are  of  the  former.  Now,  if 
that  faculty  by  which  we  perceive  truth  in  consequence 
of  a  proof,  be  called  Reasott,  surely  that  power  by 
which  we  perceive  self-evident  truth,  ought  to  be  dis 
tinguished  by  a  different  name.  It  is  of  little  conse 
quence  what  name  we  make  choice  of,  provided  that  in 
chusing  it  we  depart  not  from  the  analogy  of  language ; 
and  that,  in  applying  it,  we  avoid  equivocation  and 
ambiguity  *.  Some  philosophers  of  note  f  have  given 
the  name  of  Common  Sense  to  that  faculty  by  which  we 
perceive  self-evident  truth  ;  and,  as  the  term  seems 
proper  enough,  we  shall  adopt  it.  But  in  a  subject  of 
this  kind,  there  is  great  danger  of  our  being  imposed 
upon  by  words  ;  we  cannot  therefore  be  too  much  up 
on  our  guard  against  that  species  of  illusion.  We  mean 

*  We  might  call  the  one  Reason,  and  the  other  Reasoning  ; 
but  the  similiarity  of  the  terms  would  frequently  occasion  both 
obscurity  in  the  sense,  and  harshness  in  the  sound. 

f  Buffier,  Dr  Reid,  &c. 


24  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  iv 

to  draw  some  important  inferences  from  this  doctrine 
of  the  distinction  between  Reason  and  Common  Sense* 
Now  these  words  are  not  always  used  in  the  strict  sig 
nification  we  have  here  assigned  them  :  let  us  there 
fore  take  a  view  of  all  the  similar  senses  in  which  they 
are  commonly  used,  and  let  us  explain  more  particu 
larly  that  sense  in  which  we  are  to  use  them  -?  and  thus- 
we  shall  take  every  method  in  our  power  to  secure 
ourselves  against  the  impropriety  of  confounding  our 
notions  by  the  use  of  ambiguous  and  indefinite  lan 
guage.  These  philological  discussions  are  indeed 
no  part  of  philosophy  ;  but  they  are  very  necessary  to 
prepare  us  for  it.  "  Qui  ad  interpretandam  naturam 
*'  accesserit,"  says  Bacon,  "  verborum  mixtam  natu- 
"  ram,  et  juvarnenti  et  nocumenti  imprimis  partici- 
*'  pern,  distincte  sciat  *." 

This  distinction  between  Common  Sense  and  Rea 
son  is  no  modern  discovery  f.     The   ancient  geome- 

*  De  ihterpretatione  Naturae,  sent.  9. 
f  The  KotvovwfMtrwv  of  the  Greek  Stoics  seems  to  mean 
that  benevolent  affection  which  men  owe  to  society  and  to 
cue  another.  Some  modern  moralists  have  called  it  the  Pub- 
lie  Sense.  But  the  notion  or  idea  we  mean  to  express  by 
»he  term  Common  Sense  is  quite  different. 

The  Sensus  Communis  of  the  Latins  hath  several  significa 
tions.   1.   It   denotes  this  Public  Sense,  or  xwvcyow^oa-uy».     See 
Shaft  shiny"1*  Essay  on  the  freedom  of  wit  and  humour,  part  3. 
sect*  1.  Note.    2.  It  denotes  that  experience  and  knowledge  of 
life  which  is  acquired  by  living  in   society.       Thus  Horace 
seems  to  use  it,  lib.  1.  satir.  3.  lin.  66.    'And  thus  Quint ilian, 
speaking  of  the  advantages  of  a  public  education  ;  '*  Sensum. 
"  ipsum  q.ui  communis  dicitur,  ubi  discet,  cum  se  a  congressu, 
44  qui  noa  hominibus  solum,  sed  mutis  quoque  animalibus 
ki  naturalis  est,  segregarh  j"  Kb*  1.  cap.  2.      3.  It  seems  to 
signify  that  instinctive  persuasion  of  truth  which  arises  from, 
intuitive  evidence,  and  is  the  foundation  of  all  reasoning  : 
"  Corpus  enim  per  se  communis  deliquat  esse 
*'  Sensus  :  quo  nisi  prima  fides  fundata  valebit, 
•*  Haud  erit  occultls  de  rebus  quo  referentes 
w  Confirioare  snimi  ^uicquam  ratione  queamus." 

Lucretius,  lib.  1*  ver. 


UHAP.  I.       AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  2£ 

tricians  were  all  acquainted  with  it.  Aristotle  treats 
of  self-evident  principles  in  many  parts  of  his  works, 
particularly  in  the  fourth  book  of  his  Metaphysics,  and 
in  the  first  book  of  his  latter  Analytics.  He  calls  them 
Axioms  or  Dignities,  Principles  and  Common  Senti 
ments*  ;  and  says  of  them,  "  That  they  are  known  by 
"  their  own  evidence  f  ;  that  except  some  first  prin- 
"  ciples  be  taken  for  granted,  there  can  be  neither  rea- 
*'  son  nor  reasoning  £  -y  that  it  is  impossible  that  every 


rots  K.tt\at,$    oc6$,       ay  ef&otvrts    wtvvVFf  oiov9   ort  vrov  £t,vot<yx.ot,(M 

$  ^CiVtf*,  V)  OiTTO^OiYOCt,    K}  i<dv9t(,T6y  UMGt,    I  tVXl  Xj    ^JJ    I  Veil. 

Metaphys.  lib.  3.  cap.  2. 

f  Analytic,  lib.  2.  cap.  16.  -  Of  these  first  principles, 
a  French  Peripatetic,  who  wrote  about  the  beginning  of  the 
last  century,  expresses  himself  thus  :  "  Ces  principes  portent 
"  le  nom  de  cornmuns,  non  seulement  parce  qu'ils  servent  a 
"  plusieurs  sciences,  mais  aussi  parce  que  P  intelligence  en  est 
*'  commune  a  tous.  On  les  appelle  aussi  dignite<x,,  et  notions 
**  communes  :  a  scavoir,  dignitez,  quasi  comme  dignes  entre 
**  toutes  les  autres  qu'on  y  adiouste  foy,  a  cause  de  la  grande 
"  excellence  de  leur  clarte  et  evidence  j  et  notions  com- 
'*  mur.es,  pour  ce  qu'ils  sont  si  connus,  qu'  aussi  tost  que  la 
"  signification  des  termes  dont  ils  sont  composez  est  enten- 
"  due,  sans  discourir  ny  argurnenter  davantage  dessus,  chacun 
**  entend  naturellement  leur  verite  j  si  ce  n'est  quelque  he- 
"  bete  prive  de  raison  j  lequel  je  revoye  a  Aristote,  qui  pro- 
'*  nounce,  que  ceux  qui  doutent,  qu'il  faut  reverer  les  Dieux, 
"  ou  aymer  les  parents,  meritent  d'estre  punis  5  et  que  ceux 
"  qui  doutent  que  la  nege  est  blanche  out  besom  de  sons  ;  et 
"  a  Averroes,  qui  dit,  que  ceux  qui  ne  scauroient  distinguer 
*'  ce  qui  est  connu  par  soy  d'avec  ce  qui  ne  Pest  pas,  sont  in- 
J<  capables  de  philosopher  j  et  que  ne  pouvoir  connoistre  ces 
**  principes,  procede  de  quelque  defaut  de  nature,  ou  de  pen 
**  d'exercice,  ou  drune  mauvaise  accoustumance  enracinee." 

Corps  de  ioute  la  Philosophic  de  Theophraste  Bouju,  p.  190 


Aristot*  Mc'taphys*  lib.  2.  cap.  6. 


26  ASF  ESSAY  aN   TRUTH.  PART  I. 

**  truth  should  admit  of  proof,  otherwise  proof  would 
"  extend  in  infinitum,  which  is  incompatable  with  its 
"  nature  *  ;  and  that  if  ever  men  attempt  to  prove  a 
"  first  principle,  it  is  because  they  are  ignorant  of  the 
"  nature  of  proof  f." 

The  word  Reason  is  used  in  several  different  senses. 
I.  It  is  used  to  signify  that  quality  of  human  nature 
which  distinguishes  man  from  the  inferior  animals. 
Man  is  called  a  reasonable  being,  and  the  brutes  are 
said  to  be  irrational.  But  the  faculty  of  reason,  tak 
ing  the  word  in  a  strict  sense,  is  perhaps  not  more 
characteristical  of  the  nature  of  man,  than  his  moral 
faculty,  or  his  imagination,  or  his  power  of  artificial 
language,  or  his  risibility.  Reason,  in  this  acceptation 
seems  to  be  a  general  name  for  all  the  intellectual  pow 
ers,  as  distinguished  from  the  sensitive  part  of  our  con 
stitution.  2.  Every  thing  that  is  called  truth  is  said 
to  be  perceived  by  reason  :  by  reason,  we  are  said  to 
perceive,  that  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  are  equal 
to  two  right  angles  ;  and  we  are  also  said  to  perceive, 
by  reason,  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  same  thing  to 
be,  and  not  to  be.  But  these  truths  are  of  different 
kinds  ;  and  therefore  the  energies  of  understanding,  to 
which  they  are  referred^  ought  to  be  called  by  different 
names.  3.  The  power  of  invention  is  sometimes  as 
cribed  to  resson.  LOCKE  tells  us,  that  it  is  reason 
\vhich  discovers  and  arranges  the  several  intermedi 
ate  proofs  in  an  argument  ;  an  office,  which  accord 
ing  to  the  common  use  of  words,  is  to  be  refer 
red  not  to  reason,  but  to  imagination.  4.  Reason,  as 


Bristol.  Metaphys.  lib.  4.  cap.  4 


TO  {MI  yiva<rx,toy  rwui    u    *Tliv    -srociiv  ,  t£  TIVM  ov  on. 

ID.  Ibid. 

I  cite  these  authorities,  that  I  may  not  be  supposed  to  affect 
either  an  uncommon  doctrine,  or  uncommon  moc'e:  of  ex 
pression. 


CHAP.  I.  AN  ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  27 

implying  a  faculty  not  marked  by  any  other  name,  19 
used  by  those  who  are  most  accurate  in  distinguishing, 
to  signify  that  power  of  the  human  mind  by  which  we 
draw  inferences,  or  by  which  we  are  convinced,  that  a 
relation  belongs  to  two  ideas,  on  account  of  our  having 
found,  that  these  ideas  bear  certain  relations  to  other 
ideas.  In  a  word,  it  is  that  faculty  which  enables  us, 
from  relations  or  ideas  that  are  known,  to  investigate 
such  as  are  unknown  j  and  without  which  we  never 
could  proceed  in  the  discovery  of  truth  a  single  step 
beyond  first  principles  or  intuitive  axioms.  And  it  is 
in  this  last  sense  we  are  to  use  the  word  Reason  in  the 
course  of  this  inquiry. 

The  term  Common  Sense  has  also  several  different  sig 
nifications.  I.  Sometimes  it  seems  to  be  synonymous 
with  prudence.  Thus  we  say,  that  a  man  has  a  large 
stock  of  common  sense,  who  is  quick  in  perceiving  re 
mote  consequences,  and  thence  instantaneously  deter*. 
mines  concerning  the  propriety  of  present  conduct.  2. 
Common  Sense,  in  certain  instances,,  seemeth  to  be 
confounded  with  some  of  the  powers  of  taste.  We 
often  meet  with  persons  of  great  sagacity  in  most  of 
the  ordinary  affairs  of  life,  and  very  capable  of  accu 
rate  reasoning*  who  yet,  without  any  bad  intention, 
commit  the  most  egregious  blunders  in  regard  to  deco 
rum  ;  both  saying  and  doing  what  is  offensive  to  their 
company,  and  inconsistent  with  their  own  character  : 
and  this  we  are  apt  to  impute  to  a  defect  in  common 
sense..  But  it  seems  rather  to  be  owing  to  a  defect  in 
that  kind  of  sensibility,  or  sympathy,  by  which  we 
suppose  ourselves  in  the  situations  of  other?,  adopt 
their  sentiments,  and  in  a  manner  perceive  their  very 
thoughts  ;  and  which  is  indeed  the  foundation  of  good 
breeding  *.  It  is  by  this  secret,  and  sudden,  and  (to 
those  who  are  unacquainted  with  it)  inexplicable,  com 
munication  of  feelings,  that  a  man  is  enabled  to  avoid 
what  would  appear  incongruous  or  offensive.  Thej 

*  See  Smith's  Theory  of  moral  sentiments.  sect..l. 


2  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTtf.  PART  I. 

who  are  prompted  by  inclination,  or  obliged  by  neces 
sity,  to  study  the  art  of  recommending  themselves  to 
others,  acquire  a  wonderful  facility  in  perceiving  and 
avoiding  all  possible  ways  of  giving  offence  :  which  is 
a  proof,  that  this  kind  of  sensibility  may  be  much  im 
proved  by  habit :  although  there  are,  no-  doubt,  in 
respect  of  this,  as  well  as  of  all  other  modifica 
tions  of  perception,  original  and  constitutional  differ 
ences  in  the  frame  of  different  minds.  3.  Seme  men 
are  distinguished  by  an  uncommon  acutecess  in  disco 
vering  the  characters  of  others  :  they  seem  to  read  the 
soul  in  the  countenance,  and  with  a  single  glance  to  pe 
netrate  the  deepest  recesses  of  the  heart.  In  their  pre 
sence,  the  hypocrite  is  detected,  notwithstanding  his 
specious  outside  ;  the  gay  effrontery  of  the  coxcomb 
cannot  conceal  his  insignificance  ;  and  the  man  of  merit 
appears  conspicuous  under  all  the  disguises  of  an  unas 
suming  and  ungainly  modesty.  This  talent  is  some 
times  called  Common  S<;nse  y  but  very  improperly.  It 
is  far  from  being  common  ;  it  is  even  exceedingly  rare: 
it  is  to  be  found  in  men  who  are  not  remarkable  for 
any  other  mental  excellence  :  'and  we  often  see  those 
who  in  other  respects  are  j  adiciou?  enough,  quite  des- 
titute  of  it.  4.  Neither  ought  every  common  opinion 
to  be  referred  to  common  sense.  Modes  in  dress,  re 
ligion,  and  conversation,  however  absurd  in  themselves, 
may  suit  the  notions  or  ihs  taste  of  a  particular  peo 
ple  :  but  none  of  us  will  say,  that  it  is  agreeable  to 
common  sense,  to  worship  more  gods  than  one  ;  to  be 
lieve  that  one  and  the  same  body  may  be  in  ten  thou 
sand  different  places  at  the  sajne  time  *  ;  to  like  a  face 
the  better  because  it  is  painted,  or  to  dislike  a  person 
because  he  does  not  lisp  in  his  pronunciation.  Lastly,. 
The  term  Common  Sense  hath  in  modern  times  been 
used  by  philosophers,  both  French  and  British,  to  sig 
nify  that  power  of  the  mind  which  perceives  truth> 
or  commands  belief,  not  by  progressive  argumentation^ 

*"  Transubstantiation. 


-CHAP.  I.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  2$ 

but  by  an  instantaneous,  instinctive,  arid  irresistible  im 
pulse  ;  derived  neither  from  education  nor  from  habit, 
but  from  nature  ;  acting  independently  on  our  will, 
whenever  its  object  is  presented,  according  to  an  esta 
blished  law,  and  therefore  not  improperly  called 
Sense  f  ;  and  acting  in  a  similar  mariner  upon  all,  or  at 
least  upon  a  great  majority  of  mankind,  and  therefore 
properly  called  Common  Sense.  It  is  in  this  significa 
tion  that  the  term  Common  Sense  is  used  in  the  present 
inquiry. 

That  there  is  a  real  and  essential  difference  between 
these  two  faculties  :  that  common  sense  cannot  be  ac 
counted  for,  by  being  called  the  perfection  of  reason, 
nor  reason,  by  being  resolved  into  common  sense,  will 
perhaps  appear  from  the  following  remarks,  i.  We 
are  conscious,  from  internal  feeling,  that  the  energy  of 
understanding  which  perceives  intuitive  truth,  is  differ 
ent  from  that  other  energy  which  unites  a  conclusion 
with  a  first  principle,  by  a  gradual  chain  of  interme 
diate  relations.  We  believe  the  truth  of  an  investiga 
ted  conclusion,  because  we  can  assign  a  reason  for  our 
belief;  we  believe  an  intuitive  principle,  without  being 
able  to  assign  any  other  reason  for  our  belief  than  this, 
that  the  law  of  our  nature  determines  us  to  believe  it  ; 
even  as  the  law  of  our  nature  determines  us  to  see  a  co 
lour  when  presented  to  our  open  eyes  at  noon-day.  2. 
We  cannot  discern  any  necessary  connection  between 
reason  and  common  sense  :  they  are  indeed  generally 
connected  ;  but  we  can  conceive  a  being  endued  with 
the  one  who  is  destitute  of  the  other.  Nay,  we  often 
find,  that  this  is  in  fact  the  case.  In  dreams,  we  some 
times  reason  without  common  sense.  Through  a  de 
fect  of  common  sense,  we  adopt  absurd  principles  ;  but 
suppobing  our  principles  true,  our  reasoning  is  often 
unexceptionable.  The  same  thing  may  be  observed  in 
certain  kinds  of  madness.  A  man  who  believes  him 
self  made  of  glass,  shall  yet  reason  very  justly  concern- 

.f  For  the  circumstances  that  characterise  a  Stnsey  see  Pr 
Gerard's  F.ssayon  Taste,  part  3.  sei;t.  1.  Note. 


3®  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

ing  the  means  of  preserving  his  supposed  brittleness 
from  flaws  and  fractures.  Nay,  what  is  still  more  to 
the  purpose,  we  sometimes  meet  with  persons,  whom 
it  would  be  injurious  to  charge  with  insanity,  who, 
though  defective  in  common  sense,  have  yet,  by  con 
versing  much  with  polemical  writers,  improved  their 
reasoning  faculty  to  such  a  degree,  as  to  puzzle  and  put 
to  silence  those  who  are  greatly  .their  superiors  in  every 
other  mental  endowment.  3.  This  leads  us  to  remark 
a  third  difference  between  these  two  faculties  ;  namely, 
that  the  one  is  more  in  our  power  than  the  other. 
There  are  few  faculties,  either  of  our  mind  or  body, 
more  improveable  by  culture,  than  that  of  reasoning  ; 
whereas  common  sense,  like  other  instincts,  arrives  at 
maturity  with  almost  no  care  of  ours.  To  teach  the 
art  of  reasoning,  or  rather  of  wrangling,  is  easy  j  but 
it  is  impossible  to  teach  common  sense  to  one  who 
wants  it.  You  may  make  him  remember  a  set  of  first 
principles,  and  say  that  he  believes  them,  even  as  you 
may  teach  one  born  blind  to  speak  intelligibly  of  co 
lours  and  light ;  but  neither  to  the  one,  nor  to  the  o- 
ther,  can  you  by  any  means  communicate  the  peculiar 
feeling  which  accompanies  the  operation  of  that  facul 
ty  which  nature  has  denied  him.  A  man  defective  in 
common  sense  may  acquire  learning  ;  he  may  even  pos 
sess  genius  to  a  certain  degree  :  but  the  defect  of  na 
ture  he  never  can  supply  :  a  peculiar  modification  of 
scepticism,  or  credulity,  or  levity,  will  to  the  end  of 
his  life  distinguish  him  from  other  men.— It  would  e- 
vidence  a  deplorable  degree  of  irrationality,  if  one  could 
not  perceive  the  truth  of  a  geometrical  axiom  ;  such 
instances  are  uncommon  :  but  the  number  of  self-evi 
dent  principles  cognisable  by  man  is  very  great,  and 
more  vigour  of  mind  may  be  necessary  to  the  percep 
tion  of  some,  than  to  that  of  others.  In  this  respect, 
therefore,  there  may  be  great  diversities  in  the  mea 
sure  of  common  sense  which  different  men  enjoy. 

Further,  of  two  men,  one  of  whom,  though  he  acknow 
ledges  the  truth  of  a  first  principle,  is  but  little  affected 

i 


CHAP.  I.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  O  "- 

with  it,  and  is  easily  induced  to  become  sceptical 
in  regard  to  it ;  while  the  other  has  a  vivid  percep 
tion  of  its  truth,  is  deeply  affected  with  it,  and  firm- 
ly  trusts  to  his  own  feelings  without  doubt  or  he 
sitation  ;  I  should  not  scruple  to  say,  that  the  latter 
possesses  the  greater  share  of  common  sense  :  and 
jn  this  respect  too,  I  presume  the  minds  of  different 
men  will  be  found  to  be  very  different.  These  di 
versities  are,  I  think,  to  be  referred,  for  the  most 
part,  to  the  original  constitution  of  the  mind,  which 
it  is  not  in  the  power  of  education  to  alter.  I  ac 
knowledge,  however,  that  common  sense,  like  other 
instincts,  may  languish  for  want  of  exercise  ;  as  in 
the  case  of  a  person  who,  blinded  by  a  false  religion, 
has  been  all  his  days  accustomed  to  distrust  his  own 
sentiments,  and  to  receive  his  creed  from  the  mouth 
of  a  priest.  I  acknowledge  too,  that  freedom  of 
inquiry  does  generally  produce  a  juster,  as  well  as 
more  liberal,  turn  of  thinking,  than  can  ever  be  ex 
pected,  while  men  account  it  damnable  even  to 
think  differently  from  the  established  mode.  But 
from  this  we  can  only  infer,  that  common  sense  is 
improveable  to  a  certain  degree.  Or  perhaps  this 
only  proves,  that  the  dictates  of  common  sense  are 
sometimes  overruled,  and  rendered  ineffectual,  by  the 
influence  of  sophistry  and  superstition  operating  u- 
pon  a  weak  and  diffident  temper.  4.  It  deserves  al 
so  to  be  remarked,  that  a  distinction  extremely  si 
milar  to  the  present  is  acknowledged  by  the  vulgar, 
who  speak  of  mother-wit  as  something  different 
from  the  deductions  of  reason,  and  the  refinements 
of  science.  When  puzzled  with  argument,  they 
have  recourse  to  their  common  sense,  and  acquiesce 
in  it  so  steadily,  as  often  to  render  all  the  arts  of  the 
logician  ineffectual.  •'*  I  am  confuted,  but  not  con 
vinced,'  is  an  apology  sometimes  offered,  when  one 
has  nothing  to  oppose  to  the  arguments  of  the  anta 
gonist^  but  the  original  undisguised  feelings  of  his 
mind.  This  apology  is  indeed  very  inconsist- 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  T. 

t?nt  with  the  dignity  of  philosophic  pride  ;.  which, 
taking  for  granted  that  nothing  exceeds  the  limits  of 
human  capacity,  professes  to  confute  whatever  it 
cannot  believe,  and,  which  is  still  more  difficult,  to 
believe  whatever  it  cannot  confute  :  but  this  apolo 
gy  may  be  perfectly  consistent  with  sincerity  and 
candor;  and  with  that  principle  of  which  Pope  says, 
that  *  though  no  science,  it  is  fairly  worth  the  sc- 
•"  ven." 

Thus  far  we  have  endeavoured  to  distinguish   and 
ascertain  the  separate  provinces  of  Reason  and  Com 
mon  Sense.     Their  connection   and  mutual  depen 
dence,  and  the  extent  of  their   respective  jurisdic 
tions,  we  now  proceed  more  particularly  to  investi 
gate.— I    ought  perhaps   to  make    an  apology    for 
these,    and    some    other    metaphorical    expressions. 
And  indeed  it  were  to  be  wished,  that    in  all    mat 
ters  of  science,  they  could  be  kid  aside  ;  for  the  in 
discreet  use  of  metaphor   has  done   great  harm,  by 
leading  philosophers  to  mistake  verbal  analogies  for 
real  ones  ;  and  often,  too,  by  giving  plausibility  to 
nonesense,  as  well  as  by  disguising  and   perplexing 
very  plain  doctrines  with   an  affected  pomp  of  high- 
sounding  words  and  gaudy  images.     But  in  the  phi 
losophy  of  the  human  mind,  it  is  impossible  to  keep 
clear  of  metaphor  ;  because  we  cannot  speak  intelli 
gibly   of  immaterial  things,  without  continual  allu 
sions  to  matter,  and  its  qualities.    All  I  need  to  say 
further  on   this   head  is,  that  I  mean  not  by  these 
metaphors   to  impose  upon   the   reader  ;    and  that  I 
shall  do  my  utmost  to  prevent  their  imposing  upon 
myself. 

It  is  strange  to  observe,  with  what  reluctance 
some  people  acknowledge  the  power  of  instinct. 
That  man  is  governed  by  reason,  and  the  brutes  by 
instinct,  is  a  favourite  topic  with  certain  philoso 
phers  ;  who,  like  other  froward  children,  spurn  the 
hand  that  leads  them  ;  and  desire,  above  all  things, 
to  be  left  at  their  own  .disposal.  Were  this  boast 


CHAP.  I.  AN  ESS,\Y  ON  TRUTH.  3  J 

founded  in  truth,  it  might  be  supposed  to  mean  lit 
tle  more,  than  that  man  is  governed  by  himself,  and 
(he  brutes  by  their  Maker*.  But,  luckily  for  mar, 
it  is  not  founded  in  truth,  but  in  ignorance,  inatten 
tion,  arid  self-conceit.  Our  instincts,  as  well  as  our 
rational  powers,  are  far  superior,  both  in  number 
and  dignity,- to  those  which  the  brutes  enjoy  ;  and  it 
were  well  for  us,  on  many  occasions,  if  we  laid  our 
systems  aside,  and  were  more  attentive  in  observing 
these  impulses  of  nature  in  which  reason  has  no 
part.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  speak  with  disrespect 
of  any  of  the  gifts  of  God ;  every  work  of  his  is 
good  ;  but  the  best  things,,  when  abused,  may  be 
come  pernicious.  Reason  is  a  noble  faculty,  and, 
when  kept  within  its  proper  sphere,  and  applied  to 
useful  purposes,  proves  a  mean  of  exalting  hums". 
creatures  almost  to  the  rank  of  superior  beings.  Bu: 
this  faculty  has  been  much  perverted,  often  to  vil-% 
and  often  to  insignificant  purposes  5  sometimes  chain 
ed  like  a  slave  or  malefactor,  and  sometimes  soarip.c 
in  forbidden  and  unknown  regions.  No  wonder,, 
then,  if  it  has  been  frequently  made  the  instrument 
of  seducing  and  bewildering  mankind,  and  of  render 
ing  philosophy  contemptible. 

In  the  science  of  body,  glorious  discoveries  have 
been  made  by  a  right  use  of  reason.  When  men  are 
once  satisfied  to  take  things  as  they  find  them  ;  when 
they  believe  Nature  upon  her  bare  declaration,  with 
out  suspecting  her  of  any  design  to  impose  udon 
them  ;  when  their  utmost  ambition  is  to  be.  her  ser 
vants  and  humble  interpreters  ;  then,  and  net  till 
then,  will  philosophy  prosper.  But  of  t":ose  who 
have  applied  themselves  to  the  science  of  Human 
Nature,  it  may  truly  be  said,  (of  many,  of  them  at 
leas^),  that  too  much  reasoning  hath  made  them 
mad.  Nature  speaks  to  us  by  our  external,  as  well 

*  And  Reason  raise  o'er  Instinct  as  you  can, 
In  this 'tis  God  directs,  in  that  'tis  man. 

.    Pofe*s  Essay  on  Man,  Ep.  S,  ver.  3°, 
C    2 


34  A^  ES3AY  Otf  TRUTH.  FRAT  I. 

as  by  our  internal,  senses  ;  it  is  strange,  that  we 
should  believe  her  in  the  one  case,  and  not  in  the  o- 
ther  ;  it  is  most  strange,  that  supposing  her  falla 
cious,  we  should  think  ourselves  capable  of  detec 
ting  the  cheat.  Common  sense  tells  me,  that  the 
ground  on  which  I*  stand  is  hard,  material,  and  solid, 
•and  has  a  real,  separate,  independent  existence. 
BERKELEY  and  HUME  tell  me,  that  I  am  imposed 
upon  in  this  mntter :  for  that  the  ground  under  my 
feet  is  really  an  idea  in  my  mind  ;  that  its  very  es 
sence  consists  in  being  perceived  ;  and  that  the  same 
instant  it  ceases  to  be  perceived,  it  must  also  cease 
to  exist  :  in  a  word,  that  to  be,  and  to  be  perceived, 
\vhen  predicated  of  the  ground,  the  sun,  the  starry 
heavens,  or  any  corporeal  object,  signify  precisely 
the  same  thing.  Now  if  my  common  sense  be  mis 
taken,  who  shall  ascertain  and  correct  the  mistake  ? 
Our  reason,  it  is  said.  Are  then  the  inferences  of 
reason  in  this  instance  clearer,  and  more  decisive, 
than  the  dictates  of  common  sense  ?  By  no  means.  I 
^till  trust  to  my  common  sense  as  before ;  and  I  feel 
that  I  must  do  so.  But  supposing  the  inferences  of 
the  one  faculty  as  clear  and  decisive  as  the  dictates 
of  the  other,  yet  who  will  assure  me,  that  my  rea 
son  is  less  liable  to  mistake  than  my  common  sense? 
And  if  reason  be  mistaken,  what  shall  we  say  ?  Is 
this  mistake  to  be  rectified  by  a  second  reasoning*,  ss 
liable  to  mistake  as  the  first  ? — In  a  word,  we  must 
deny  the  distinction  between  truth  and  falsehood,  a- 
dopt  universal  scepticism,  and  wander  without  end 
from  one  maze  of  error  and  uncertainty  to  another  ; 
a  state  of  mind  so  miserable,  that  Milton  makes  it 
one  of  the  torments  of  the  damned  ;— or  else  we 
must  suppose,  that  one  of  these  faculties  is  naturally 
of  higher  authority  than  the  other  ;  and  that  either 
reason  ought  to  submit  to  common  sense,  or  com 
mon 'sense  to  reason,  whenever  a  variance  happens 
between  them. 

It  has  been  said,  that  every  inquiry  in  philosophy 


H.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH,  35 

to  begin  with  doubt  ; — that  nothing  is  to  be 
taken  for  granted,  and  nothing  believed,  without 
proof.  If  this  be  admitted,  it  must  also  be  admitted, 
that  reason  is  the  ultimate  judge  of  truth,  to  which 
common  sense  must  continually  act  in  subordination. 
But  this  I  cannot  admit  ;  because  I  am  able  to  prove 
the  contrary  by  the  most  incontestable  evidence „ 
I  am  able  to.  prove,  that  "except  we  believe  many 
"  things  without  proof,  we  never  can  believe  any 
"'thing  at  all  ;  for  that  all  sound  reasoning  must 
"  ultimately  rest  on  the  principles  of  common  sense  ; 
"  that  is,  on  principles  intuitively  certain,  or  intur- 
**  tively  probable  ;  and,  consequently,  that  common 
"  sense  is  the  ultimate  judge  of  truth,  to  which  rea- 
4*  son  must  continually  act  in  subordination." — This 
I  shall  prove  by  a  fair  induction  of  particulars. 

CHAP.     II. 

All  reasoning  terminates  in  Jlrst  principles.  A!! 
evidence  ultimately  intuitive.  Common  Sense  tie 
Standard  of  Truth  to  Man. 

7 N  this  induction,  we  cannot  comprehend  all  sorts 
•*•  of  evidence,  and  modes  of  reasoning  ;  but  we  shall 
endeavour  to  investigate  the  origin  of  those  *  which 

*  That  tlie  induction  here  given  is  sufficiently  compre 
hensive,  will  appear  from  the  following  analysis. 

All  the  objects  of  the  human  understanding  may  be  re 
duced  to  two  classes,  viz.  Abstract  Ideas,  z&&  Things 
really  existing. 

Of  Abstract  Ideas,  and  their  Relations,  all  our  knowledge 
is  certain,  being  founded  on  MATHEMATICAL  EVI 
DENCE  («)  ;  which  comprehends,  1.  Intuitive  Evidence, 
and,  2.  The  Evidence  of  strict  demonstration. 

We  judge  of  Things  really  existing  ;  either,  1,  From 
our  cwn  experience;  or,  2.  From  the  experience  of  other 
men. 

(&)  Se&ioir  i, 


36  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

are  the  most  important,  and  of  the  most  extensive 
influence  in  science,  and  common  life  ;  beginning  with 
the  simplest  and  clearest,  and  advancing  gradually 
to  those  which  are  more  complicated,  or  less  per 
spicuous. 

SECTION     T. 

Of  Mathematical  Reasoning. 

'T^HE  evidence  that  takes  place  in  pure  mathema- 
•*•  tics,  produces  the  highest  assurance  and  certain 
ty  in  the  mind  of  him  who  attends  to,  and  under 
stands  it  ;  for  no  principles  are  admitted  into  this 
science,  but  such  as  are  either  self-evident,  or  sus 
ceptible  of  demonstration.  Should  a  man  refuse  to 
believe  a  demonstrated  conclusion,  the  world  would 
impute  his  obstinacy,  either  to  want  of  understand 
ing,  or  to  want  of  honesty  :  for  every  person  of  un 
derstanding  feels,  that  by  mathematical  demonstra 
tion  he  must  be  convinced  whether  he  will  or  not. 
There  are  two  kinds  of  mathematical  demonstration. 

1.  Judging  of  Real  Existences  from  our  own  experience, 
we  attain  either  Certainty  or  Probability.     Our  knowledge 
is  certain  when  supported  by  the  evidence,    1.  Of   SENSE 
EXTERNAL  (£)  and  INTERNAL  (r)  :  2.  Of  MEMORY  (//)  j 
and,    3.  Of  LEGITIMATE  INFERENCES  OF  THE  CAUSE 

FROM  THE  EFFECT  (*).« Our  knowledge  \sprobable, 

when  from  facts  already  experienced,  we  argue,  1.  to  facts 
•OF  THE  SAME  KIND  (/*)  not  experienced  5  and,  2.  to  facts 
OF  A  SIMILAR  KIND  (^)  not  experienced.  This  knowledge, 
though  called  probable,  often  rises  to  moral  certainty, 

2.  Judging  of  Real  Existences  from   the  experience  of 
other  men,  we  have  the  EVIDENCE  OF  THEIR  TESTIMO 
NY  (£).     ^ne  m°de  of  understanding  produced   by  that 
evidence  is  properly  called  Faith  ;  and  this  faith  sometimes 
amounts  to  probable  opinion,  and  sometimes  rises  even  to 
absolute  certainty. 

(I)  SecS.  1.          (i)  Se&.  3.          (</)  Sect.  4-  (<)  Se&.  5. 

,'/)  Se£.  6.  U)  Sea.  7.  (A)  Sect.  8, 


CHAP.    II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  37 

The  first  is  called  direct ;  and   takes  place,  when   a 
conclusion  is  inferred  from  premises   that   render   it 
necessarily  true  :   and  this  perhaps  is  a  more  perfect, 
or  at  least  a  simpler,  kind  of  proof,  than  the   other  ; 
but  both  are  equally  convincing.     The  other  kind  is 
called  in  direct,  apagogica!,  mducensadabsurdum  ;  and 
takes  place  when,  by  supposing  a   proposition   false, 
we  are  led  into  an  absurdity,  which  there  is  no  other 
way    to   avoid,    than  by  supposing  the   proposition 
true.  In  this  manner  it  is  proved,  that  the  proposition 
is  not,  and  cannot  be,  false  ;  in  other  words,   that  it 
is  a  certain  truth.       Every   step  in   a  mathematical 
proof  either  is  self-evident,  or  must  have  been    for 
merly  demonstrated  ;  and  every  demonstration  does 
finally   resolve   itself  into  intuitive  or  self-evident 
principles,  which  it  is  impossible   to   prove,   and  e- 
qually  impossible  to  disbelieve.     These  first   princi 
ples  constitute  the  foundation  of  mathematics  :  if  you 
disprove  them,  you  overturn  the   whole  science  ;  if 
you  refuse  to  believe  them,  you  cannot,  consistently 
with    such   refusal,   acquiesce  in   any   mathematical 
truth  whatsoever.     But  you  may  as  well  attempt  to 
blow  out  the  sun,  as   to   disprove  these   principles  : 
and  if  you  say,  that  you  do  not  believe  them  *,  you 
will  be  charged  either  with  falsehood  or  with  folly  ; 
you  may  as  well  hold  your  hand  in  the  fire,  and   say 
that  you  feel  no  pain.     By  the  law   of  our   nature, 
we  must  fed  in  the  one  case,  and  believe  in  the   o- 
ther  j  even  as,  by  the  same  law,  we  must  adhere  to 
the  earthp  and  cannot  fall  headlong  to  the  clouds. 

*  Si  quelque  opimastre  les  nie  de  la  voix,  on  ne  Pen 
scauriot  empescher  j  mais  cela  ne  luy  est  pas  permis  inter- 
ieurement  en  sen  esprit,  parce  que  sa  lumiere  naturelle  y 
repugne,  qui  est  la  partie  ou  se  rapporte  la  demonstration 
et  le  syllogisme,  et  non  aux  paroles  externes.  Au  moyen 
de  quoy  s'll  se  trouve  quelqu'un  qui  ne  les  puisse  entendre, 
cettuy-la  est  incapable  de  discipline. 

Dialectique  de  Boujou,  Ih.  3.  ch.  3, 


3^  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  ?AR;T  r, 

But  who  will  pretend  to  prove  a  mathematical 
axiom,  That  a  whole  is  greater  than  a  part,  or,. 
That  things  equal  to  one  and  the  same  thing  are  e- 
qual  to  one  another  ?  Every  proof  must  be  clearer 
and  more  evident  than  the  thing  to  be  proved.  Can 
you  then  assume  any  more  evidei^t  principle,  from,. 
which  the  truth  of  these  axioms  may  be  consequen 
tially  inferred  ?  It  is  impossible  ;  because  they  are 
already  as  evident  as  any  tiling  can  be  *.  You  may- 
bring  the  matter  to  the  test  of  the  senses,  by  laying, 
a  few  halfpence  and  farthings  upon  the  table  ;  but 

*  Different  opinions  have  prevailed  concerning  the  na 
ture  of  these  geometrical  axioms.     Some  suppose,  that  an  ^ 
axiom  is  not  self-evident,  except  it  imply  an  identical  pro 
position  j  that  therefore  this  axiom,  It  is  impossible  fir 
the  same  thing,  at  the  same  time,  to  be  and  not  to-  be,  is   the 
only  axiom  that  can  properly  be  called  intuitive  j  and  that" 
all  those  other  propositions  commonly  called  axioms,  ought 
to  be  demonstrated  by  being  resolved  into  this  fundamen 
tal  axiom.       But  if  this  cculd  be  done,  which  I  fear  is  not 
possible,  mathematical  truth  would  not  be  one  whit  more 
certain  than  it  is.     Those  other  axioms  produce   absolute 
certainty,   and  produce  it  immediately,   without  any  pro 
cess  of   thought  or  reasoning  that  we  can  discover.     And' 
if  the  truth  of  a  proposition  be  clearly  and  certainly  per 
ceived  by  all  men  without  proof,  and  if  no  proof -whatever 
could  make  it  more  clear  or  more  certain,  it  seems  captious, 
not  to  allow  that  proposition  the  name  of  Intuitive  Jixiont. 
—Others  suppose,  that   though  the  demonstration  of  ma 
thematical  axioms  is  not  absolutely  necessary,  yet  that  these 
axioms  are  susceptible  of  demonstration,  and  ought  to   be 
temonstrated  to  those  who  require  it.     Dr  Barrow  is  of 
this  opinion.     So  is  Apollonius  ;  who,  agreeably  to  it,  has 
attempted    a  demonstration  of  this  axiom,  That   things  e- 
qual  to  one  and  the  same  thing  are  equal  to  one   another. — 
Eut  whatever  account  we  make  of  these  opinions,  they  af 
fect  not  our  doctrine.     However  far  the  demonstration  of 
axioms  may  b'e-  carried,  it   must  at  last   terminate  in   one 
principle  of  common  sense,  if  not  in  many  ^  which  principle 
we  must  believe  without  proof  whether  we  will  or  no. 


CHAP.    II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  39 

the  evidence  of  sense  is  not  more  unquestionable, 
than  that  of  abstract  intuitive  truth ;  and  therefore 
the  former  evidence,  though  to  one  ignorant  of  the 
meaning  of  the  terms,  it  might  serve  to  explain  and 
illustrate  the  latter,  can  never  prove  it.  But  not  to 
rest  any  tiling  on  -  the  signification  we  affix  to  the 
xvord  proof  i  and  to  remove  every  possibility  of 
doubt  as  to  this  matter  ;  let  us  suppose,  that  the 
evidence  of  external  sense  is  more  unquestionable 
than  that  of  abstract  intuitive  truth,  and  that  every 
intuitive  principle  in  mathematics  may  thus  be 
brought  to  the  test  of  sense  ;  and  if  we  cannot  call 
the  evidence  of  sense  a  proof,  let  us  call  it  a  confir 
mation  of  the  abstract  principle :  yet  what  do  we 
gain  by  this  method  of  illustration  ?  We  only  dis 
cover,  that  the  evidence  of  abstract  intuitive  truth  is 
resolvable  into,  or  may  be  illustrated  by,  the  evidence 
of  sense.  And  it  will  be  seen  in  the  next  section, 
that  we  believe  in  the  evidence  of  external  sense,  not 
because  we  can  prove  it  to  be  true,  but  because  the 
law  of  our  nature  determines  us  to  believe  in  it 
without  proof.  So  that  in  whatever  way  we  view 
this  subject,  the  point  we  mean  to  illustrate  appears 
certain,  namely,  "  That  all  mathematical  truth  is. 
"  founded'  in  certain  first  principles,  which  common 
"  sense  or  instinct  compels  us  to  believe  without 
"  proof,  whether  we  will  or  not." 

Nor  would  the  foundation  of  mathematics  be  in  the 
least  degree  more  stable,  if  these  axioms  did  admit  of 
proof,  or  were  all  resolvable  into  one  primary  axiom 
expressed  by  an  identical  proposition.  As  the  case 
now  stands,  we  are  absolutely  certain  of  their  truth  ; 
and  absolute  certainty  is  all  that  demonstration  can 
produce.  We  are  convinced  by  a  proof,  because  our 
constitution  is  such,  that  we  must  be  convinced  by 
it  :  and  we  believe  a  self-evident  axiom,  because  our 
constitution  is  such  that  we  must  believe  it.  You 
ask,  why  I  believe  what  is  self-evident.  I  may  as 
T,\:ell  ask,  why  you  believe  what  is  proved.  Neither 


40  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART   T. 

question  admits  of  an  answer  ;  or  rather,  to  both 
questions  the  answer  is  the  same,  namely,  Because 
I  must  believe  it. 

Whether  o'.ir  belief  in  these  cases  be  agreeable  to 
the  eternal  relations  and  iitnesses  of  things,  and  such 
as  we  should  entertain  if  we  were  perfectly  acquaint 
ed  with  all  the  laws  of  nature,  is  a  question  which 
no  person  of  a  sound  mind  can  have  any  scruple  to 
answer,  with  the  fullest  assurance,  in  the  affirmative. 
Certain  it  is,  our  constitution  is  so  framed,  that  we 
must  believe  to  be  trae,  and  conformable  to  universal" 
nature,  that  which  is  intimated  to  us,  as  such,  by  the 
original  suggestions  of  our  own  understanding.  If 
these  are  fallacious,  it  is  the  Deity  who  makes  them 
so  ;  and  therefore  we  can  never  rectify,  or  even  de 
tect,  the  fallacy.  But  we  cannot  even  suppose  them 
fallacious,  without  violating  our  nature ;  nor,  if  we 
acknowledge  a  God,  without  the  most  absurd  and  most 
audacious  impiety ;  for  in  this  supposition  it  is  implied 
that  we  suppose  the  Deity  a  deceiver.  Nor  can  we, 
consistently  with  such  a  supposition,  acknowledge 
any  distinction  between  truth  and  falsehood,  or  be 
lieve  that  one  inch  is  less  than  ten  thousand  miles, 
or  even  that  we  ourselves  exist. 

SECT.     II. 

Of  the  Evidence  of  External  Sense. 

A  NOTHER  class  of  truths  producing  conviction, and 
*  •*•  absolute  certainty,  are  those  which  depend  up 
on  the  evidence  of  the  external  senses;  Hearing,  See 
ing,  Touching,  Tasting,  and  Smelling,  On  this  evidence 
is  founded  all  our  knowledge  of  external  or  material 
things ;  and  therefore  all  conclusions  in  Natural  Philo~ 
sophy  and  all  those  prudential  considerations  which 
regard  the  preservation  of  our  body,  as  it  is  liable  to  be 
affected  by  the  sensible  qualities  of  matter,  must  fi 
nally  be  resolved  into  this  principle,  That  things  are 
as  our  senses  represent  them.  When  I  touch  a 
stone,.  I  am  conscious  of  a  certain  sensation,  which  L 


CHAP.    If.  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  41 

eall  a  sensation   of  hardness.       But  this  sensation  is 
not  hardness   itself,  nor  any  thing  like  hardness  :   it 
is   nothing   more   than  a  sensation   or  feeling  in  my 
mind  ;  accompanied,  however,  with  an  irresistable 
belief,  that   this   sensation  is  excited  by  the  applica 
tion  of  an  external  and  hard  substance  to  some  part 
of  my  body.       This    belief  as  certainly  accompanies 
the  sensation,  ^s  the  sensation  accompanies  the  appli 
cation  of  the  stone  to  my  organ  of  sense.     I  believe, 
with  as  much   assurance,   and  as  unavoidably,   that 
the   external   thing   exists,    and  is  hard,  as  I  believe 
that  I  receive,  and  am  conscious  of,  the  sensation  of 
hardness  ;   or,  to  speak   more   strictly,  the  sensation 
which    by  experience  I  know   to  be  the  sign  of  my 
touching  a  hard   body*.      Now7,   why    do  1   believe 
that  this   sensation  is  a  real  sensation,  and  really  felt 
by  me  ?  Because  my  constitution  is  such  that  I  must 
believe   so.      And  why  do  I  believe,  in  consequence 
of  my  receiving  this  sensation,  that  I  touch  an  exter 
nal  object,  really  existing,  material,  and  hard  ?    The 
answer  is  the  same  :  the  matter  is  incapable  of  proof: 
I  believe,  because  I  must  believe.      Can  I  avoid  be 
lieving,  that  I  really  am  conscious   of  receiving  this 
sensation  ?   No.     Can  I  avoid  believing,  that  the  ex 
ternal  thing  exists,  and  has  a  certain   quality,    which 
fits  it,  on   being  applied  to  my  hand,  to  excite  a  cer 
tain  feeling  or  sensation  in  my  mind  ?  No  ;  I  must 
believe  this,   whether  T  will  or  not.      Nor  could  I 
divest  myself  of  this  belief,  though  my  life   and   fu 
ture   happiness  depended  on  the  consequence. — To 
believe  our  senses,  therefore,  is  according  to  the  law 
of  our  nature  ;  and  we   are  prompted  to  this  belief 
by  instinct,  or  common  sense.     I  am  as  certain,  that  - 
at  present  I  am  in  a  house,  and  not  in  the  open    air  ; 
that   I  see   by   the  light   of  the  sun,  and  not  by  the 
light  of  a  candle  j  that  I  feel  the  ground  hard  under 

*  See  Dr  Reid's  Inquiry  into  the  human  mind,  chap.  5, 
sect.  3., 


4*  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  PART    I* 

my  feet;  and  that  I  lean  against  a  real  material 
table,— as  I  can  be  of  the  truth  of  any  geometrical 
axiom,  or  of  any  demonstrated  conclusion  ;  nay,  I  am 
as  certain  of  all  this  as  of  my  own  existence.  But  I 
cannot  prove  by  argument,  that  there  is  such  a  thing 
as  matter  in  the  world,  or  even  that  I  myself  exist : 
and  yet  I  know  as  assuredly,  that  I  do  exist,  and  that 
there  is  a  real  material  sun,  and  a  real  material 
world,  with  mountains,  trees,  houses,  and  animals, 
existing  separately,  and  independently  on  me  and  my 
faculties  ;  I  say,  I  know  all  this  with  as  much  as 
surance  of  conviction,  as  the  most  irrefragable  de 
monstration  could  produce.  Is  it  unreasonable  to 
believe  in  these  cases  without  proof  ?  Then,  I  affirm, 
it  is  equally  unreasonable  to  believe  in  any  case  Moita 
proof.  Our  belief  in  either  case. is  unavoidable,  and 
according  to  the  law  of  our  nature  j  and  if  it  be  un 
reasonable  to  think,  according  to  the  law  of  our  na 
ture,  it  must  be  equally  unreasonable  to  adhere  to 
the  earth,  to  be  nourished  with  food,  or  to  die  when 
the  head  is  separated  from  the  body.  It  is  indeed 
easy  to  affirm  any  thing,  provided  a  man  can  recon 
cile  himself  to  hypocrisy  and  falsehood.  A  man  may 
affirm,  that  he  sees  with  the  soles  of  his  feet,  that  he 
believes  there  is  no  material  world,  that  he  doubts  of 
his  own  existence.  He  may  as  well  say,  that  he  be 
lieves  one  and  two  to  be  equal  to  six,  a  part  to  be  great 
er  than  a  whole,  a  circle  to  be  a  triangle ;  and  that  it 
may  be  possible  for  the  same  thing,  at_the  same  time, 
to  be  and  not  to  be. 

But  it  is  said,  that  our  senses  do  often  impose 
iipon  us  ;  and  that  by  means  of  reason  we  are  enab 
led  to  detect  the  imposture,  and  to  judge  rightly  even 
where  our  senses  give  us  wrong  information  ;  that 
therefore  our  belief  in  the  evidence  of  sense  is  not  in 
stinctive  or  intuitive,  but  such  as  may  be  either  con 
futed  or  confirmed  by  reasoning.  We  shall  acknow 
ledge  that  our  senses  do  often  impose  upon  us:  but 
n  little  attention  will  convince  us,  that  reason,  though 
it  may  be  employed  in  correcting  the  present  falla- 


CHAP.    II.  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  43 

clous  sensation,  by  referring  it  to  a  former  sensation, 
received  by  us,  or  by  other  men,  is  not  the  ultimate 
judge  in  this  matter  ;  for  that  all  such  reasoning  is 
resolvable  into  this  principle  of  common  sense,  That 
tilings  are  what  our  external  senses  represent  them. 
One  instance  will  suffice  at  present  for  illustration  of 
this  point*. 

After  having  looked  a  moment  at  the  sun,  I  see  a 
black,  or  perhaps  a  luminous,  circle  swimming  in 
the  air,  apparently  at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  feet 
from  my  eyes.  That  I  see  such  a  circle,  is  certain  ; 
that  I  believe  I  see  it,  is  certain  ;  that  I  believe  its 
appearance  to  be  owing  to  some  cause,  is  also  cer 
tain  : — thus  far  there  can  be  no  imposture,  and  there 
is  no  supposition  of  any.  Suppose  me  from  this 
appearance  to  conclude,  that  a  real,  solid,  tangible  or 
visible  round  substance,  of  a  black  or  yellow  colour, 
is  actually  swimming  in  the  air  before  me  ;  in  this  I 
should  be  mistaken.  How  then  come  I  to  know  that 
I  am  mistaken  ?  I  may  know  it  in  several  ways.  i. 
I  stretch  out  my  hand  to  the  place  where  the  circle 
seems  to  be  floating  in  the  air  ;  and  having  felt  no 
thing,  I  am  instantly  convinced,  that  there  is  no  tan 
gible  substance  in  that  place.  Is  this  conviction  an 
inference  of  reason  ?  No  ;  it  is  a  conviction  arising 
from  our  innate  propensity  to  believe,  that  things 
are  as  our  senses  represent  them.  By  this  innate  or 
instinctive  propensity  I  believe  that  what  I  touch 
exists  ;  by  the  same  propensity  I  believe,  that  where 
I  touch  nothing,  there  nothing  tangible  does  exist. 
If  in  the  present  case  I  were  suspicious  of  the  vera 
city  of  my  senses,  I  should  neither  believe  nor  disbe 
lieve.  2.  I  turn  my  eyes  towards  the  opposite 
quarter  of  the  heavens  ;  and  having  still  observed  the 
same  ^circle  floating  before  them,  and  krowfng  by 
experience,  that  the  motion  of  bodies  placed  at  a  dis 
tance  from  me  does  not  follow  or  deperd  on  the  mo 
tion  of  my  body,  I  conclude,  that  the  appearance  i& 
*  See  .part  2.  chatj.  I.  scct.  3. 
O 


44  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

owing,  not  to  a  real,  external  corporeal  object,  but 
to  some  disorder  in  my  organ  of  sight.  Here  rea 
soning  is  employed :  but  where  does  it  terminate  ? 
It  terminates  in  experience,  which  I  have  acquired 
by  means  of  my  senses.  But  if  I  believed  them  fal 
lacious,  if  I  believed  things  to  be  otherwise  than  my 
senses  represent  them,  I  should  never  acquire  expe 
rience  at  all.  Or,  3.  I  apply,  first  to  one  man,  then 
to  another,  and  then  to  a  third,  who  all  assure  me, 
that  they  perceive  no  such  circle  floating  in  the  air, 
and  at  the  same  time  inform  me  of  the  true  cause  cf 
the  appearance.  I  believe  their  declaration,  either 
because  I  have  had  experience  of  their  veracity,  or 
because  I  have  an  innate  propensity  to  credit  testi 
mony.  To  gain  experience  implies  a  belief  in  the 
evidence  of  sense,  which  reasoning  cannot  account 
for  ;  and  a  propensity  to  credit  testimony  previous  to 
experience  or  reasoning,  is  equally  unaccountable*. 
— So  that,  although  we  acknou  ledged  some  of  our 
senses,  in  some  instances,  deceitful,  our  detection  of 
the  deceit,  whether  by  the  evidence  of  our  other  sen 
ses,  or  by  a  retrospect  to  our  past  experience,  or  by 
our  trusting  to  the  testimony  of  other  men,  does  still 
imply,  that  we  do  and  must  believe  our  senses  pre 
viously  to  all  reasoningf. 

A  human  creature  born  with  a  propensity  to  dis 
believe  his  senses,  would  be  as  useless  and  helpless  as 
if  he  wanted  them.  To  his  own  preservation  he 
could  contribute  nothing  ;  and,  after  ages  of  being, 
.would  remain  as  destitute  of  knowledge  and  experi 
ence,  as  when  he  began  to  be. 

Sometimes  we  seem  to  distrust  the  evidence  of 
,our  senses,  when  in  reality  we  only  doubt  whether 
we  have  that  evidence.  I  may  appeal  to  any  man, 
if  he  were  thoroughly  convinced  that  he  had  really, 
when  awake,  seen  and  conversed  with  a  ghost, 
vvhether  any  reasoning  would -convince  him  that  it 

*  See  sect.  8.  of  this  chapter, 
t  See  pait  2.    chap.  I.    sect.  2. 


CHAP.  IT.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  45 

was  a  delusion.  Reasoning  might  lead  him  to  sus* 
pect  that  he  had  been  dreaming,  and  therefore  to 
doubt  whether  or  not  he  had  the  evidence  of  sense  ; 
bac  if  he  were  assured  that  he  had  that  evidence,  no 
arguments  whatsoever  would  shake  his  belief. 


SECT.     III. 

Of  the  Evidence  of  Internal  Sense,  or  Consciousness, 

BY  attending  to  what  passes  in  my  mind,  I  know 
not  only  that  it  exists,  but  also  that  it  exerts 
certain  powers  of  action  and  perception;  which,  on 
account  either  of  a  diversity  in  their  objects,  or 
of  a  difference  in  their  manner  of  operating,  I  con 
sider  as  separate  and  distinct  faculties;  and  which 
I  find  it  expedient  to  distinguish  by  different  names, 
that  I  may  be  able  to  speak  of  them  so  as  to  be  under 
stood.  Thus  I  a:n  conscious  that  at  one  time  I 
exert  memory,  at  another  time  imagination:  some 
times  I  believe,  sometimes  I  doubt  :  the  perfor 
mance  of  certain  actions,  anri  the  indulgence  of  certain 
affections,  is  attended  with  an  agreeable  feeling  of  a 
peculiar  kind  which  I  call  moral  approbation  ;  dif 
ferent  actions  and  affections  excite  the  opposite 
feeling,  of  moral  disapprobation :  to  relieve  dis 
tress,  I  fsal  to  be  meritorious  and  praise- worthy  : 
to  pick  a  pocket,  I  know  to  be  blameable,  and 
worthy  of  punishment;  I  am  conscious  that  some  ac 
tions  are  in  my  power,  and  that  others  are  not  ;  that 
•when  I- neglect  to  do  what  I  ought  to  do,  and  can  do, 
I  deserve  to  be  punished ;  and  that  when  I  act  neces 
sarily,  or, upon  unavoidable  and  irresistible  compul 
sion,  I  deserve  neither  punishment  ncr  blame.  Of  all 
these  sentiments  I  am  as  conscious,  and  as  certain,  as  of 
my  own  existence.  I  cannot  prove  that  I  feel  them, 
neither  to  myself,  nor  to  others  ;  but  that  I  do  really 
feel  them,  is  as  evident  to  me  as  demonstration  could 
make  it.  I  cannot  prove,  in  regard  to  my  moral  feel 
ings,  that  they  are  comfortable  to  any  extrinsick  and 
Dz 


46  AN    ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  PART    I. 

eternal  relations  of  things  ;  but  I  know  that  my  con 
stitution  necessarily  determines  me  to  believe  them 
just  and  genuine,  even  as  it  determines  me  to  believe 
that  I  myself  exist,  and  that  things  are  as  my  external 
senses  represent  them.  And  a  sophister  could  no  more 
prove  to  my  conviction,  that  these  feelings  are  falla 
cious,  or  that  I  have  no  such  feelings,  than  he  could 
prove  to  my  conviction,  that  two  and  two  nVay  be  e- 
qual  to  fiVe,  or  that  my  friend  is  as  much  present  with 
me  when  I  think  of  him  at  a  thousand  miles  distance, 
as  when  I  sit  and  converse  with  him  in  the  same  cham 
ber.  An  expert  logician  might  perhaps  puzzle  me 
with  words,  and  propose  difficulties  I  could  not  solve  : 
but  he  might  as  well  attempt  to  convince  me,  that  I 
do  not  exist,  as  that  I  do  not  feel  what  I  am  consci 
ous  I  do  feel.  And  if  he  could  induce  me  to  suspect 
that  I  may  possibly  be  mistaken,  what  standard  of 
truth  could  he  propose  to  me,  more  evident,  and  of 
higher  authority,  than  my  own  feelings  ?  Shall  I  be 
lieve  his  tesnmony,and  disbelieve  my  own  sensations? 
Sh.  11  I  admit  his  reasons,  because  1  cannot  confute 
them,,  altho'  common  sense  tells  me  they  are  false  ? 
Shall  I  suffer  the  ambiguities  of  artificial  language  to 
prevail  against  the  clear,  the  intelligible,  the  irre 
sistible  voice  of  nature  ? — Am  I  to  judge  of  the  co 
louring  of  a  flower  by  moonshine,  or  by  the  .light  of 
the  sun  ?  Or,  because  I  cannot,  by  candle-light,  distin 
guish  green  from  blue,  shall  I  therefore  infer,  that 
green  and  blue  are  the  same  ? 

°We  cannot  disbelieve  the  evidence  of  internal  sense, 
•without  offering  violence  to  our  nature.  And  if  we  be 
led  into  such  disbelief, or  distrust,  by  the  sophistry  of 
pretended  philosophers, we  act  just  as  wisely  as  a  ma- 
jiner  would  do,  who  should  suffer  himself  to  be  per 
suaded,  that  the  pole-star  is  continually  changing  its 
place,  but  that  the  wind  always  blows  from  the  same 
quarter.  Common  sense,  or  instinct,  which  prompts 
men  to  trust  to  their  own  feelings,  hath  in  all  ages  con 
tinued  the  same:  but  the  interests,  pursuit  ^and  abilu 


CHAP,  If.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  47 

ties  of  philosophers  are  susceptible  of  endless  variety; 
and  their  theories  vary  accordingly. 

Let  it  not  be  thought,  that  these   objects   and  fa 
culties  of  internal  sensation  are  things  too  evanescent 
to  be  attended  to,  or  that  their  evidence  is  too  weak 
to  produce  a  steady  and  well-grounded  conviction. 
They  are  more  necessary  to  our  happiness  than  even 
the  powers  and  objects  of  external  sense  ;  yea,  they 
are  no  less  necessary  to  cur   existence.      What  can 
be  of  greater    consequence  to  man,   than  his  moral 
sentiments,  his  reason,  his  memory,  his  imagination  ? 
What  more  interesting,  than  to  know,   whether  his 
notions  of  duty  and  of  truth  be  the  dictates   of  his 
nature,  that  is  the  voice  of  God,  or  the   positive  in 
stitutions  of  men  ?   What  is  it  to  which  A  wise  man 
will  pay  more  attention,  than  to  his  reason  and   con 
science,  thosn  divine  monitors,  by  which   he  is   to 
judge  even  of  religion  itself,  and  which  he  is  not  at 
liberty  to  disobey,   though  .an  angel    from   heaven 
should  command  him  ?   The  generality  of  mankind, 
however  ignorant  of  the  received  distinctions  and  ex 
plications  of  their  internal  powers,  do  yet   by  their 
conduct  declare,  that   they  feel  their  influence,   and 
acknowledge  their  authenticity.     Every  instance  of 
their  being  governed  by  a  principle  of  moral  obliga 
tion,  is  a  proof  of  this.     They  believe   an  action  to 
be  lawful  in  the  sight  of  God,  when   they  are   con 
scious  of  a  sentiment  of   lawfulness   attending   the 
performance  of  it :   they  believe  a  certain    mode  of 
conduct  to  be  incumbent  on  them  in  certain  circum 
stances,  because  a  notion  of  duty  arises  in  their  mind, 
when  they  contemplate  that  conduct  in  relation  to 
those  circumstances — -"  I  ought  to  be  grateful  for, 
^  a  favour  received.     Why  ?  Because  my  conscience* 
tells  me  so.     How  do  you  know   that  you  ought 
"  to  do  that  of  which  your   conscience  enjoins   the 
"  performance  ?  I  can  give  no  further  reason  for  it ; 
*  bu5  *  feel  that  such  is  m7   duty."     Here  the   in 
vestigation  must  stop  ;  or,  if  carried  a  little  further 
it  must  return  to  this  point  :— «    I  know  that   I 


48  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

*'  ought  to  do  what  my  conscience  enjoins,    because 
*'*  God  is  the  author  of  my  constitution  ;  and  I  obey 
**  His  will,  when  I  act  according  to  the  principles  of 
*'  my   constitution.      Why  do   you    obey  the    will 
"   of  God  ?   Because  it  is  my  duty.     How   know 
*'  you  that  ?   Because  my   conscience  tells  me    so." 
If  a  man  were  sceptical  in  this  matter,  it  would 
not  be  in  the  power  of  argument  to  cure  him.     Such 
a  man  could  not  be  said  to  have  any  moral  principle 
distinct  from  the  hope  of  reward,  the  fear  of  punish 
ment,  or  the  force  of  custom.     But  that  there  is  in 
human  nature  a  moral  principle  distinct  from  those 
motives,  has  been  felt  and  acknowledged  by  men  of 
all  ages  and  nations  ;  and  indeed  was  never  denied 
or  doubted,  except  by  a  few  metaphysicians,  who, 
through  want  either  of  sense  or  of  honesty,   found 
themselves  disposed  to  deny   the  existence  or  ques 
tion  the  authenticity,  of  our  moral  feelings.     In  the 
celebrated  dispute  concerning  liberty  and  necessity, 
the  advocates  for  the  latter  have  either  maintained, 
that  we  have  no  sense  of  moral  liberty  ;  or,  grant 
ing  that  we  have  such  a  sense,  have  endeavoured  to 
prove  it  deceitful.     Now,  if  we  be   conscious,  that 
we  have  a  sense  of  moral   liberty,   it  is  certainly  as 
absurd  to  argue  against  the   existence  of  that  sense, 
us  against  the  reality  of  any   other  matter    of  fact. 
And  if  the  real  existence  of  that  sense  be   acknow 
ledged,  it  cannot  be  proved  to    be  deceitful    by  any 
arguments  which  may  not  also  be  applied  to  prove 
every  power  of  our  nature  deceitful,  and  consequent 
ly,  to  show  that  man  ought  not  to  believe  any  thing 
iit  all.     Buf^more  of  this  afterwards. 

We  have  no  ether  direct  evidence  than  this  of 
consciousness,  or  internal  sensation,  for  the  existence 
and  identity  of  our  own  soul  *.  I  exist  ; — I  am  the 

same 

=*  I  say,  direct  evidence.  But  there  are  not  wanting 
ether  irrefragable,  ti.ojgh  indirect,  evidences  of  the  ex 
istence  of  the  huiuan  soul.  Sych  ifc  that  v\lich  results 


H.  AN  ESSAY  OF  TRUTH.  49! 

same  being  to-day  I  was  yesterday,  and  twenty 
years  ago  ; — this  principle,  or  being,  within  me, 
that  thinks  and  acts,  is  one  permanent  and  individual 
principle,  distinct  from  all  other  principles,  beings, 

or 

from  a  oomparison  of  the  known  qualities  of  matter  with 
the  phenomena  of  animal  motion  and  thought.  1  he  fur 
ther  we  carry  our  inquiries  into  matter,  the  more  we  are 
convinced  of  its  incapacity  to  begin  motion.  And  as  to 
thought,  and  its  several  modes,  if  we  think  that  thsy 
might  be  produced  by  any  possible  configuration  and  ar 
rangement  of  the  minute  particles  of  matter,  we  form  a 
supposition  as  arbitrary,  as  little  warranted  by  experience 
or  evidence  of  any  kind,  and  as  contrary  to  the  rules  that 
determine  us  in  all  our  rational  conjectures,  as  if  we  were 
to  suppose,  that  diamonds  might  be  produced  „  from  the 
smoke  of  a  candle,  or  that  men  might  grow  like  mush 
rooms  out  of  the  earth.  There  must  then,  in  all  animals, 
,and  especially  in  .man,  be  a  principle,  net  only  distinct 
and  different  from  body,  but  in  some  respects  of  a  quite 
contrary  nature.  Tc  ask,  whether  the  Deity,  without  u- 
niti'ig  body  with  spirit,  ct)uld  create  thinking  matter,  is 
just  such  a  question,  as,  whether  he  could  create  a  being 
essentially  active  and  essentially  inactive,  capable  cf  begin 
ning  motion,  and  at  the  same  time  incapable  of  beginning 
motion  :  questions,  which,  if  we  allow  experience  to' be -.a 
rational  ground  of  knowledge,  we  need  not  scruple  to  an 
swer  in  the  negative.  For  these  questions,  according  to 
the  best  lights  that  our  rational  faculties  can  a  fiord,  seem 
to  us  to  refer  to  the  production  of  an  effect  as  truly  im 
possible,  as  the  creation  of  round  squareness,  hot  cold, 
black  whiteness,  or  true  falsehood. 

Yet  I  am  inclined  to  think,  it  is  not  by  this  argument 
that  the  generality  of  mankind  are  led  to  acknowledge,  tLe 
existence  of  their  own  minds.  An  evidence  more  direct, 
much  more  obvious,  and  not  less  convincing,  every  man 
discovers  in  the  instinctive  suggestions  of  nature.  We 
perceive  the  existence  of  our  souls  by  intuition  ;  and  this 
1  believe  is  the  only  way  in  which  the  vulgar  perceive  it. 
But  their  conviction  is  not  on  that  account  the  weaker  j 
on  the  contrary,  they  would  account  the  man  mad  who 
should  seem  to  entertain  any  doubts  on  this  subject. 


JO  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  T. 

or  things  ; — these  are  dictates  of  internal  sensation 
natural  to  man,  and  universally  acknowledged :  and 
they  are  of  so  great  importance,  that  while  we  doubt 
of  their  truth,  we  can  hardly  be  interested  in  any 
thing  else  whatsoever.  If  I  were  to  believe  with 
Mr  HUME,  and  some  others,  that  my  mind  is  perpe 
tually  changing,  so  as  to  become  every  different  mo 
ment  a  different  thing,  the  remembrance  of  past,  or 
the  anticipation  of  future  good  or  evil,  could  give 
me  neither  pleasure  nor  pain  ;  yea,  though  I  were 

to 

One  of  the  first  thoughts  that  occur  to  Milton's  Adam, 
•when  "  new  waked  from  soundest  sleep,"  is  to  inquire  af 
ter  the  cause  of  his  existence  : 

"  Thou  sun,  said  I,  fair  light ! 
"  And  thou  enlightened  earth,  so  fresh  and  gay  ! 
**  Ye  hills,  and  dales,  ye  rivers,  woods,  and  plains, 
**  And,  ye  that  live  and  move,  fair  creatures,  tell, 
"  Tell,  if  ye  stv.T,  how  came  I  thus,  how  here  : 
'  Not  of  myself  5  by  some  great  jYlaker  then, 
"  In  goodness  and  in  power  pre-eminent. 
"  Tell  me,  hew  I  may  know  him,  how  adcrc, 
**  From  whom  I  have,  that  thus  I  move  and  live, 
"  And  feel  that  I  am  happier  than  I  know." 

Paradise  Lost,  viii.  273. 

Of  the  reality  of  his  own  life,  motion,  and  existence,  it  is 
observable    that   be   makes  no  question  j  and  indeed  it 
would  have  been  strange  if  lie  had.      Eut  Dryden,  in  his 
opera  called  The  state  of  innocence,  would  needs  attempt 
an  improvement  on  this  passage  \  and  to  make  surer  work, 
obliges  Adam  to  prove  his  existence  by  argument,  before 
he  allows  him  to  enter  upon  any  other  inquiry  : 
"  What  am  I  ?  or  from  whence  ? — For  that  I  am 
"  I  know,  because  I  think  :  but  whence  I  came, 
*4  Or  how  this  frame  of  mine  began  to  be, 
"  What  other  being  can  disclose  to  me  ? 

Act  2.  scene  1. 

Dryden,  it  seems,  bad  read  Des  Cartes  j  but  Milton  had 
studied  nature  :  Accordingly  Dryden  speaks  like  a  me- 
taphysician,  Milton  like  a  poet  and  philosopher. 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY   ON    TRUTH.  51 

to  believe,  that  cruel  death  would  certainly  over 
take  me  within  an  hour,  I  should  be  no  more  con 
cerned,  than  if  I  were  told,  that  a  certain  elephant, 
three  thousand  years  hence,,  would,  be  sacrificed  on 
the  top  of  Mount  Atlas.  To  a  man  who  doubts  the 
individuality  or  identity  of  his  own  mind,  virtue, 
truth,  religion,  good  and  evil,  hope  and  fear,  are  ab 
solutely  nothing. 

Metaphysicians  have  taken  some  pains  to  confound 
our  notions  on  the  subject  of  identity  ;  and,  by  e» 
stablishing  the  currency  of  certain  ambiguous  phrases 
have  succeeded  so  Well,  that  it  is  now  nardly  possible 
for  us  to  explain  these  dictates  of  our  nature  accord 
ing  to  common  sense  and  common  experience>  in  such 
language  as  shall  be  liable  to  no  exception.  The 
misfortune  is,  that  many  of  the  words  we  must  use 
though  extremely  well  understood,  are  either  too 
simple  or  too  complex-  in  their,  meaning,  to  admit  a 
logical  definition  ;  so  that  the  caviller  is  never  at  a 
Joss  for  an  evasive  reply  to  any  thing  we  may  ad-*- 
vance.  But.  I  will  take  it  upon  me  to  affirm,  that 
there  arc  hardly  any  human  notions'  more  clearly, 
or  more  universally  understood,  than  those  we  en 
tertain  concerning  the  identity  both  of  ourselves  and 
of  other  things,  however  difficult  we  may  some 
times  find  it  to  express  those  notions  in  proper 
words.  And  I  will  also  venture  to  affirm,  that 
the  sentiments  of  the  generality  of  mankind  on  this 
hea'd  are  grounded  on  such  evidence,  that  he  who 
refuses  to  be  convinced  by  it,  acts  irrationally,  ami 
cannot,  consistently  with  such  refusal,  believe  any 


^ 

I.  The  existence  of  our  own  mind,  as  something 
different  and  distinct  from  the  body,  is  universally 
acknowledged.  I  say  universally  ;  having  never 
heard  of  any  nation  of  men  upon  earth,  who  did  not; 
in  their  conversation  and  behaviour,  show,  by  the 
plainest  signs,  that  they  made  this  distinction.  N-ay? 
so  strongly  are  mankind  impressed  with  it,  that  the 


5 a  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

rudest  barbarians,  by  their  incantations,  their  fune 
ral  solemnities,  their  traditions  concerning  invisible 
beings,  and  their  hopes  and  opinions  of  a  future  state 
seem  to  declare,  that  to  the  existence  of  the  soul 
the  body  is  not,  in  their  opinion  necessary.  All  phi 
losophers,  a  few  Epicureans  and  Pyrrhonists  except- 
ed,  have  acknowledged  the  existence  of  the  soul,  ag 
one-  of  the  first  and  most  unexceptionable  principles 
oi  human  science.  Now  whence  could  a  notion  so  u- 
niversal  arise?  Let  us  examine  our  own  minds,  and 
we  shall  find,  that  it  could  arise  from  nothing  but 
consciousness,  a  certain  irresistible  persuasion,  that 
we  have  a  soul  distinct  from  the  body.  The  evidence 
of  this  notion  is  intuitive  ;  it  is  the  evidence  of  in 
ternal  sense.  Reasoning  can  neither  prove  nor  dis 
prove  it.  DES  CARTES?  and  his  disciple  MALE- 
BRANCHE,  acknowledge,  that  the  existence  of  the  hu 
man  soul  must  be  believed  by  all  men,  even  by  those 
who  can  bring  themselves  to  doubt  of  every  thing 
else. 

Mr  Simon  Browne  *,  a  learned  and  pious  clergy 
man  of  the  last  age,  is  perhaps  the  only  person  en  re 
cord  of  whom  there  is  reason  to  think,  that  he  se 
riously  disbelieved  the  existence  of  his  own  soul. 
He  imagined,  that  in  consequence  of  an  extraordi 
nary  interposition  of  divine  power,,  his  rational  soul 
was  gradually  annihilated,  and  that  nothing  was  now 
left  him,  but  a  principle  of  animal  life,  which  he  held 
in  common  with  the  brutes.  But  wherever  the  story 
of  this  excellent  person  is  known,  his  unhappy  mis 
take  will  be  imputed  to  madness,  and  to  a  deprava 
tion  of  intellect,  as  real,  and  as  extraordinary,  as  if 
he  had  disbelieved  the  existence  of  his  body,  or  the 
axioms  of  mathematics. 

2.  That  the  thinking  principle,  which  we  believe 
to  be  within  us,  continues  the  same  through  life,  is 
equally  self-evident,  and  equally  agreeable  to  the  u- 

*  See  his  affecting  story  in  the  Adventurer,  vol.  3. 
No.  8.8,. 


CHAP,  II.  AN  ESSAY  OK  TRUTH,  5J 

niversal  consent  of  mankind.  If  a  man  were  to  speak 
and  act  in  the  evening,  as  if  he  believed  himself  to 
have  become  a  different  person  since  the  morning, 
the  whole  world  would  pronounce  him  in  a  state  of 
insanity.  Were  we  to  attempt  to  disbelieve  our 
own  identity,  we  should  labour  in  vain  ;  we  could  ag 
easily  bring  ourselves  to  believe,  rhat  it  is  possible 
for  the  same  thing  to  be  and  not  to  be.  But  there 
is  no  reason  to  think,  that  this  attempt  was  ever 
imde  by  any  man,  not  even  by  Mr  HUME  himself ; 
though  that  author,  in  his  Treatise  of  Human  Na 
ture,  has  asserted,  yea,  and  proved  too,  Caccording 
to  his  notions  of  proaf,^  that  the  human  soul  is  per 
petually  changing  ;  being  nothing  but  "  a  bundle  of 
*f  perceptions,  that  succeed  each  other  with  incon- 
"  ceivable  rapidity,  and  are  (as  he  clauses  to  express 
"  it)  in  a  perpetual  flux  *."  He  might  as  easily, 
and  as  decisively,  with  equal  credit  to  his  own  un 
derstanding,  and  with  equal  advantage  to  the  reader, 
by  a  method  of  reasoning  no  less  philosophical,  and 
with  the  same  degree  of  discretion  in  the  use  of  words 
have  attacked  the  axioms  of  mathematics,  and  pro 
duced  a  formal  and  serious  confutation  of  them.  In 
explaining  the  evidence  on  which  we  believe  our  own 
identity,  it  is  not  necessary  that  I  should  here  exa 
mine  his  arguments  against  that  belief:  first,  because 
the  point  in  question  is  self-evident ;  and  therefore 
all  reasoning  on  the  other  side  unphilosophical  and 
irrational  :  and,  secondly,  because  I  shall  afterwards 
prove  that  some  of  Mr  HUME'S  first  principles  are 
inconceivable  and  impossible  ;  and  that  this  very  no 
tion  of  his  concerning  identity,  when  fairly  stated,  is 
absurd  and  s  'If-contradictory. 

It  has  been  asked,  how  we  can  pretend  to  have 
lull  evidence  of  our  identity,  when  of  identity  itself 
we  are  so  far  from  having  a  distinct  notion,  that  we 
cannot  define  it.  It  might  with  as  good  reason  be 
cl,  how  we  come  to  believe  that  two  and  two  are 
*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  428,  &.c* 


|4  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART    1^ 

equal  to  four,  or  that  a  circle  is  different  from  a 
triangle,  if  we  cannot  define  either  equality  or  diver 
sity: — why  we  believe  in  our  own  existence,  since 
we  cannot  define  existence : — why,  in  a  word,  the 
vulgar  believe  any  thing  at  all,  since  they  know  no 
thing'  about  the  rules  of  definition,  and  hardly  ever 
attempt  it.  In  fact,  we  have  numberless  ideas  that 
admit  not  of  definition,  and  yet  concerning  which  we 
may  argue,  and  believe,  and  know,  with  the  utmost 
clearness  and  certainty.  To  define  heat  or  cold,  i- 
dentity  or  diversity,  red,  or  white,  an  ox  or  an  ass, 
would  puzzle  all  the  logicians  on  earth  ;  yet  nothing 
can  be  clearer,  or  more  certain,  than  many  of  our 
uidgment-  concerning  those  objects.  The  rudest  of 
the  vulgar  know  most  perfectly  what  they  mean, 
when  they  say,  Three  months  ago  I  was  at  such  a 
town,  and  have  ever  since  been  at  home  :  and  the 
conviction  they  have  of  the  truth  of  this  proposition, 
is  founded  on  the  best  of  evidence,  namely,  on  that 
of  internal  sense  ;  in  which  all  men,  by  the  law  of 
their  nature,  do  and  must  implicitly  believe. 

It  has   been  asked,  whether  this  continued  consci 
ousness  of  our  being  always  the  same,  does  not  con 
stitute  our  sameness  or  identity.     No  more,  I  should 
answer,   than  our  perception  of  truth,  light,  or  cold, 
k   the  eilicient  cause  of  truth,  light,  or  cold.     Our 
identity  is  perceived  by  consciousness  ;  but  consci 
ousness  is  as  different  from   identity,  as  the  under 
standing  is  different  from  truth,   as  past  events  are 
different  from   memory,  as   colours  from  the  power 
of  seeing.      Consciousness  of  identity  is  so  far  from 
constituting  identity,   that  it   presupposes   it.     An 
animal  might   continue  the  same  being,   and  yet  not 
be  conscious  of  its  identity  ;   which  is  probably  the 
csse  with  many  of  the  brute  creation  ;  nay,  which  is 
often   the  case  with  man   himself.     When  we  sleep 
•witho   t  dreaming,  or  fall  into  a  fainting  nt  *,  or  rave 

*  The  following  case,  which  3VI.  Crozaz  gave  in  to  the 
Academy  of  Sciences,  is  the  most  extraordinary  instance 


CHAP.  ir.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  35 

in  a  fever,  and  often  too  in  our  ordinary  dreams,  we 
lose  all  sense  of  our  identity,  and  yet  never  conceive 
that  our  identity  has  suffered  any  interruption  or 
change  :  the  moment  we  awake  or  recover,  we  are 
conscious  that  we  are  the  same  individual  beings  we 
were  before. 

Many  doubts  and  difficulties  have  been  started  a- 
bout  our  manner  of  conceiving  identity  of  person  un 
der  a  change  of  substance,  Plutarch  tells  us,  that  in 
the  time  of  Demetrius  Phalereus,  the  Athenians 
still  preserved  the  custom  of  sending  every  year 
to  Delos  the  same  galley  which,  about  a  thousand 

years 

of  interrupted  consciousness   I  have  ever   heard  of.     A 
nobleman  of  Lausanne,   as  he  was  giving  orders  to  a  ser 
vant,  suddenly  lost  his  speech  and  all  his  senses.     Different 
remedies  were  tried  without  effect  for  six  months  j  during 
all  which  time  he  appeared  to  be  in  a  deep  sleep,  or  deh- 
quium,  with  various  symptoms  at  different  periods,  which 
nre  particularly  specified  in  the  narration.     At  last,  after 
some  chirurgical  operations,  at  the  end  of  six  months  his 
speech  and  senses  were  suddenly  restored.     When  he  re 
covered,  the  servant  to  whom  he  had  been  giving  orders 
when  he  was  first  seized  with  the  distemper,  happening  to 
be  in  the  room,  he  asked  whether  he  had  executed  his 
commission ;  not  being  sensible,  it  seems,  that  any  interval 
of  time,  except,  perhaps  a  very  short  one,  had  elapsed  du 
ring  his  illness.     He  lived  ten  years  after,  and  died  of  a- 
nother  disease.     See  D  Histoire  de  /*  Academic  Royale  des 
Sciences,  pour  /*  ann/e,  1719,  p.  28.     Van  Swieten  also 
relates  this  story  in  his  commentaries    on   Boerhaave's 
Aphorisms,  under  the  head  Apoplexy.     I  mention  it  chief 
ly  with  a  view  to  the  reader's  amusement  \  he  may  con 
sider  the  evidence,  and  believe  or  disbelieve  as  he  please?. 
But  that  consciousness  may  be  interrupted  by  a  total  de- 
liquium,  without  any  change  in  our  notions  of  our  own  i- 
dentity,  I  know  by  my  own  experience.     I  am  therefore 
fully  persuaded,  that  the  identity  of  this  substance,  which 
I  call  my  soul,  may  continue  even  when  I  am  unconscious 
of  it  j  and  if  for  a  shorter  space,  why  not  for  a  longer  ? 
E 


5^  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

years  before,  had  brought  Theseus  and  his  company 
from  Crete  ;  and  that  it  then  used  to  be  a  question 
in  the  schools,  how  this  could  be  the  same  vessel, 
when  every  part  of  its  materials  had  been  changed 
oftener  than  once  *.  It  is  asked,  how  a  tree  can  be 
accounted  the  same,  when,  from  a  plant  of  an  inch 
long,  it  has  grown  to  the  height  of  fifty  feet ;  and 
how  identity  can  be  ascribed  to  the  human  body, 
since  its  parts  are  continually  changing,  so  that  not 
one  particle  of  the  body  I  now  have,  belonged  to  the 
body  I  had  twenty  years  ago. 

It  were  well,  if  metaphysicians  would  think  more 
and  speak  less  on  these  subjects  :  they  would  then 
find,  that  the  difficulties  so  much  complained  of  are 
rather  verbal  than  real.  Was  there  a  single  Athen 
ian,  who  did  not  know  in  what  respects  the  galley  of 
Theseus  continued  the  same,  and  in  what  respects  it 
was  changed  ?  It  was  the  same  in  respect  of  its  name, 
its  destination,  its  shape  perhaps,  and  size,  and  some 
other  particulars  ;  in  respect  of  its  substance,  it  was 
altogether  different.  And  when  one  party  in  the 
schools  maintained,  that  it  was  the  same,  and  the 
other,  that  it  was  not  the  same,  all  the  difference  be 
tween  them  was  this,  that  the  one  used  the  word 
same  in  one  sense,  and  the  other  in  another. 

The  identity  of  vegetables  is  as  easily  conceived. 
No  man  imagines,  that  the  plant  of  an  inch  long  is 
the  same  in  substance  with  the  tree  of  fifty  feet. 
The  latter  is  by  the  vulgar  supposed  to  retain  all  the 
substance  of  the  former,  but  with  the  addition  of  an 
immense  quantity  of  adventitious  matter.  Thus 
far,  and  no  further,  do  they  suppose  the  substance 
of  the  tree  to  continue  the  same.  They  call  it,  how 
ever,  the  same  tree  ;  and  the  same  it  is,  in  many  re 
spects,  which  to  every  person  of  common  sense  are 
obvious  enough,  though  not  easily  expressed  in  un 
exceptionable  language. 

*  Plutarch,  in  Theseo.      Plato,  in  Phaedone. 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  57 

Of  the  changes  made  in  the  human  body  by  attri 
tion,  the  vulgar  have  no  notion.  They  believe  the 
substance  of  a  full-grown  body  to  continue  the  same, 
notwithstanding  its  being  sometimes  fatter,  and  some 
times  leaner  ;  even  as  they  suppose  the  substance  of 
a  wall  to  be  the  same  before  and  after  it  is  plaistered, 
or  painted.  They  therefore  do  not  ascribe  to  it  i- 
dentity  of  person,  and  diversity  of  substance,  but  a 
real  and  proper  identity  both  of  substance  and  per 
son.  Of  the  identity  of  the  body  while  increasing  in 
stature,  they  conceive,  nearly  in  the  same  way,  as  of 
the  identity  of  vegetables  :  they  know  in  what  re 
spects  it  continues  the  same,  and  in  what  respects  u 
becomes  different ;  there  is  no  confusion  in  their  no 
tions  ;  they  never  suppose  it  to  be  different  in  those 
respects  in  which  they  know  it  to  be  the  same. 

When  philosophers  speak  of  the  identity  of  the 
human  body,  they  must  mean,  not  that  its  substance 
is  the  same,  for  this  they  say  is  perpetually  chang 
ing  ;  but  that  it  is  the  same,  in  respect  of  its  having 
been  all  along  animated  with  the  same  vital  and 
thinking  principle,  distinguished  by  the  same  name, 
marked  with  the  same  or  similar  features,  placed  in 

the  same  relations  of  life,  &c It  must-be  obvious 

to  the  intelligent  reader^  that  the  difficulties  attend 
ing  this  subject  arise  not  from  any  ambiguity  or  in 
tricacy  in  our  notions  or  judgments,  for  these  are 
extremely  clear,  but  from  our  way  of  expressing 
them  :  the  particulars  in  which  an  object  continues 
the  same,  are  often  so  blended  with  tjiose  in  which 
it  has  become  different,  that  we  cannot  find  proper 
words  for  marking  the  distinction,  and  therefore 
must  have  recourse  to  tedious  and  obscure  circum 
locutions. 

But  whatever  judgments  we  form  of  the  identity 
of  corporeal  objects,  we  cannot  from  them  draw  any 
inference  concerning  the  identity  of  our  mind.  We 
cannot  ascribe  extension  or  solidity  to  the  soul,  far 
less  any  increase  or  diminution  of  solid  or  extended 

£2 


58  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  FART  I. 

parts.  Here,  therefore,  there  is  no  ground  for  dis 
tinguishing  diversity  of  substance  from  identity  of 
person.  Our  soul  is  the  very  same  being  now  it 
was  yesterday,  last  year,  twenty  years  ago.  This 
is  a  dictate  of  common  sense,  an  intuitive  truth,  which 
ail  mankind,  by  the  law  of  their  nature,  do  and  must 
believe,  and  the  contrary  of  which  is  inconceivable. 
V/e  have  perhaps  changed  many  of  our  principles  : 
we  may  have  acquired  many  new  ideas  and  notions, 
and  lost  many  of  those  we  once  had  ;  but  that  the 
substance,  essence,  or  personality,  of  the  soul,  has 
suffered  any  change,  increase,  or  diminution,  we  never 
have  supposed,  nor  can  suppose.  New  faculties  have 
perhaps  appeared,  with  which  we  were  formerly  un 
acquainted  ;  but  these  we  cannot  conceive  to  have 
affected  the  identity  of  the  soul,  any  more  than  lear 
ning  to  write,  or  to  play  on  a  musical  instrument,  is 
conceived  to  affect  the  identity  of  the  hand  ;  or  than 
the  perception  of  harmony  the  first  time  one  hears 
music,  is  conceived  to  affect  the  identity  of  the  ear*. 

*  I  beg  leave  to  quote  a  few  lines   from  an  excellent 
poem,  written  by  an  author,  whose  genius  and  virtue  were 
an  honour  to  his  country,  and  to  human  nature  : 
'*  Am  I  but  what  I  seem,  mere  flesh  and  blood  ? 
"  A  branching  channel,  and  a  mazy  flood  ? 
"  The  purple  stream,  that  through  my  vessels  glides, 
4<  Dull  and  unconscious  flows  like  common  tides. 
**  The  pipes,  through  which  the  circling  juices  stray, 
"  Are  not  that  thinking  I,  no  more  than  they. 
"  This  frame  compacted  with  transcendent  skill, 
"  Of  moving  joints,  obedient  to  my  will, 
"  Nursed  from  the  fruitful  glebe  like  yonder  tree, 
"  Waxes  and  wastes :  I  call  it  MINE  not  ME. 
"  New  matter  still  the  mouldering  mass  sustains  j 
"  The  mansion  changed,  the  tenant  still  remains, 
"  And,  from  the  fleeting  stream  repaired  by  food, 
"  Distinct,  as  is  the  swimmer  from  the  flood." 
ARBUTHNOT.     See  Dodsley*.s  Collection^  'vol.  1.  />.  1SO» 


CHAP.    IT.  AN' ESSAY  ON   TRUTH.  59 

But  if  we  perceive  our  identity  by  consciousness, 
and  if  the  acts  of  consciousness  by  which  we  perceive 
it  be  interrupted,  how  can  we  know  that  our  identity 
is  not  interrupted  ?  I  answer,  The  law  of  our  na 
ture  determines  us,  whether  we  will  or  not,  to  be 
lieve  that  we  continue  the  same  thinking  beings. 
The  interruption  of  consciousness,  whether  more  or 
less  frequent,  makes  no  change  in  this  belief.  My 
perception  of  the  visible  creation  is  every  moment 
interrupted  by  the  winking  of  my  eyes.  Am  I 
therefore  to  believe,  that  the  visible  universe,  which 
I  this  moment  perceive,  is  not  the  same  with  the 
visible  universe  I  perceived  last  moment  ?  Then 
must  I  also  believe,  that  the  existence  of  the  uni 
verse  depends  on  the  motion  of  my  eye-lids  ;  and  that 
the  muscles  which  move  them  have  the  power  of 
creating  and  annihilating  worlds. 

To  conclude  :  That  our  soul  exists,  and  continues 
through  life  the  same  individual  being,  is  a  dictate 
of  common  sense  ;  a  truth  which  the  law  of  our  na 
ture  renders  it  impossible  for  us  to  disbelieve;  and 
in  regard  to  which,  we  cannot  suppose  ourselves  in 
an  error,  without  supposing  our  faculties  fallacious, 
and  consequently  disclaiming  all  conviction,  and  all 
certainty,  and  disavowing  the  distinction  between 
truth  and  falsehood. 

S  E  C  T  I  ON     IV. 

Of  tie  Evidence  of  Memory. 

PHE  evidence  of  memory  commands  our  belief  as 
J~  effectually  as  that  of 'sense.  T  cannot  possibly 
doubt,  with  regard  to  any  of  my  transactions  of 'yes 
terday  which  I  now  remember,  whether  I  perform 
ed  them  or  not.  That  I  dined  to-day,  and  was  in 
bed  last  night,  is  as  certain  to  me,  as  that  I  at  pre 
sent  see  the  colour  of  this  paper.  If  we  had  no  me^ 
mory,  knowledge  and  experience  would  be  impossi 
ble  j,  and  if  we  had  any  tendency  to  distrust  our  ratfi. 


60  AN   ESSAY   ON   TRUTH.  PART   I. 

mory,  knowledge  and  experience  would  be  of  as  lit 
tle  use  in  directing  our  conduct  and  sentiments,  as 
our  dreams  now  are.  Sometimes  we  doubt,  whe 
ther  in  a  particular  case  we  exert  memory  or  ima 
gination  ;  and  our  belief  is  suspended  accordingly  : 
but  no  sooner  do  we  become  conscious,  that  we  re- 
member,  than  conviction  instantly  takes  place  ;  we 
say,  I  am  certain  it  was  so,  for  now  I  remember  I 
was  an  eye-witness. 

But  who  is  it  that  teaches  the  child  to  believe, 
that  yesterday  he  was  punished,  because  he  remem 
bers  to  have  been  punished  yesterday  ?  Or,  by  what 
argument  will  you  convince  him,  that,  notwithstan 
ding  his  remembrance,  he  ought  not  to  believe  that 
he  was  punished  yesterday,  because  memory  is  fal 
lacious  ?  The  matter  depends  not  on  education  or 
reasoning.  We  trust  to  the  evidence  of  memory, 
because  we  cannot  help  trusting  to  it.  The  same 
Providence  that  endued  us  with  memory,  with 
out  any  care  of  ours,  endued  us  also  with  an  instinc 
tive  propensity  to  believe  in  it,,  previously  to  all  rea 
soning  and  experience.  Nay,  all  reasoning  suppo 
ses  the  testimony  of  memory  to  be  authentic  :  for, 
without  trusting  implicitly  to  this  testimony,  no 
train  of  reasoning  could  be  prosecuted ;  we  could  ne 
ver  be  convinced,  that  the  conclusion  is  fair,  if  we 
did  not  remember  the  several  steps  of  the  argument, 
and  if  we  were  not  certain  that  this  remembrance  i s 
not  fallacious. 

The  diversities  of  memory  in  different  men  are 
very  remarkable  j  and  in  the  same  man  the  remem 
brance  of  some  things  is  more  lasting,  and  more 
lively  than  that  of  others.  Some  of  the  ideas  of  me 
mory  seem  to  decay  gradually  by  length  of  time  j 
so  that  there  may  be  some  things  which  I  distinctly 
remember  seven  years  age,  but  which  at  present  I 
remember  very  imperfectly,  and  which  in  seven 
years  more  Cif  I  live  so  long)  I  shall  have  utterly 
forgotten.  Hence  some  have  been  led  to  think,  that 


CHAP.    II.  AN  ESSAV  ON  TRUTH.  tfl- 

the  evidence  of  memory  decays  gradually,  from  ab 
solute  certainty,  through  all  the  degrees  of  probabi 
lity,  down  to  that  suspense  of  judgment  uhich  we 
call  doubt.     They  seem  to  have  imagined,    that  the 
vivacity  of  the  idea  is  in  some  sort  necessary  to  the 
establishment  of  belief.  Nay,  one  author  *  has  gone 
so  far  as  to  say,  that  belief  is  nothing  else   but  this 
vivacity  of  ideas  j    as  if  we  never  believed  what  we 
have  no  lively  conception    of,   nor  doubted   of  any 
thing  of  which  we  have   a  lively  conception.     But 
this  doctrine  is  so  absurd,  that  it  hardly  deserves  a 
serious  confutation.    I  have  a  much  more  lively  idea 
of  Don    Quixote  than  of  the  present  King  of  Prus 
sia  ;  and  yet  I  believe  that  the  latter  does  exist,  and 
that  the  former  never  did.      When  I  was  a  school- 
"boy,  I  read  an  abridgment  of  the  history  of  Robin 
son  Crusoe,  and  believed  every  word  of  it  ;  since  I 
grew  up,  I  have  read  that  ingenious  work  at  large, 
and  consequently  have  a  much  livelier  conception  of 
it  than  before ;  yet  now  I  believe  the  whole  to  be  a 
fiction.     Some  months  ago   I  read  the    Treatise  of 
Human  Nature,  and  have   at  present  a  pretty  clear 
remembrance  of  its    contents;  but  I  shall  probably 
forget  the  greater  part  in  a  short  time.     When  this 
happens,    I    ought   not,  according  to    Mr  HUME'S 
theory,  to   believe  that   I   ever   read  it.     As  longs 
however,  as  my  faculties  remain  unimpaired,  I  fear 
I  shall  hardly  be  able  to  bring  myself  to  this  pitch  of 
scepticism.     No,  no  j  I  shall  ever  have  good  reason 
to  remember  my  having  read   that  book,   however 
imperfect  my  remembrance   may   be,  and   however 
little  ground  I  may  have  to  congratulate  myself  up 
on  my  acquaintance  with  it. 

The  vivacity  of  a  perception  does  not  seem  neees- 
sary  to  our  belief  of  the  existence  of  the  thing  per 
ceived.  I  see  a  town  afar  off;  its  visible  magnitude 
is  not  more  than  an  inch  square,  and  therefore  my 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p,  1, 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH-.  PRAT  IV 

perception  of  it  is  neither  lively  nor  distinct  ;.  and 
yet  I  as  certainly  believe  that  town  to  exist,  as  if  I 
were  in  the  centre  of  it.  I  see  an  object  in  motion 
on  the  top  of  yonder  hill  ;  I  cannot  discern  whether 
it  be  a  man,  or  a  horse,  or  both  ;  I  therefore  exert 
no  belief  in  regard  to  the  class  or  species  of  objects 
to  which  it  belongs,  but  I  believe  with  as  much  as 
surance  that  it  exists,  as  if  I  saw  it  distinctly  in  all 
its  parts  and  dimensions.  We  have  never  any 
doubt  of  the  existence  of  an  object  so  long  as  we  are 
sure  that  we  perceive  it  by  our  senses,  whether  the 
perception  be  strong  or  weak,  distinct  or  confused  -r 
but  whenever  we  begin  to  doubt,  whether  the  ob 
ject  be  perceived  by  our  senses,  or  whether  we  only 
imagine  that  we  perceive  it,  then  we  likewise  begin 
to  doubt  of  its  existence. 

These  observations  are  applicable  to  memory.  I 
saw  a  certain  object  some  years  ago  ;  my  remem 
brance  of  it  is  less  distinct  now  than  it  was  the  day 
after  I  saw  it  ;  but  I  believe  the  evidence  of  my  me 
mory  as  much  at  present  as  I  did  then,  in  regard  to 
all  the  parts  of  it  which  I  now  am  Conscious  that  I 
remember.  Let  a  past  event  be  ever  so  remote  in 
time,  if  I  am  conscious  that  I  remember  it,  I  still 
believe,  with  equal  assurance,  that  this  event  did- 
once  take  place.  For  what  is  memory,  but  a  con^ 
sciousness  of  our  having  formerly  done  or  perceived 
something  ?  And  if  it  be  true,  that  something  is 
perceived  or  done  at  this  present  moment,  it  will  al* 
ways  be  true,  that  at  this  moment  that  thing  was 
perceived  or  done.  The  evidence  of  memory  does 
not  decay  in  proportion  as  the  ideas  of  memory  be- 
come  less  lively  ;  as  long  as  we  are  conscious  that  we 
remember,  so  long  will  the  evidence  attending  that 
remembrance  produce  absolute  certainty  ;  and  abso 
lute  certainty  admits  not  of  degrees.  Indeed,  as  was 
already  observed,  when  remembrance  becomes  so  ob 
scure,  that  we  are  at  a  loss  to  determine  whether 
we  remembtr  or  only  imagine  an  event, — in  this  case 


CHAP.    II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  63 

belief  will  be  suspended  till  we  become  certain  whe 
ther  we  remember  or  not ;  whenever  we  become 
certain  that  we  do  remember,  conviction  instantly 
arises. 

Some  have  supposed  that  the  evidence  of  memory 
is  liable  to  become  uncertain,  because  we  are  not  well 
enough  acquainted  with  the  difference  between  me 
mory  and  imagination,  to  be  able  at  all  times  to  de 
termine,  whether  the  one  or  the  other  be  exerted  in 
regard  to  the  events  or  facts  we  may  have  occasion 
to  contemplate.  "  You  say,  that  while  you  only 
"  imagine  an  event,  you  neither  believe  nor  disbe- 
"  lieve  the  existence  or  reality  of  it :  but  that  as 
'•'  soon  as  you  become  conscious  that  you  remember 
*'  it,  you  instantly  believe  it  to  have  been  real. 
"  You  must  then  know  with  certainty  the  difference 
"  between  memory  and  imagination,  and  be  able  to 
".tell  by  what  marks  you  distinguish  the  operations 
44  of  the  former  from  those  of  the  latter.  If  you 
"  cannot  do  this,  you  may  mistake  the  one  for  the 
"  other,  and  think  that  you  imagine  when  you  real- 
u  ly  remember,  and  that  you  remember  when  you 
"  only  imagine.  That  belief,  therefore,  must  be 
"  very  precarious  and  uncertain,  which  is  built  up- 
"  on  the  evidence  of  memory,  since  this  evidence 
"  is  so  apt  to  be  confounded  with  the  visionary  ex- 
"  hibirions  of  imagination,  which,  by  your  own  ac- 
44  knowledgment,  can  never  constitute  a  foundation 
"  for  true  rational  belief."  This  is  an  objection, 
according  to  the  metaphysical  mode,  which,  without 
consulting  experience,  is  satisfied  if  a  few  plausible 
words  can  be  put  together  in  the  form  of  an  argu 
ment  :  but  this  objection  will  have  no  credit  with 
those  who  acknowledge  ultimate  instinctive  princi 
ples  of  conviction,  and  who  have  more  faith  in  their 
own  feelings  than  it:  the  subtleties  of  logic. 

It  is  certain  the  vulgar  are  not  able  to  give  a  sa 
tisfactory  account  of  the  difference  between  memory 
and  imagination ;  even  philosophers  have  not  al~ 


64  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I, 

ways  succeeded  in  their  attempts  to  illustrate  this 
point.  Mr  HUME  tells  us,  that  ideas  of  memory 
are  distinguished  from  those  of  imagination  by  the 
superior  vivacity  of  the  former  *.  This  may  some 
times,  but  cannot  always,  be  true  :  for  ideas  of  ima 
gination  are  often  mistaken  for  objects  of  sense  ;  i- 
deas  of  memory  never.  The  former,  therefore, 
must  often  be  more  lively  than  the  latter  ;  for,  ac 
cording  to  Mr  HUME'S  own  account,  all  ideas  are 
weaker  than  impressions,  or  informations  of  sensef. 
Dreaming  persons,  lunatics,  stage-players,  enthusi 
asts,  and  all  who  are  agitated  by  fear,  or  other  vio 
lent  passions,  are  apt  to  mistake  ideas  of  imagina 
tion  for  real  things,  and  the  perception  of  those  ideas 
for  real  sensation.  And  the  same  thing  is  often  ex 
perienced  by  persons  of  strong  fancy,  and  great  sen 
sibility  of  temper,  at  a  time  when  they  are  not  trou 
bled  with  any  fits  of  irrationality  or  violent  pas 
sion. 

But  whatever  difficulty  we  may  find  in  defining 
or  describing  memory,  so  as  to  distinguish  it  from 
imagination,  we  are  never  at  any  loss  about  our  own 
meaning,  when  we  speak  of  remembering  and  of  ima 
gining.  We  all  know  what  it  is  to  remember,  and 
what  it  is  to  imagine  ;  a  retrospect  to  former  expe 
rience  always  attends  the  exertions  of  memory;  but 
those  of  imagination  are  not  attended  with  any  such 
retrospect.  "  I  remember  to  have  seen  a  lion,  and 
"  I  can  imagine  an  elephant  or  centaur,  which  I  have 
"  never  seen  i1'-— Every  body  who  uses  these  words 
knows  very  well  what  they  mean,  whether  he  be  a- 
ble  to  explain  his  meaning  by  other  words  or  not. 
The  truth  is,  that  when  we  remember,  we  generally 
know  that  we  remember  ;  when  we  imagine,  we  ge 
nerally  know  that  we  imagine  |  :  such  is  our  conbti- 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  153. 
f  Ibid.   p.  41. 
In  dreams  indeed  this  is  not  the  case  >  but  the  delu* 


CHAP.  II.     AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  65 

tution.  We  therefore  do  not  suppose  the  evidence 
of  memory  uncertain,  notwithstanding  that  we  may 
be  at  a  loss  to  explain  the  difference  between  that  fa 
culty  and  imagination  :  this  difference  is  perfectly 
known  to  every  man  by  experience,  though  perhaps 
no  man  can  fully  express  it  in  words.  There  are 
many  things  very  familiar  to  us,  which  we  have  no 
words  to  express.  I  cannot  describe  or  define, 
either  a  red  colour,  which  I  know  to  be  a  simple  ob 
ject,  or  a  white  colour,  which  I  know  to  be  a  com 
position  of  seven  colours  :  but  will  any  one  hence 
infer,  that  I  am  ignorant  of  their  difference,  so  as 
not  to  know,  when  I  look  on  ermine,  whether  it  be 
white  or  red  ?  Let  it  not  then  be  said,  that  because 
we  cannot  define  memory  and  imagination,  therefore 
we  are  ignorant  of  their  difference  :  every  person  of 
a  sound  mind,  knows  their  difference,  and  can  with 
certainty  determine,  when  it  is  that  he  exerts  the 
one,  and  when  it  is  that  he  exerts  the  other. 

SECT.     V. 

Of  Reasoning  from  the  Effect  to  tie  Cause. 

T  LEFT  my  chamber  an  hour  ago,  and  now  at  my 
•*  return  find  a  book  on  the  table,  the  size,  and  bind 
ing,  and  contents  of  which  are  so  remarkable,  that 
I  am  certain  it  was  not  here  when  I  went  out  ;  and 
that  I  never  saw  it  before.  1  ask,  who  brought 
this  book  ;  and  am  told,  that  no  body  has  entered 
my  apartment  since  I  left  it.  That,  say  I,  is  im 
possible.  1  make  a  more  particular  inquiry  ;  and  a 
servant,  in  whose  veracity  I  can  confide,  assures  me, 
that  he  has  had  his  eye  on  my  chamber-door  the 

sions  of  dreaming,  notwithstanding  our  frequent  expe 
rience  of  them,  are  never  supposed  to  affect  in  the  least 
deg  ree  either  the  veracity  cf  ourfaculties,  or  the  certain 
ty  of  our  knowledge.  See  below,  Part  II.  Chap.  2. 
Sect.2. 


66  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  r, 

whole   day,  and  that  no  person  has  entered   it    but 
myself  only.     Then,  say  i,  the  person  who  brought 
this  book  must  have  come   in  by  the  window  or  the 
Chimney  ;  for   it  is    impossible  that  this  book  could 
have  come  hither  of  itself.     The  servant  bids  me 
remember,  that  my  chimney  is  too  narrow  to  admit 
any  human  creature,  and  that  the  window  is  secured 
on  the  inside  in  such  a  manner  that    it    cannot  be  o- 
pened  from  without.     I  examine  the  walls  ;  it  is  e- 
vident  no  breach  has  been   made  ;  and  there  is  but 
one  door  to  the  apartment.    What  shall  I  think  ?   If 
the  servant's  report    be    true,    and  if  the  book  have 
not  been  brought  by  any  visible  agent,  it  must  have 
come  in  a  miraculous  manner,  by  the  interposition  of 
some  invisible  cause  ;  for  still  I   must  repeat,  that 
without  some  cause  it  could  not  possibly  have  come 
hither. 

Let  the  reader  consider  the  case,  and  deliberate 
with  himself  whether  I   think   irrationally  on  this 
occasion,  or  express  myself  too    strongly,  when   I 
speak  of  the   impossibility  of  a  book  appearing  in 
my  chamber  without  some  cause  of  its  appearance, 
either  visible  or  invisible.     I   would  not  willingly 
refer  such   a  phenomenon  to  a  miracle  ;   but   still 
a  miracle  is  possible  ;  whereas   it  is  absolutely  im 
possible  that  this    could  have  happened  without  a 
cause  ;  at  least  it  seems  to  me  to  be  as  real  an  im 
possibility,  as   that   a   part  should  be  greater  than 
the  whole,  or  that  things  equal  to  one  and  the  same 
thing  should  be  unequal   to   one   another.     And   I 
presume  the  reader  will  be  of  my  opinion  ;  for,  in  all 
my  intercourse  with  others,  and  after  a  careful  ex 
amination  of  my  own  mind,  I  have  never  found  any 
reason  to  think,  that  it  is  possible  for  a  human,  or 
for  a  rational  creature,  to  conceive  a  thing  beginning 
to  exist,  and  proceeding  from  no  cause. 

I  pronounce  it  therefore  to  be  an  axiom,  clear, 
certain,  and  undeniable,  That  "  whatever  beginneth 
"  to  exist,  proceedeth  from  some  cause."  1  cannot 


CHAP.    II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  67 

bring  myself  to  think,  that  the  reverse  of  any  geo 
metrical  axiom  is  more  absuid  than  the  reverse  of 
this  ;  and  therefore  I  am  as  certain  of  the  truth  of 
this,  as  I  can  be  of  the  truth  of  the  other  ;  and 
cannot,  without  contradicting  myself,  and  doing 
violence  to  my  nature,  even  attempt  to  believe  o- 
therwise. 

Whether  this  maxim  be  intuitive  or  demonstra 
ble,  may  perhaps  admit  of  some  dispute  ;  but  the 
determination  of  that  point  will  not  in  the  least  af 
fect  the  truth  of  the  maxim.  If  it  be  demonstrable, 
we  can  then  assign  a  reason  for  our  belief  of  it  :  if 
it  be  intuitive,  it  is  on  the  same  footing  with  other 
intuitive  axioms  ;  that  is,  we  believe  it,  because 
the  law  of  our  nature  renders  it  impossible  for  U3 
to  disbelieve  it. 

In  proof  of  this  maxim  it  has  been  said,  that  no 
thing  can  produce  itself.  .  But  this  truth  is  not  more 
evident  than  the  truth  to  be  proved,  and  therefore  is 
no  proof  at  all.  Nay,  this  last  proposition  seems  to 
be  only  a  different,  and  less  proper,  way  of  express 
ing  the  same  thing: — Nothing  can  produce  itself ; 
that  is,  every  thing  produced,  must  be  produced  by- 
some  other  thing  ;  that  is,  every  effect  must  proceed 
from  a  cause  ;  and  that  is,  (for  all  effects  being  pos 
terior  to  their  causes,  must  necessarily  have  a  be 
ginning)  *'  every  thing  beginning  to  exist  proceeds 
**  from  some  cause."  Other  arguments  have  been 
offered  in  proof  of  this  maxim,  which  I  think  are 
sufficiently  confuted  by  Mr  HUME,  in  his  treatise  of 
Human  Nature  *.  This  maxim  therefore  he  affirms 
and  I  allow,  to  be  not  demonstrably  certain.  But  he 
further  affirms,  that  it  is  not  intuitively  certain  ;  in 
which  I  cannot  agree  with  him.  "  All  certainty," 
says  he,  "  arises  from  the  comparison  of  ideas,  and 
"  from  the  discovery  of  such  relations  as  are  unalter- 
"  able  so  long  as  the  ideas  continue  the  same :  but 

*  B:>ok  1.  part  3.  sect.  3. 
* 


68  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

.  "  the  only  relations  *  of  this  kind  are  resemblance, 
"  proportion  in  quantity  and  number,  degrees  of  any 
"  quality,  and  contrariety  ;  none  of  which  is  implied 
"  in  the  maxim,  Whatever  begins  to  exist,  proceeds 
"from  some  cause  : — that  maxim  therefore  is  not  in- 
*'  tuitively  certain." — This  argument,  if  it  prove 
any  thing  at  all,  would  prove,  that  the  maxim  is  not 
even  certain  ;  for  we  are  here  told,  that  it  has  not  that 
character  or  quality  from  which  all  certainty  arises. 
But,  if  I  mistake  not,  both  the  premises  of  this 
syllogism  are  false.  In  the  first  place,  I  cannot  ad 
mit,  that  all  certainty  arises  from  a  comparison  of 
ideas.  I  am  certain  of  the  existence  of  myself  and 
of  the  other  things  that  affect  my  senses  ;  I  am  cer 
tain,  that  "  whatever  is,  is  ;"  and  yet  I  cannot  con 
ceive,  that  any  comparison  of  ideas  is  necessary  to 
produce  these  convictions  in  my  mind.  Perhaps  I 
cannot  speak  of  them  without  using  words  expres 
sive  of  relation  ;  but  the*simple  act  or  perception  of 
the  understanding  by  which  I  am  conscious  of  them, 
implies  not  any  comparison  that  I  can  discover.  If 
it  did,  then  the  simplest  intuitive  truth  requires 
proof,  or  illustration  at  least,  before  it  can  be  ac 
knowledged  as  truth  by  the  mind  ;  which  I  presume 
will  not  be  found  warranted  by  experience.  Whe 
ther  others  are  conscious  of  making  such  a  compari 
son,  before  they  yield  assent  to  the  simplest  intui 
tive  truth,  I  know  not  ;  but  this  I  know,  that  my 
mind  is  often  conscious  of  certainty  where  no  such 
comparison  has  been  made  by  rne.  I  acknowledge, 

*  There  are,  according  to  Mr  HUME,  seven  different 
kinds  of  philosophical  relation,  to  wit,  Resemblance,  Iden 
tity,  Relations  of  time  and  place,  Proportion  in  quantity 
*>r  number,  Degrees  in  any  common  quality,  Contrariety, 
and  Causation.  And  by  the  word  Relation  he  here  means 
ibat  particular  circumstance  in  which  we  may  think  pro 
per  to  compare  ideas.  See  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vof. 
I. p.  32. 


CHAP.    II.  AN    ESSAY   ON    TRUTH.  69 

indeed,  that  zao  certain  truth  can  become  an  object  of 
science,  till  it  be  expressed  in  words  ;  that,  if  express 
ed  in  words,  it  must  assume  the  form  of  a  proposi 
tion  ;  and  that  every  proposition,  being  either  affir 
mative  or  negative,  must  imply  a  comparison  of  the 
thing  or  subject,  with  that  quality  or  circumstance 
which  is  affirmed  or  denied,  to  belong  to,  or  agree 
with  it:  and  therefore  I  acknowledge,  that  in  science 
all  certainty  may  be  said  to  arise  from  a  comparison 
of  ideas.  But  the  generality  of  mankind  believe 
many  things  as  certain,  which  they  never  thought  of 
expressing  in  words.  An  ordinary  man  believer, 
that  himself,  his  family,  his  house,  and  cattle,  exist  > 
but,  in  order  to  produce  this  belief  in  his  mind,  is  it 
necessary,  that  ha  compare  those  objects  with  the 
general  idea  of  existence  or  non-existence,  so  as  to 
discern  their  agreement  with  the  one,  or  disagreement 
with  the  other  ?  I  cannot  think  it :  at  least,  if  he  has 
ever  made  such  a  comparison,  it  must  have  been 
without  his  knowledge  ;  for  I  am  convinced,  that,  if 
we  were  to  ask  him  the  question,  he  would  not  un 
derstand  us. 

Secondly,  I  apprehend,  that  Mr  HUME  has  not  e- 
numerated  all  the  relations  which,  when  discovered, 
give  rise  to  certainty.  T  am  certain,  that  I  am  the 
same  person  to-day  I  was  yesterday.  Mr  HUME 
indeed  will  not  allow  that  this  is  possible  *.  I  can 
not  help  it;  I  arn  certain  notwithstanding ;  and  I 
flatter  mysdf,  there  are  not  many  persons  in  the 
world  who  would  think  this  sentiment  of  mine  a 
paradox.  I  s^y,  then,  I  am  certain,  that  I  am  the 
same  person  to-day  I  was  yesterday.  Now,  the  re 
lation  expressed  in  this  proposition  is  net  resem 
blance,  nor  proportion  in  quantity  and  number,  nor 
degrees  of  any  common  quality,  nor  contrariety  :  it 
is  a  relation  different  from  all  these  ;  it  is  identity 
or  sameness. — That  London  is  contiguous  to  the 
Thames,  is  a  proposition  which  many  of  the  most 
*  See  Part  2-.  chap.  2.  sect  1.  of  this  Essay. 
F  2. 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

sensible  people  in  Europe  hold  to  be  certainly  true  ; 
and  yet  the  relation  expressed  in  it  is  none  of  those 
four  which  our  author  supposes  to  be  the  sole  pro 
prietors  of  certainty.  For  it  is  not  in  respect  of  re 
semblance,  of  proportion  in  quantity  or  number,  of 
contrariety,  or  of  degrees  in  any  common  quality, 
that  London  and  the  Thames  are  here  compared,  but 
purely  in  respect  of  place  or  situation. 

Again,  that  the  foregoing  maxim  is  neither  intui 
tively  nor  demonstrably  certain,  our  author  attempts 
to  prove  from  this  consideration,  that  we  cannot  de 
monstrate  the  impossibility  of  the  contrary.  Nay, 
the  contrary,  he  says,  is  not  inconceivable  :  "  for  we 
*'  can  conceive  an  object  non-existent  this  moment, 
"  and  existent  the  next,  without  joining  it  to  the  i- 
"  dea  of  a  cause,  which  is  an  idea  altogether  distinct 
"  and  different."  But  this  I  presume,  is  not  a  fair 
state  of  the  case.  Can  we  conceive  a  thing  begin 
ning  to  exist,  and  yet  bring  ourselves  to  think  that  a 
cause  is  not  necessary  to  the  production  of  such  a 
thing  ?  If  we  cannot,  (I  am  sure  I  cannot),  then  is 
the  contrary  of  this  maxim,  when  fairly  stated,  found 
to  be  truly  and  properly  inconceivable. 

But  whether  the  contrary  of  this  maxim  be  incon 
ceivable  or  not,  the  maxim  itself  may  be  intuitively 
certain.  Of  intuitive,  as  well  as  of  demonstrable 
truths,  there  are  different  kinds.  It  is  a  character  of 
some,  that  their  contraries  are  inconceivable  :  such 
are  the  axioms  of  geometry.  But  of  many  other 
intuitive  truths,  the  contraries  are  conceivable.  "  I 
do  feel  a  hard  body  ;" — "  I  do  not  feel  a  hard  body  ;" 
these  propositions  are  equally  conceivable  :  the  first 
is  true,  for  I  have  a  pen  between  my  fingers  ;  but  I 
cannot  prove  its  truth  by  argument ;  therefore  its 
truth  is  perceived  intuitively. 

Thus  far  we  have  argued  for  the  sake  of  argument, 
and  opposed  metaphysic  to  metaphysic  *,  in  order  to 
prove,  that  our  author's  reasoning  on  the  present  sub- 
*  See  part  3.  chap.  2,  of  this  Essay. 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  ?!• 

ject  is  not  conclusive.  It  is  now  time  to  enter  into  the 
merits  of  the  cause,  and  consider  the  matter  philoso 
phically  that  is,  according  to  fact  and  experience.  And 
in  this   way  we  bring  it  to  a  very  short  issue.     The 
point  in  dispute  is,  Whether  this  maxim,  "  What- 
"  ever  begins   to  exist,  proceeds  from  some  cause,'' 
be  intuitively  certain  ?   That  the  mind  naturally  and 
necessarily  assents  to  it  without  any  doubt,  and  con 
siders   its   contrary   as    impossible,'  I   have  already- 
shewn  ;    the    maxim,    therefore,    is   certainly    true. 
That   it   cannot,   by   any   argument,   or   medium  of 
proof,  be  rendered  more  evident  than  it  is  when  first 
apprehended   by   the   mind,   is  also  certain  ;  for  it  is 
of  itself  as   evident  as   any  proposition  that  can  be 
urged  in   proof  of  it.     If,  therefore,  this  maxim  be 
true,   (as  every  rational  being  feels,    and  acknow- 
ledgesj,  it   is    a  principle  of  common  sense  :  we  be 
lieve  it,   not   because   we  can  give  a  reason,  but  be 
cause,  by  the  law  of  our  nature,  we  must  believe  it. 
Our  opinion  of  the  necessity  of  a  cause  to  the  pro 
duction  of  every  thing  that  has  a  beginning,  is  by 
Mr  HUME  supposed  to  arise   from  observation  and 
experience.     It  is  true,  that  in  our   experience   we 
have  never  found  any  thing  beginning  to  exist,  and 
proceeding  from  no  cause  ;  but  I  imagine  it  will  not 
appear,  that  our  belief  of  this  axiom  hath  experience 
for  its  foundation.  For  le"t  it  be  remarked,  that  seme 
children,   at  a  time  when  their  experience  is  very 
scanty,  seem  to  be 'as  sensible  of  the  truth   of 'this 
axiom,  as  -many  persons  arrived  at   maturity.     I  do 
not  mean,  that  they  ever  repeat  it  in  the  form  of  a 
proposition  ;  or  that,  if  they  were  to  hear  it  repeated 
in  that  form  they  would  instantly  declare  their  as-* 
sent  to  it ;  for  a  proposition  can  never  be  rationally 
assented    to,   except   by   those   who   understand  the 
words   that   compose   it  :    but    I    mean,   that   these 
children  have  a  natural  propensity  to  inquire   aftet 
the  cause  of  any  effect  or  event  that  engages  their 
attention  -,  which  they  would  not  do;  if  the  view  of 
£3 


7*  AN   ESSAY  ON    fRUTH.  PART   I. 

an  event  or  effect  did  not  suggest  to  them,  that  a  cause 
is  necessary  to  its  production.  Their  curiosity  in 
asking  the  reasons  and  causes  of  every  thing  they 
see  and  hear,  is  often  very  remarkable,  and  rises  even 
to  impertinence  ;  at  least  it  is  called  so  when  one  is 
not  prepared  to  give  them  an  answer.  I  have  known 
a  child  to  break  open  his  drum,  to  see  if  he  could 
discover  the  cause  of  its  extraordinary  sound  ;  and 
that  at  the  hazard  of  rendering  the  play  thing  unser 
viceable,  and  of  being  punished  for  his  indiscretion. 
If  the  ardor  of  this  curiosity  were  always  propor 
tioned  to  the  extent  of  a  child's  experience,  or  to  the 
care  his  teachers  have  taken  to  make  him  attentive 
to  the  dependence  of  effects  on  causes,  we  might  then 
ascribe  it:  to  the  power  of  education,  or  to  a  habit 
contracted  by  experience.  But  every  one  who  has 
had  an  opportunity  of  conversing  with  children,  knows 
that  this  is  not  the  case  ;  and  that  their  curiosity 
cannot  otherwise  be  accounted  for,  than  by  suppos 
ing  it  instinctive,  and,  like  all  other  instincts,  strong 
er  in  some  minds,  and  weaker  in  others,  independent 
ly  on  experience  and  education,  and  in  consequence 
of  the  appointment  of  that  Being  who  had  been 
pleased  to  make  one  man  differ  from  another  in  his 
intellectual  accomplishments,  as  well  as  in  his  fea 
tures,  complexion,  and  size.  Nor  let  it  be  imagined, 
because  some  children  are  in  this  respect  more  cu 
rious  than  others,  that  therefore  the  belief  of  this 
maxim  is  instinctive  in  Some  minds  only  :  the  maxim 
may  be  equally  believed  by  all,  notwithstanding  this 
diversity.  For  do  we  not  find  a  similar  diversity 
In  the  genius  of  different  men  ?  Some  men  have  a 
philosophical  turn  of  mind,  and  love  to  investigate 
causes,  and  to  have  a  reason  ready  on  every  occasion  ; 
others  are  indifferent  as  to  these  matters,  being  in- 
grossed  by  studies  of  another  kind.  And  yet  I  pre 
sume  it  will  be  found,  that  the  truth  of  this  maxim 
is  felt  by  every  man>  though  perhaps  rr.any  me..i 

,     ,,          . 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  7J 

never  thought  of  putting  it  in  words  in  the  form  of 
a  proposition. 

We  repeat,  therefore,  that  this  axiom  is  one  of  the 
principles  of  common  sense,  which  every  rational  mind 
does  and  must  acknowledge  to  be  true  ;  not  because 
it  can  be  proved,  but  because  the  law  of  nature  de 
termines  us  to  believe  it  without  proof,  and  to  look 
upon  its  contrary  as  perfectly  absurd,  impossible, 
and  inconceivable. 

The  axiom  now  before  us  is  the  foundation  of  the 
most  important  argument  that  ever  employed  human 
reason  ;  I  mean  that  which,  from  the  works  that  are 
created,  evinces  the  eternal  power  and  godhead  of 
the  Creator.  That  argument,  as  far  as  it  resolves 
itself  into  this  axiom,  is  properly  a  demonstration, 
being  a  clear  deduction  from  a  self-evident  principle  ; 
and  therefore  no  man  can  pretend  to  understand  it 
without  feeling  it  to  be  conclusive.  So  that  what 
the  Psalmist  says  of  the  atheist  is  literally  true,  He 
is  a  fool  ;  as  really  irrational  as  if  he  refused  to  be 
convinced  by  a  mathematical  demonstration.  Nay, 
he  is.  more  irrational ;  because  there  is  no  truth  de 
monstrated  in  mathematics  which  so  many  powers  of 
our  nature  conspire  to  ratify,  and  with  which  the 
minds  of  the  whole  rational  creation  are  so  deeply 
impressed.  The  contemplation  of  the  Divine  Na 
ture  is  the  most  useful  and  the  most  ennobling 
exercise  in  which  our  faculties  can  be  engaged, 
and  recommends  itself  to  every  man  of  sound 
judgment  and  good  taste,  as  the  most  durable 
and  the  most  perfect  enjoyment  that  can  possibly  fall 
to  the  share  of  any  created  being.  Sceptics  may 
wrangle,  and  mockers  may  blaspheme  ;  but  the  pious 
man  knows  by  evidence  too  sublime  for  their  com 
prehension,  that  his  affections  are  not  misplaced,  and 
that  his  hopes  shall  not  be  disappointed  ;  by  evidence 
which,  to  every  sound  mind,  is  fully  satisfactory  ; 
but  which  to  the  humble  and  tender-hearted,  is  al 
together  overwhelming,  irresistible,  and  divine. 


74  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART;I«- 

That  many  of  the  objects  in  nature  have  had  a  be 
ginning,  is  obvious  to  our  own  senses  and  memory, 
or  confirmed  by  unquestionable  testimony  :  these, 
therefore,  according  to  the  axiom  we  are  here  con 
sidering,  must  be  believed  to  have  proceeded  from  a 
cause  adequate  at  least  to  the  efFecrs  produced.  That 
the  whole  sensible  universe  hath  to  us  the  appearance 
of  an  effect,  of  something  which  once  was  not,  and 
xvhich  exists  not  by  any  necessity  of  nature,  but  by 
the  arbitrary  appointment  of  some  powerful  and  in 
telligent  cause  different  from  and  independent  on  it  ; 

that  the  universe,  I  say,  has  this  appearance, 

cannot  be  denied  :  and  that  it  is  what  it  appears  to 
be,  an  effect  ;  that  it  had  a  beginning,  and  was  not 
from  eternity,  is  proved  by  every  sort  of  evidence 
the  subject  will  admit.  And  if  so,  we  offer  violence 
to  our  understanding,  when  we  attempt  to  believe 
that  the  whole  universe  does  not  proceed  from  some 
cause  ;  and  we  argue  unphilosophically  and  irration 
ally,  when  we  endeavour  to  disprove  this  natural  and 
universal  suggestion  of  the  human  mind. 

It  is  true,  the  universe  is,  as  one  may  say,  a  work 
sui  generis,  altogether  singular,  and  such  as  we  can 
not  properly  compare  to  other  xvorks  ;  because  in 
deed  all  works  are  comprehended  in  it.  But  that 
natural  dictate  of  the  mind  by  which  we  believe  the 
universe  to  have  proceeded  from  a  cause,  arises  from 
our  considering,  it  as  an  effect  ;  a  circumstance  in 
which  it  is  perfectly  similar  to  all  works  whatsoever. 
The  singularity  of  the  effect  rather  confirms  (if  that 
be  possible)  than  weakens  our  belief  of  the  necessity 
of  a  cause  ;  at  least  it  makes  us  more  attentive  to 
the  cause,  and  interests  us  more  deeply  in  it.  What 
is  the  universe,  but  a  vast  system  of  works  or  ef 
fects,  some  of  them  great,  and  others  small;  some 
more  and  some  less  considerable  ?  If  each  of  these 
works,  the  least  as  well  as  the  greatest,  require  a 
cause  for  its  production  ;  is  it  not  in  the  highest  de 
gree  absurd  and  unnatural  to  say,  .that  the  whole  is  ••• 


C.HAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  75 

not  the  effect  of  a  cause  ? — Each  link  of  a  great  chain 
must -be  supported  by  something,  but  the  whole  chain 
may  be  supported  by  nothing  : — Nothing  less  than 
an  ounce  can  be  a  counterpoise  to  an  ounce,  nothing 
less  than  a  pound  to  a  pound  ;  but  the  wing  of  a  gnat, 
or  nothing  at  all,  may  be  a  sufficient  counterpoise  to 
ten  hundred  thousand  pounds  : Are  not  these  as 
sertions  too  absurd  to  deserve  an  answer  ? 

The  reader,  if  he  has  the  misfortune  to  be  ac 
quainted  with  Mr  HUME'S  Essay  on  a  particular 
providence  and  a  future  state,  will  see,  that  these  re 
marks  are  intended  as  an  answer  to  a  very  strange 
argument  there  advanced  against  the  belief  of  a  Die- 
ty.  "  The  universe,"  we  are  told,  "  is  an  object 
"  quite  singular  and  unparalleled  ;  no  other  object 
*;  that  has  fallen  under  our  observation  bears  any 
41  similarity  to  it  ;  neither  it  nor  its  cause  can  be 
"  comprehended  under  any  known  species  ;  and 
*4  therefore  concerning  the  cause  of  the  universe  we 
"  can  form  no  rational  conclusion  at  all." 1  ap 
peal  to  any  man  of  sound  judgment,  whether  that 
suggestion  of  his  understanding,  which  prompts  him 
to  infer  a  cause  from  an  effect,  has  any  dependence 
upon  a  prior  operation  of  his  mind,  by  which  the 
effect  in  question  is  referred  to  its  genius  or  species. 
When  he  pronounces  concerning  any  object  which 
he  conceives  to  have  had  a  beginning,  that  it  must 
have  proceeded  from  some  cause,  does  this  judg 
ment  necessarily  imply  any  comparison  of  that  ob 
ject  with  others  of  a  like  kind  ?  If  the  new  object 
were  in  every  respect  unlike  to  other  objects,  would 
this  have  any  influence  on  his  judgment?  Would 
he  not  acknowledge  a  cause  to  be  as  necessary  fer 
tile  production  of  the  most  uncommon,  as  of  the 
most  familiar  object  ? — If  therefore  I  believe,  that 
I  myself  owe  my  existence  to  some  cause,  because 
there  is  something  in  my  mind  which  necessarily 
determines  me  to  this  belief,  I  must  also,  for  the 
very  same  reason,  believe,  that  the  whole  universe 


j6  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PRAT  I. 

(supposed  to  have  had  a  beginning)  proceeds  from 
some  cause.  The  evidence  of  both  is  the  same.  If 
I  believe  the  first  and  not  the  second,  I  believe  and 
disbelieve  the  same  evidence  at  the  same  time  ;  I 
believe  that  the  very  same  suggestion  of  my  under 
standing  is  both  true  and  false. 

Though  I  were  to  grant,  that,  when  an  object  is- 
reducible  to  no  known  genius',  no  rational  inference, 
can  be  made  concerning  its  cause  ;  yet  it  will  not 
follow,  that  our  inferences  concerning  the  cause  of. 
the  universe  are  irrational,  supposing  it  reasonable 
to  believe  that  the  universe  had  a  beginning.  If  there. 
be  in  the  universe  any  thing  which  is  reducible 
to  no  known  genius,  let  it  be  mentioned  :  if  there  be 
any  presumption  for  the  existence  of  such  a  thing, 
let  the  foundation  of  that  presumption  be  explained. 
And,  if  you  please,  I  shall,  for  argument's  sake,  ad 
mit,  that  concerning  the  cause  of  that  particular  thing, 
no  rational  conclusion  can  be  formed*  But  it  has 
never  been  asserted,  that  the  existence  of  such  a  thing 
is  either  real  or  probable.  Mr  HUME  only  asserts,, 
that  the  universe  itself,  not  any  particular  thing  in 
the  universe,  is  reducible  to  no  known  genius.  Well 
then,  let  me  ask,  What  is  the  universe  ?  A  word  ? 
No  ;  it  is  a  vast  collection  of  things. — Are  all  these 
things  reducible  to  genera  ?  Mr  HUME  does  not 
deny  it Each  of  these  things,  then,  if  it  had  a  be 
ginning,  must  also  have  hadacause  ?  It  must. — What 
thing  in  the  universe  exists  uncaused  ?  Nothing. — 
Is  this  a  rational  conclusion  ?  So  it  seems. — It  seems, 
then,  that  though  it  be  rational  to  assign  a  cause  to 
every  thing  in  the  universe,,  yet  to  assign  a  cause. 
to  the  universe  is  noc  rational  !  It  is  shameful 
thus  to  trifle  with  words.— In  fact,  this  argument 
of  Mr  HUME'S,,  so  highly  admired  by  its  Au 
thor,  is  no  argument  at  all.  It  is  founded  on  a  dis 
tinction  that  is  perfectly  inconceivable.  Twenty 
shillings  laid  on  a  table  make  a  pound  :  though  you. 
take  up  these  twenty  shillings,  yet  have  you  not  ta 
ken  up  the  pound  j  you  have  only  taken  up  twenty;.. 


CHAP.   II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  77 

shillings.  If  the  reader  cannot  enter  into  this  dis 
tinction,  he  u  ill  never  be  able  to  conceive  in  what 
the  force  of  Mr  HUME'S  argument  consists. 

If  the  universe  had  a  beginning,  it  must  have  had  a 
cause.  This  is  a  self-evident  axiom,  or  at  least  an 
undeniable  consequence  of  one.  We  necessarily  as 
sent  to  it  ;  such  is  the  law  of  our  nature.  If  we  de 
ny  it,  we  cannot,  without  absurdity,  believe  any 
thing  else  whatsoever  j  because  we  at  the  same 
time  deny  the  authenticity  of  those  instinctive  sugges 
tions  which  are  the  foundation  of  all  truth.  The 
Atheist  will  never  be  able  to  elude  the  force  of  this 
argument,  till  he  can  prove,  that  everything  in  nature 
exists  necessarily,  independently,  and  from  eter 
nity. 

If  Mr  HUME'S  argument  be  found  to  turn  to  so 
little  account,  from  the  simple  consideration  of  the 
universe,  as  existing,  and  as  having  had  a  beginning, 
it  will  appear  (if  possible)  still  more  irrational,  when 
we  take  a  view  of  the  universe,  and  its  parts  as  of 
works  curiously  adapted  to  certain  ends.  Their  ex 
istence  displays  the  necessity  of  a  powerful  cause  ; 
their  frame  proves  the  cause  to  be  intelligent,  good, 
and  wise.  The  meanest  of  the  works  of  nature 
(if  any  of  Nature's  works  may  be  called  mean), — 
the*  arrangement  necessary  for  the  production  of  the 
smallest  plant,  requires  in  the  cause  a  degree  of  pow 
er,  intelligence,  and  wisdom,  which  infinitely  tran 
scends  the  sublimest  exertions  of  human  ability. 
What  then  shall  we  say  of  the  cause  that  produces 
an  animal,  a  rational  soul,  a  world,  a  system  of 
worlds,  an  universe?  Shall  we  say,  that  infinite  pow 
er  and  wisdom  are  not  necessary  attributes  of  that 
universal  cause,  though  they  be  necessary  attributes 
of  the  cause  that  produces  a  plant  ?  Shall  we 
say,  that  the  maker  of  a  plant  may  be  acknowled 
ged  to  be  powerful,  intelligent,  and  wise  ;  because 
there  are  many  other  things  in  nature  that  resemble 
a  plant  j  but  that  we  cannot  rationally  acknowledge 


7  8  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

the  maker  of  the  universe  to  be  wise,  powerful,  or 
intelligent,  because  there  is  nothing  which  the  uni 
verse  resembles,  or  to  which  it  may  be  compared  ? 
Can  the  man  who  argues  in  this  manner  have  any 
meaning  to  his  words  ? 

For  an  answer  to  the  other  cavils  thrown  out  by 
Mr  HUME,  in  this  flimsy  essay  against  tiic  divine  attri 
butes,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  first  part  of  But- 
ler's  Analogy  of  Natural  and  Revealed  Religion. 
It  needs  not  be  matter  of  any  surprise,  that  we  name, 
on  this  occasion,  a  book  which  was  published  before 
Mr  HUML'S  essay  was  written.  With  infidel  wri 
ters  it  has  long  been  the  fashion,  (less  frequently  in 
deed  with  this  author  than  with  many  others),  to 
deliver  as  their  own,  and  as  entirely  new,  objections 
against  religion,  which  have  been  repeatedly  and  un 
answerably  confuted.  This  piece  of  craft  gives  no 
offence  to  their  disciples  ;  these  gentlemen,  if  they 
read  at  all,  generally  causing  to  confine  their  inqui 
ries  to  one  side  of  the  controversy  :  to  themselves  it 
is  a  considerable  saving  in  the  articles  of  time  and 
invention. 

SECT.     VI. 

Of  Probable  or  Experimental  Reasoning. 

TN  all  our  reasonings  from  the  cause  to  the  effect, 
•*•  we  proceed  on  a  supposition,  and  a  belief,  that 
the  course  of  nature  will  continue  to  be  in  time  to 
come  what  we  experience  it  to  be  at  present,  and 
remember  it  to  have  been  in  time  past.  This  pre 
sumption  of  continuance  is  the  foundation  of  all  our 
judgments  concerning  future  events  ;  and  this,  in 
many  cases,  determines  our  conviction  as  effectually 
as  any  proof  or  demonstration  whatsoever  ;  al 
though  the  conviction  arising  from  it  be  different  in 
kind  from  what  is  produced  by  strict  demonstration, 
as  well  as  from  those  kinds  of  conviction  that  attend 
the  evidence  of  sense,  memory,  and  abstract  intui 
tion.  The  highest  degree  of  conviction  in  reasoning 


CH.i.P.  II.  A\*    F..ffSAY    OX    TUL  ' 

from  causes  to  effects,  is  cxued  jworrt/  certain 

the  inferior  degrees  result   from  that  specie:;  of  cv:- 


pence  which  is  called  probability  or  vtrutimiliti 
That  all  men  will  die  ;  that  the  sun  will  rise  to- 
mo'rrovv,  and  the  sea  ebb  and  flow  ;  that  sleep  • 
continue  to  refresh,  and  food  to  nourish-  us  ;  that  {.he 
same  articulate  sounds  which  to-day  communicate 
the  ideas  of  virtue  and  vice,  meat  and  drink,  man 
and  beast,  will  to-morrow  communicate  the  same  i- 
deas  to  the  same  persons  ;  —  no  man  can  doubt,  with 
out  being  accounted  a  fool.  In  these,  and  in  all  othes 
instances  where  our  experience  of  the  past  has  b£ea 
equally  extensive  and  uniform,  our  judgment  con 
cerning  the  future  amounts  to  moral  certainty  ;  we 
believe,  with  full  assurance,  or  at  least  without  doubt 
that  the  same  laws  of  nature  which  have  hitherto 
operated,  will  continue  to  operate  as  long  as  we 
foresee  no  cause  to  interrupt  or  hinder  their  oper-» 
ation. 

But  no  person  who  attends  to  his  own  mind  will 
say,  that,  in  these  cases,  our  belief,  or  conviction, 
or  assurance,  is  the  eifect  of  a  proof,  or  of  any  thing 
like  it.  If  reasoning  be  at  all  employed,  it  is  only 
in  order  to  give  us  a  clear  view  of  our  past  experi 
ence  with  regard  to  the  point  in  question.  When 
this  view  is  obtained,  reasoning  is  no  longer  neces 
sary  ;  the  mind,  by  its  own  innate  force,  and  in  con 
sequence  of  an  irresistible  and  instinctive  impulse, 
infers  the  future  from  the  past  immediately,  and 
without  the  intervention  of  any  argument.  The  sea 
has  ebbed  and  flowed  twice  every  day  in  time  past  ; 
therefore  the  sea  will  continue  to  ebb  and  flow  twice 
every  day  in  the  time  to  come,  —  is  by  no  means  a 
logical  deduction  of  a  conclusion  from  premises  *. 
When  our  experience  of  the  past  has  not  been  uniform 
*  This  remark  was  first  made  by  Mr  HUME.  See  it 
illustrated  at  great  length  in  his  Essays,  part  2.  sect.  4. 
'See  also  Dr  Campbell'*  Dissertion  on  Miracles,  p.  13,  14, 


8o  AN    ESS  AT    ON    TRUTH.  PART    I, 

nor  extensive,  our  opinion  with  regard  to  the  fuf.ire 
falls  short  of  moral  certainty  ;  and  amounts  oiJy  to 
a  greater  or  less  degree  or  smaller  proportion  of 
favourable  instances  : — we  say,  such  an  event  will 
probably  happen,  such  another  is  wholly  improbable. 
If  a  medicine  has  proved  salutary  in  one  instance, 
and  failed  in  five,  a  physician  would  not  chuse  to  re. 
commend  it,  except  in  a  desperate  case  ;  and  would 
then  consider  its  success  as  a  thing  rather  to  be  wished 
than  expected.  An  equalnumber  of  favourable  and  un 
favourable  instances  leave  the  mind  in  a  state  of 
suspense,  without  exciting  the  smallest  degree  of  as 
surance  on  either  side,  except,  perhaps,  what  may 
arise  from  our  being  more  interested  on  the  one  side 
than  on  the  other.  A  physician  influenced  by  such 
evidence  would  say,  *'  My  patient  may  recover,  and 
'*  he  may  die  :  I  am  sorry  to  say,  that  the  former 
"event  is  not  one  whit  more  probable  than  the  lat- 
•**  ter."  -When  the  favourable  instances  exceed  the 
unfavourable  in  number,  we  begin  to  think  the  fu 
ture  event  in  some  degree  probable ;  and  more  or  less 
so,  according  to  the  surplus  of  favourable  instances. 
A  few  favourable  instances,  without  any  mixture  of 
•nnfavourable  ones,  render  an  event  probable  in  a 
pretty  high  degree  :  but  the  favourable  experience 
must  be  at  once  -extensive  and  uniform,  before  it 
can  produce  moral  certainty. 

A  man  brought  into  being  at  maturity,  and  placed 
In  a  desert  island,  would  abandon  himself  to  despair, 
•/vhen  he  first  saw  the  sun  set,  and  the  night  come 
on  ;  for  he  could  have  no  expectation  that  ever  the 
day  would  be  renewed.  But  he  is  transported  with 
]oy,  when  he  again  beholds  the  glorious  orb  appear 
ing  in  the  east,  and  the  heavens  and  the  earth  illumi 
nated  as  before.  He  again  views  the  declining  sun 
with  apprehension,  yet  not  without  hope ;  the  second 
niglit  is  less  dismal  than  the  first,  but  is  still  very 
uncomfortable  on  account  of  the  weakness  of  the 
probability  produced  by  one  favourable  instance.  Ae 


CHAP.  II.  AN    ESSAY    ON  TRUTH.  8l 

the  instances  grow  more  numerous,  the  probability 
becomes  stronger  and  stronger  :  yet  it  may  be  ques 
tioned,  whether  a  man  in  these  circumstances  would 
ever  arrive  at  so  high  a  degree  of  moral  certainty  in 
this  matter,  as  we  experience  ;  who  know,  not  only 
that  the  sun  has  risen  every  day  since  we  began  to 
exist,  but  also  that  the  same  phenomenon  has  happen, 
ed  regularly  for  more  than  five  thousand  years,  with 
out  failing"  in  a  single  instance.  The  judgment  of 
our  great  epic  poet  appears  no  where  to  more  advan 
tage  than  in  his  eight  book  ;  where  Adam  relates  to 
the  atigel  what  passed  in  his  mind  immediately  after 
his  awaking  into  life.  The  following  passage  is  at 
once  trunscendently  beautiful,  and  philosophically 
just  r 

*'  While  thus  I  call'd,  and  stray'd  I  knew  not  whither, 
"  From  where  I  first  drew  air,  and  first  beheld 
fl  This  happy  light,  when  answer  none  return M, 
'*  On  a  green  shady  bank,  profuse  of  flowers, 
"  Pensive  I  sat  me  down  j  there  gentle  sleep 
'*  First  found  me,  and  with  soft  oppression  seiz'd 
"  My  droused  sense  5  untroubled,  though  I  thought 
"  I  then  was  passing  to  my  former  state 
4i  Insensible,  and  forthwith  to  dissolve  *." 

Paradise  Lost,  b.  8.  1.  283, 

Adam  at  this  time  had  no  experience  of  sleep,  and 
therefore  could  not,  with  any  probability,  expect  that 
he  was  to  recover  from  it.  Irs  approaches  were  at 
tended  with  feelings  similar  to  those  he  had  experien 
ced  when  awaking  from  non-existence,  and  would  na 
turally  suggest  that  idea  to  his  mind  ;  and  as  he  had 
no  reason  to  expect  that  his  life  was  to  continue, 
would  intimate  the  probability  that  he  was  again 
upon  the  verge  of  an  insensible  stale. 

Now  it  is  evident,  from  what  has  been  already  said, 
that  the  degree  of  probability  must  be  intuitively 

*  The  beauty  of  these  lines  did  not  escape  the  elegant 
and  judicious  Addison  j  but  that  author  does  not  assigiTthe 
reason  of  his  approbation.  Spect.  No.  345-. 


A!?  JCbSAY  OU  TRUTH'.  -     ?»  r  ; . 

r .the, -degree  of  assurance  spontaneous1!  v 
;-ud  instinctively  excited  in  the  mind,  upon  the  bare 
consideration  of  the  instances  on  either  side  ;  and  that 
uTi  of  argument  to  connect  the  fn- 
tvrz  evirnt  with  the  .past  experience.  Reasoning  may 
i)e  employed  in  bringing  the  instances  into  view  ; 
but  when  ti-'it  is  done,  it  is  no  longer  necessary.  And 
>1  you  were  to  argue  with  a  man,,  in  order  to  convince 
him  th;:t  a  terrain  future  event  is  not  so  im 
probable  as  he  seems  to  think,  you  would  only  make 
him  take  notice  of  same  favourable  instance  which 
lie  had  overlooked,  or  endeavour  to  render  him  sus 
picious  of  the  reality  of  some  of  the  unfavourable  in 
stances  ;  leaving  it  to  himself  to  estimate  the  degree 
of  probability.  If  he  continue  refractory,  notwith 
standing  that  his  view  of  the  subject  is  the  same  with 
yours,  he  can  be  reasoned  with  in  no  other  way,  than 
by  your  appealing  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind. 

SECT.     VII. 

Of  Analogical  Reasoning. 

REASONING  from  analogy,  when  traced  up  to 
its  source,  will  be  found  in  like  manner  to  ter 
minate  in  a  certain  instinctive  propensity,  implanted 
in  us  by  our  Maker,  which  leads  us  to  expect,  that 
similar  causes  in  similar  circumstances,  do  probably 
produce,  or  will  probably  produce,  similar  effects. 
The  probability  which  this  kind  of  evidence  is  fit 
ted  to  illustrate,  does,  like  the  former,  admit  of  a 
vast  variety  of  degrees,  from  absolute  doubting  up 
to  moral  certainty.  When  the  ancient  philosopher 
who  was  shipwrecked  in  a  strange  country,  disco 
vered  certain  geometrical  figures  drawn  upon  the 
sand  by  the  sea-shore,  he  was  naturally  led  to  be 
lieve,  with  a  degree  of  assurance  not  inferior  to  mo 
ral  certainty,  that  the  country  was  inhabited  by 
men,  some  of  whom  were  men  of  study  and  science, 
like  himself.  Had  these  figures  been  less  regular, 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  83 

and  liker  the  appearance  of  chance-work,  the  pre 
sumption  from  analogy,  of  the  country  being  inha 
bited,  would  have  been  weaker  ;  and  had  they  been 
of  such  a  nature  as  left  it  altogether  dubious,  whe 
ther  they  were  the  work  of  accident  cr  of  design, 
the  evidence  would  have  been  too  ambiguous  to 
serve  as  a  foundation  for  any  opinion. 

In  reasoning  from  analog}',  we  argue  from  a  fact 
or  thing  experienced  to  something  similar  not  expe 
rienced  ;  and  from  our  view  of  the  former  arises  an 
opinion  with  regard  to  the  latter  ;  which  opinion  will 
be  found  to  imply  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  assur 
ance,  according  as  the  instance yro/ra  which  we  argue 
is  more  or  less  similar  to  the  instance  to  which  we  ar 
gue.    Why  the  degree  of  our  assurance  is  determined 
by  the  degree  of  likeness,  we  cannot  tell  ;  but  we 
know  by  experience,  that  this  is  the  case  :  and  by  ex 
perience  also  we  know,  that  our  assurance,  such  as  it- 
is,  arises  immediately  in  the  mind,  whenever  we  fix  our 
attention  on  the  circumstances  in  which  the  probable- 
event  is  expected,  so  as  to  trace  their  resemblance  to 
those  circumstances  in  which  we  have  known  a  simi 
lar  event  to  take  place.     A  child    who  has   been 
burnt  with  a  red-hot  coal,  is  careful  to-  avoid  touch 
ing  the  flame  of  a  candle  j  for  aa,  the   visible  quali 
ties  of  the  latter  are  like  to  those  of  the  former,  he 
expects,  with  a  very  high  degree  of  assurance,  that 
the  effects   produced  by  the   candle,  operating   on 
his  fingers,   will  be  similar  to  those  produced  by 
the  burning  coal.     And  it  deserves  to  be   remar 
ked,  that   the   judgment   a    child  forms-  oa    these 
occasions   may  arise,  and  often   doth  arise,  previ 
ous   to   education  and   reasoning,  and  while  expe 
rience  is   very   limited.       Knowing    that  a   lighted- 
candle  is  a  dangerous  object,  he  will  be  shy  of  touch 
ing  a  glow-worm,  or   a  piece  of  wet  fish  shining  in 
the  dark,  because  of  their  resemblance  to  the  flame 
of  a  candle  :  but  as  this   resemblance  is  but  imper 
fect,  his  judgment,  with  regard  to  the  consequences 
G  3 


84  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

of  touching  these  objects,  will  probably  be  more  in 
clined  to  doubt,  than  in  the  former  case,  where  the 
instances  were  more  similar. 

Those  who  are  acquainted  with  astronomy,  think 
U  extremely  probable,  that  the  planets  are  inhabi 
ted  by  living  creatures,  on  account  of  their  being  in 
all  other  respects  so  like  to  our  earth.  A  man  who 
thinks  them  not  much  bigger  than  they  appear  to 
the  eye,  never  dreams  of  such  a  notion  ;  for  to  him 
they  seem  in  every  respect  unlike  to  our  earth  :  and 
there  is  no  other  way  of  bringing  him  over  to  the 
astronomer's  opinion,  than  by  explaining  to  him 
those  particulars  in  which  the  planets  and  our  earth 
resemble  one  another.  As  soon  as  he  comprehends 
these  particulars,  and  this  resemblance,  his  mind  of 
its  own  accord  admits  the  probability  of  the  new  o- 
i>inion,  without  being  led  to  it  by  any  medium  of 
proof,  connecting  the  facts  he  hath  experienced  with 
other  similar  and  probable  facts  lying  beyond  the 
reach  of  his  experience.  Such  a  proof  indeed  could 
not  be  given.  If  he  were  not  convinced  of  the  pro 
bability  by  the  bare  view  of  the  facts,  you  would 
impute  his  perseverance  in  his  old  opinion,  either  to 
obstinacy,  or  to  wTant  of  common  sense  ;  two  men 
ial  disorders  for  which  logic  provides  no  remedy. 

SECT.     VIII. 

Of  Faith  in  Testimony. 

r~PHERE  are  in  the  world  many  men,  whose  de- 
-*-  claration  concerning  any  fact  which  they  have 
^een,  and  of  which  they  are  competent  judges, 
•would  engage  my  belief  as  effectually  as  the  evi 
dence  of  my  own  senses.  A  metaphysician  may  tell 
-me,  that  this  implicit  confidence  in  testimony  is  un- 
xvorthy  of  a  philosopher  and  a  logician,  and  that  my 
faith  ought  to  be  more  rational.  It  may  be  so  ;  but 
I  believe  as  before  notwithstanding.  And  I  find, 
that  all  men  have  the  same  confidence  in  the  testi 
mony  of  certain  persons  j  and  that  if  a  man  should 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  85 

refuse  to  think  as  other  men  do  in  this  matter,  he 
would  be  called  obstinate,  whimsical,  narrow-min 
ded,  and  a  fool.  If,  after  the  experience  of  so  many 
ages,  men  are  still  disposed  to  believe  the  word  of 
an  honest  man,  and  find  no  inconvenience  in  doing 
so,  I  must  conclude,  that  it  is  not  only  natural,  but 
rational,  expedient,  and  manly,  to  credit  such  tes 
timony  :  and  though  I  were  to  peruse  volumes  of 
metaphysic  written  in  proof  of  the  fallability  of  tes 
timony,  I  should  still,  like  the  rest  of  the  world, 
believe  credible  testimony  without  fear  of  inconve 
nience.  I  know  very  well,  that  testimony  is  not 
admitted  in  proof  of  any  doctrine  in  mathematics, 
because  the  evidence  of  that  science  is  quite  of  a  dif-- 
ferent  kind.  But  is  truth  to  be  found  in  mathema 
tics  only  ?  is  the  geometrician  the  only  person  who 
exerts  a  rational  belief?  do  we  never  find  conviction 
arise  in  our  minds,  except  when  we  contemplate  an 
intuitive  axiom,  or  run  over  a  mathematical  demon 
stration  ?  In  natural  philosophy,  a  science  not  in 
ferior  to  pure  mathematics  in  the  certainty  of  its 
conclusions,  testimony  is  admitted  as  a  sufficient 
proof  of  many  facts.  To  believe  testimony,  there 
fore,  is  agreeable  to  nature,  to  reason,  and  to  sound 
philosophy. 

When  we  believe  the  declaration  of  an  honest 
man,  in  regard  to  facts  of  which  he  has  had  expe 
rience,  we  suppose,  that  by  the  view  or  percep 
tion  of  these  facts,  his  senses  have  been  affected  in 
the  same  manner  as  ours  would  have  been  if  we  had 
been  in  his  place.  So  that  faith  in  testimony  is  m 
part  resolvable  into  that  conviction  which  is  produ 
ced  by  the  evidence  oi  sense  :  at  least,  if  we  did  not 
believe  our  senses,  we  could  not,  without  absurdi 
ty,  believe  testimony  ;  if  we  have  any  tendency  to 
doubt  the  evidence  of  sense,  we  must,  in  regard  to 
testimony,  be  equally  sceptical.  Those  philoso 
phers,  therefore,  who  would  persuade  us  to  reject 
the  evidence  of  sense,  among  whom  are  to  be  rec- 


86  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

koned  all  who  deny  the  existence  of  matter,  are  not 
to  be  considered  as  mere   theorists,  whose  specula 
tions  are  of  too  abstract  a  nature  to  do  any  harm,  but 
as  men  of  the   most  dangerous   principles.     Not  ta 
mention  the  bad  effects  of  such  doctrine  upon  science 
in  general  *,  I  would  only  at  present  call  upon  the 
reader  to  attend  to  its   influence  upon  OUT  religious 
opinions   and  historical   knowledge.     Testimony  is 
the  grand  external   evidence   of  Christianity.     All 
the- miracles  wrought  by  our  Saviour,  and  particu 
larly   that   great  decisive  miracle,  his   resurrection 
from  the  dead,  were   &o  many  appeals  to  the  senses 
of  men,  in  proof  of  his  divine  mission  :   and  what 
ever  some  unthinking  cavillers  may  object,  this  we 
affirm  to  be  not  only  the  most  proper,  but  the  only 
proper,  kind  of  external  evidence,  that  can  be  em 
ployed,  consistently  with  man's  free  agency  and  mo 
ral  probation,  for  establishing  a  popular  and  univer 
sal  religion  among  mankind.    Now,  if  matter  has  no 
existence    but  in  our  mind,  our  senses  are  deceit 
ful  :  and  if  so,   St  Thomas  must  have  been  deceived 
when  he  felt,  and  the  rest  of  the  apostles  when  they 
saw,  the  body  of  their  Lard  after  his  resurrection  ; 
and  all  the  facts  recorded  in  history,  both  sacred  and 
civil,  were  no  better  than  dreams  or  delusions,  with 
which  perhaps  St  Matthew,  St  John,   and  St  Luke, 
Thucydides,  Xenophon,    and    Cesar    were  affected, 
but  which  they  had  no  more  ground  of  believing  to 
be  real,  than  I  have  of  believing,  in  consequence  of  my 
having  dreamed  it,  that  I  was  last  night  in  Constanti 
nople.       Nay,  if  I  admit  BERKELEY'S  and  HUME'S 
theory,  of  the  non-existence  of  matter,  I  must  be 
lieve,  that  what  my  senses  declare  to  be  true,  is  not 
only  not  truth,  but  directly  contrary  to  it.    For  does 
not  this  philosophy  teach,  that  what  seems  to  human 
sense  to  exist,  does  not  exist ;  and  that  what  seems 
corporeal  is  incorporeal  ?  and  are  not  existence  and 

*  See  below,  part  2.  chap.  2.  sect,  2> 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY   ON    TRUTH.  87 

non-existence,  materiality  and  immateriality,  con 
traries  ?  Now,,  if  men  ought  to  believe  the  contrary 
of  what  their  senses  declare  to  be  true,  the  evidence 
of  all 'hi story,  of  all  testimony,  and  indeed  of  all  ex 
ternal  perception,  is  no  longer  any  .evidence  of  the 
reality  of  the  facts  warranted  by  it ;  but  becomes, 
on  the  contrary,  a  proof  that  those  facts  did  never 
happen.  If  it  be  urged,  as  an  objection  to  this  rea 
soning,  that  BERKELEY  was  a  Christian,  notwith 
standing  his  scepticism  (or  paradoxical  belief)  in  o- 
ther  matters;  I  answer,  that  though  he  maintained 
the  doctrine  of  the  non-existence  of  body,  there  is 
no  evidence  that  he  either  believed  or  understood 
it :  nay,  there  is  positive  evidence  that  he  did  nei 
ther  ;  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  show  afterwards*. 

Again,  when  we  believe  a  man's  word,  because 
we  know  him  to  be  honest,  or,  in  other  words,  have 
had  experience  of  his  veracity,  all  reasoning  on  such 
testimony  is  supported  by  the  evidence  of  expe 
rience,  and  by  our  presumption  of  the  continuance 
of  the  laws  of  nature  :, — the  first  evidence  resolves 
itself  into  instinctive  conviction,  and  the  second  is 
itself  an  instinctive  presumption.  The  principles  of 
common  sense,  therefore,  are  the  foundation  of  all 
true  reasoning  concerning  testimony  of  this  kind. 

It  is  said  by  MrHfc?M£,in  his  Essay  an  Miracles, 
that  our  belief  of  any  fact  from  the  report  of  eye 
witnesses  is  derived  from  no  other  principle  than  ex 
perience  ;  that  is,  from  our  observation  of  the  vera 
city  of  human  testimony,  and  of  the  usual  conformi 
ty  of  facts  to  the  report  of  witnesses.  This  doctrine 
is  confuted  with  great  elegance  and  precision,  and 
with  invincible  force  of  argument,  in  Dr  Campbell's 
Dissertation  on  Miracles.  It  is,  indeed,  like  most 
of  Mr  HUME'S  capital  doctrines,  directly  repugnant 
to  matter  of  fact :  for  our  credulity  is  greatest  when 
our  experience  is  least:  that  is,  when  we  are 

*  See  part  2.  chap.  2.  sect,  2,  of  tnis  Essay. 


$8  Atf  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART   I. 

dren  ;  and  generally  grows  less  and  less,  in  propor 
tion  as  our  experience  becomes  more  and  more  ex 
tensive  :  the  very  contrary  of  which  must  happen,  if 
Mr  HUME'S  doctrine  were  true. 

There  is  then  m  a  man  a  propensity  to  believe 
testimony  antecedent  to  that  experience,  which  Mr 
HUME  supposes,  of  the  conformity  of  facts  to  the  re 
port  of  witnesses.  But  there  is  another  sort  of  ex 
perience,  which  may  perhaps  have  soirre  influence  in 
determining  children  to  believe  in  testimony.  Man 
is  naturally  disposed  to  speak  as  he  thinks  j  and  most 
men  do  so  :  for  the  most  egregious  liars  speak  truth 
a  hundred  times  *  for  once  that  they  utter  falsehood. 
It  is  unnatural  for  human  creatures  to  falsify  ;  and 
they  never  think  of  departing  from  the  truth,  except 
they  have  some  end  to  answer  by  it.  Accordingly 
children,  white  their  native  simplicity  remains  un- 
corruptcd,  while  they  have  no  vice  to  disguise,  no 
punishment  to  fear,  and  no  artificial  scheme  to  pro 
mote,  do  for  the  most  part,  if  not  always,  speak  as 
they  think :  and  so  generally  is  their  veracity  ac 
knowledged,  that  it  has  passed  into  a  proverb,  That 
children  and  fools  tell  truth.  Now  I  am  not  cer 
tain,  but  this  their  innate  propensity  to  speak  truth, 
may  in  part  account  for  their  readiness  to  believe 
what  others  speak.  They  do  not  suspect  the  vera- 
eity  of  others,  because  they  are  conscious  and  con 
fident  of  their  own.  However,  there  is  nothing  ab 
surd  or  unphilosophtcal  in  supposing,  that  they  be 
lieve  testimony  by  one  law  of  their  nature,  and 
speak  truth  by  another.  I  seek  not  therefore  to  re 
solve  the  former  principle  into  the  latter ;  I  mention 
them  for  the  sake  only  of  observing,  that  whether 
they  be  allowed  to  be  different  principles,  or  differ 
ent  effects  of  the  same  principle,  our  general  doc 
trine  remains  equally  clear,  namely,  That  all  rea 
soning  concerning  the  evidence  of  testimony  does  fi- 

*  See  Dr  Reid's  Inquiry  into  the  Human  Miad,  p.  474, 


CHAP.    II.  AN   ESSAY    ON    TRUTH,  % 

nally  terminate  in  the  principles  of  common  sense. 
This  is  true,  as  far  as  our  faith  in  testimony  is  re 
solvable  iato  experi mental  conviction  ;  because  we 
have  already  shown,  that  all  reasoning  from  expe 
rience  is  resolvable  into  intuitive  principles,  either 
of  certain  or  of  probable  evidence  :  and  surely  it  is 
no  less  true,  as  far  as  jour  faith  in  testimony  is  itself 
instinctive,  and  such  as  cannot  be  resolved  into  any 
liigher  principle. 

Our  frith  in  testimony  does  often,  but  not  always, 
amount  to  absolute  certainty.  That  there  is  such  a 
city  as  Constantinople,  such  a  country  as  Lapland^ 
and  such  a  mountain  as  the  peak  of  TeneriiFe  ;  that 
there  were  such  men  as  Hannibal  and  Julius  Cesar; 
that  England  was  conquered  by  Vv'illiam  the  Norman  ; 
that  Charles  I.  was  beheaded  ; — of  these,  and  such 
like  truths,  every  person  acquainted  with  his 
tory  and  geography  accounts  himself  absolutely  cer 
tain.  When  a  number  of  persons,  not  acting  in  con 
cert,  having  no  interest. to  disguise  the  truth,  and  suf 
ficient  judges  of  that  to  which  they  bear  testimony, 
concur  in  making  the  same  report,  it  would  be  ac 
counted  madness  not  to  believe  them.  Nay,  when 
a  number  of  witnesses,  separately  examined,  and 
having  had  no  opportunity  to  concert  a  plan  before 
hand,  do  all  agree  in  their  declarations,  we  make  no 
scruple  of  yielding  full  faith  to  their  testimony,  even 
though  we  have  no  evidence  of  their  honesty  or 
skill  ;  nay,  though  they  be  notorious  both  for  kna 
very  and  folly  :  because  the  fictions  of  the  human 
mind  being  infinite,  it  is  impossible  that  each  of 
these  witnesses  should,  by  mere  accident,  devise  the 
very  same  circumstances  ;  if  therefore  their  declara 
tions  concur,  this  is  a  certain  proof,  that  there  is  no 
fiction  in  the  case,  and  that  they  all  speak  from  real 
experience  and  knowledge.  The  inference  we  form 
on  these  occasions  is  supported  by  arguments  drawn 
from  our  experience  ;  and  all  arguments  of  this  sor£ 
are  resolvable  into  the  principles  of  common  sense,, 


90  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  r. 

In  general,  it  will  be  found  true  of  all  our  reasonings 
concerning  testimony,  that  they  are  founded,  either 
mediately  or  immediately,  upon  instinctive  convic 
tion  or  instinctive  assent  ;  so  that  he  who  has  re 
solved  to  believe  nothing  but  what  he  can  give  a 
reason  for,  can  never,  consistently  with  this  resolu 
tion,  believe  any  thing,  either  as  certain  or  as  pro 
bable,  upon  the  testimony  of  other  men* 

SECT.     IX. 

Conclusion  of  this  Chapter. 

HP  HE  conclusion  to  which  we  are  led  by  the  above 
•*•  induction,  would  perhaps  be  admitted  by  some 
to  be  self-evident,  or  at  least  to  stand  in  no  great- 
need  of  illustration  ;  to  others  it  might  have  been 
proved  a  prioriin  very  few  words  ;  but  to  the  greater 
part  of  readers,  a  detail  of  particulars  may  be  ne 
cessary,  in  order  to  produce  that  steady  and  ivelt- 
gronnded  conviction  which  it  is  our  ambition  to  es 
tablish. 

The  argument  a  priori  might  be  comprehended  in 
the  following  words.  If  there  be  any  creatures  in 
human  shape,  who  deny  the  distinction  bet  ween  truth 
and  falsehood,  or  who  are  unconscious  of  that  dis 
tinction,  they  are  far  beyond  the  reaeh,  and  below 
the  notice,  of  philosophy,  and  therefore  have  no  con 
cern  in  this  inquiry.  Whoever  is  sensible  of  that 
distinction,  and  is  willing  to  acknowledge  it,  must 
confess,  that  truth  is  something  fixed  and  determinate, 
depending  not  upon  man,  but  upon  the  Author  of 
nature.  The  fundamental  principles  of  truth  must 
therefore  rest  upon  their  own  evidence,  perceived  in 
tuitively  by  the  understanding.  If  they  did  not,  if 
reasoning  were  necessary  to  enforce  them,  they  must 
be  exposed  to  perpetual  vicissitude,  and  appear  inider 
a  different  form  in  every  individual,  according  to  the 
peculiar  turn  and  character  of  his  reasoning  powers. 
Were  this  the  case,  no  man  could  know,  of  any  pro- 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  79 

position,  whether  it  were  true  or  false,  till  after  he 
had  heard  all  the  arguments  that  had  been  urged  for 
and  against  it  ;  and,  even  then,  he  could  not  know 
with  certainty,  whether  he  had  heard  all  that  could 
be  urged  :  future  disputants  might  overturn  the  for 
mer  arguments,  and  produce  new  ones,  to  continue 
unanswered  for  a  while,  and  then  submit,  in  their 
turn,  to  their  successors.  Were  this  the  case,  there 
could  be  no  such  thing  as  an  appeal  to  the  common 
sense  of  mankind,  even  as  in  a  state  of  nature  there 
can  be  no  appeal  to  the  law ;  every  man  would  be 
"  a  law  unto  himself,'*  not  in  morals  only,  but  in 
science  of  every  kind. 

We  sometimes  repine  at  the  narrow  limits  pre 
scribed  to  human  capacity.  Hitherto  shalt  thou 
come,  and  no  further,  seems  a  hard  prohibition,  when 
applied  to  the  operations  of  mind.  But  as,  in  the 
material  world,  it  is  to  this  prohibition  man  owes  his 
security  and  existence  ;  so,  in  the  immaterial  system, 
it  is  to  this  we  owe  our  dignity,  our  virtue,  and  our 
happiness.  A  beacon  blazing  from  a  well-known 
promontory  is  a  welcome  object  to  the  bewildered 
mariner ;'  who  is  so  far  from  repining  that  he  has 
not  the  beneficial  light  in  his  own  keeping,  that  he  is 
sensible  its  utility  depends  on  its  being  placed  on  the 
firm  land,  and  commirted  to  the  care  of  others. 

We  have  now  proved,  that  "  except  we  believe 
"  many  things  without  proof,  we  never  can  believe 
"  any  thing  at  all ;  for  that  all  sound  reasoning  must 
"  ultimately  rest  on  the  principles  of  common  sense, 
"  that  is,  on  principles  intuitively  certain,  or  intui- 
"  tively  probable  ;  and,  consequently,  that  common 
"  sense  is  the  ultimate  judge  of  truth,  to  which  reason 
"  must  continually  act  in  subordination  *."  To 
common  sense,  therefore,  all  truth  must  be  conform 
able  ;  this  is  its  fixed  and  invariable  standard.  And 
whatever  contradicts  common  sense,  or  is  inconsis- 

*  See  part  1.  chap.  J.  sub,  fin. 
H 


8o  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  r. 

f-ent  with  that  standard,  though  supported  by  argu- 
guments  that  are  deemed  unanswerable,  and  by  names 
that  are  celebrated  by  all  the  oritics,  academies,  and 
potentates  on  earth,  is  not  truth,  but  falsehood.  In 
a  word,  the  dictates  of  common  sense  are,  in  respect 
to  human  knowledge  in  general,  what  the  axioms  of 
geometry  are  in  respect  to  mathematics  :  on  the  sup 
position  that  those  axioms  are  false  or  dubious,  all 
mathematical  reasoning  falls  to  the  ground  ;  and  on 
the  supposition  that  the  dictates  of  common  sense 
are  erroneous  or  deceitful,  all  science,  truth,  and  vir 
tue  are  vain. 

I  know  not  but  it  may  be  urged  as  an  objection  to 
this  doctrine,  that,  if  we  grant  common  sense  to  be 
the  ultimate  judge  in  all  disputes,  a  great  part  of 
ancient  and  modern  philosophy  becomes  useless.  I 
0  J'dmit  the  objection  with  all  my  heart,  in  its  full  force, 
and  with  all  its  consequences  ;  and  yet  I  must  repeat, 
that  if  common  sense  be  supposed  fallacious,  all 
knowledge  is  at  an  end  ;  and  that  even  a  demonstra 
tion  of  the  fallacy  would  itself  be  fallacious  and  fri 
volous.  For  if  the  dictates  of, my  nature  deceive  me 
in  one  case,  how  shall  I  know  that  they  do  not  de 
ceive  me  in  another?  When  a  philosopher  demon 
strates  to  me,  that  matter  exists  not  but  in  my  mind, 
and,  independent  on  me  and  my  faculties,  has  no  ex 
istence  at  all  ;  before  I  admit  his  demonstration,  I 
must  disbelieve  all  my. senses,  and  distrust  every 
principle  .of  belief  within  -me  :  *  before  I  admit  his 
demonstration,  I  must  be  convinced,  that  I  and  all 
mankind  arc  fools  ;  that  our  Maker  made  us  such, 
and  from  the  beginning  intended  to  impose  on  us  ; 
and  that  it  was  not  till  about  the  six-thousandth  year 
of  the  world  when  this  imposture  was  discovered  ; 
and  then  discovered,  not  by  a  divine  revelation,  not 
by  any  rational  investigation  of  the  laws  of  nature, 
not  by  any  inference  from  previous  truths  of  acknow 
ledged  authority,  but  by  a  pretty  play  of  English 
and  French  words,  to  which  the  learned  have  given 


CKAF.    II.  AI7  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  8 1 

the  name  of  metaphysical  reasoning.  Before  I  admit ' 
this  pretended  demonstration,  I  must  bring  myself 
to  believe  what  I  find  to  be  incredible  ;  which  seems 
to  me  not  a  whit  less  difficult  than  to  perform  what 
is  impossible.  And  when  all  this  is  done,  if  it  were 
possible  that  all  this  could  be  done,  pray  what  is 
science,  or  truth,  or  falsehood  ?  Shall  I  believe  no 
thing  ?  or  shall  I  believe  every  thing  ?  Or  am  I  ca 
pable  either  of  belief,  of  of  disbelief?  or  do  I  ex 
ist  ?  or  is  there  such  a  thing  as  existence  ? 

The  end  of  all  science,  and  indeed  of  every  useful 
pursuit,  is  to  make  men  happier,  by  improving  them 
in  wisdom  and  virtue.  I  beg  leave  to  ask,  whether 
the  present  race  of  men  owe  any  part  of  their  virtue, 
•wisdom,  or  happiness,  to  what  metaphysicians  have 
written  in  proof  of  the  non-existence  of  matter,  and 
the  necessity  of  human  actions  ?  If  it  be  answered/ 
That  cur  happiness,  wisdom,  and  virtue,  are  not  at. 
all  affected  by  such  controversies,  then  I  must  af- 
fi-m,  that  all  such  controversies  are  useless.  And 
if  it  be  true,  that  they  have  a  tendency  to  promote 
wrangling,  which  of  all  kinds  of  conversation  is  the 
most  unpleasant,  and  the  most  unprofitable  ;  or  vain 
polemical  disquisition,,  which  cannot  be  carried  oa 
without  waste  of  time,  and  prostitution  of  talents  ; 
or  scepticism,  which  tends  to  make  a  man  uncomfor 
table  in  himself,  and  unserviceable  to  others  : — then" 
I  must  affirm,  that  all  such  controversies  are  both  use 
less  and  mischievous  ;  and  that  the  world  would  be 
more  wise,  more  virtuous,  and  more  happy,  without 
them. — But  it  is  said,  that  they  improve  the  under 
standing,  and  render  it  more  capable  of  discovering 
truth,  and  detecting  error.  Be  it  so  : — but  though 
bars  and  loeks  render  our  houses  secure  ;  and  though, 
accuteness  of  hearing  and  feeling  be. a  valuable  en- 
dowment  ;  it  will  not  follow,  that  thieves  are  a  public 
blessing  ;  or  that  the  man  is  intitled  to  my  gratitude* 
who  quickens  my  touch  and  hearing,  by  putting  out 
my  eyes. 

H-2. 


94  A^  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

It  is  further  said,  that  such  controversies  make 
us  sensible  of  the  weakness  of  human  reason,  and  the 
imperfection  of  human  knowledge  ;  and  for  the  san 
guinary  principles  of  bigotry  and  enthusiasm,  sub- 
stitute  the  milky  ones  of  scepticism  and  moderation. 
And  this  is  conceived  to  be  of  prodigious  emolument 
to  mankind  ;  because  a  firm  attachment  to  religion, 
which  a  man  may  call  bigotry  if  he  pleases,  doth 
often  give  rise  to  a  persecuting  spirit  ;  whereas  a 
perfect  indifference  about  it,  which  some  men  are 
good-natured  enough  to  call  moderation,  is  a  princi 
ple  of  great  good-breeding,  and  gives  no  sort  of  dis 
turbance,  either  in  private  or  public  life.  This  is  a 
plea  on  which  our  modern  sceptics  plume  themselves 
not  a  little.  And  who  will  venture  to  arraign  the 
%7irtue  or  the  sagacity  of  these  projectors  ?  To  ac 
complish  so  great  effects  by  means  so  simple  j  to  pre 
vent  such  dreadful  calamities  by  so  innocent  an  arti 
fice, — does  it  not  display  the  perfection  of  benevolence 
and  wisdom  ?  Truly  I  can  hardly  imagine  such  a- 
nother  scheme,  except  perhaps  the  following.  Sup 
pose  a  physician  ofc  the  Sangrado  school,  out  of  zeal 
for  the  interest  of  the  faculty,  and  the  public  good, 
to  prepare  a  bill  to  be  laid  before  the  parliament,  in 
these  words  :  "  That  whereas  good  health,  especially 
"  when  of  long  standing,  has  a  tendency  to  prepare 
"  the  human  frame  for  acute  and  inflammatory  dis- 
"  tempers,  which  have  been  known  to  give  extreme 
"  pain  to  the  unhappy  patient,  and  sometimes  even 
**  bring  him  to  the  grave  ;  and  whereas  the  said 
**  health,  by  making  us  brisk,  and  hearty,  and  happy, 
(t  is  apt  also,  on,  some  occasions,  to  make  us  disbr- 
"  derly  and  licentious,  to  the  great  detriment  of  glass 
"  windows,  lanthorns,  and  watchmen  :  Be  it  there- 
"  fore  enacted,  That  all  the  inhabitants  of  these  re- 
"  alms,  for  the  peace  of  government,  and  the  repose 
"  of  the  subject,  be  compelled,  on  pain  of  death,  to 
"  bring  their  bodies  down  to  a  consumptive  habit  ; 
w  and  that  henceforth  no  person  presume  to  walk  a- 


CHAFi-H.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  95 

"  broad  with  a  cane,  on  pain  of  having  his  head  broke 
**  with  it,  and  being  set  in  the  stocks  for  six  months  j 
"  nor  to  walk  at  all,  except  with  crutches,  to  be  de- 
"  livered  at  the  public  charge  to  each  person  who 
"  makes  affidavit,  that  he  is  no  longer  able  to  walk 
"  without  them,"  &c. — He  who  can  eradicate  con 
viction  from  the  human  heart,  may  doubtless  prevent 
all  the  fatal  effects  of  enthusiasm  and  bigotry ;  and 
if  all  human  bodies  were  thrown  into  a  consumption, 
I  believe  there  would  be  an  end  of  riot,   as  well  as 
of  inflammatory  diseases.     Whether  the   inconveni 
ences,  or  the  remedies,  be  the  greater  grievance,  might 
perhaps  bear  a  question.        Bigotry,  enthusiam,  and 
a  persecuting  spirit,  are  very  dangerous  and  destruc 
tive  ;  universal    scepticism,   would,  I    am   sure,  be 
equally  so,  if  it  were  to  infect  the  generality  of  man 
kind.     But  what  has  religion  and  rational  conviction 
to  do  with  either  ?  Nothing  more  than  good  health 
has  to  do  with  acute  distempers,  and  rebellious  in 
surrections  ;  or  than  the  peace  of  government,  and 
tranquillity  of  the  subject,  have  to  do  with  a  gradual 
decay  of  our  muscular  flesh.     True  religion   tends 
to  make  men  great,  and  good,  and  happy  ;  and  if  so, 
its  doctrines  can  never  be   too   firmly   believed,   nor 
held  in  too  high  veneration,     And  if   truth  be  at  all 
attainable  in  philosophy,  I  cannot  see  why  we  should 
scruple  to  receive  it  as  such,  when  we  have  attained 
it;  nor  how  it  can  promote  candour,  good-bteediog, 
and  humanity,  to  pretend  to  doubt  whit  we  do  and 
must   believe,   to  profess  to   maintain   doctrines    of 
which  we  are  conscious-  that  they  shock  -our  under 
standing,  to  differ  in  judgment  from  all  the  world  ex 
cept  a  few  metaphysical  pedants,  and  to  question  the 
evidence  of  those  principles  which  all  other  men  think 
the  most  unquestionable,  and  most,  sacred,     Con  vie- 
tion  and  steadiness  of  principle,  is  that   which   gives 
dignity,  uniformity,  and  spirit,  to   human   conduct,  , 
and  without  which  our  happiness  can  neither  be  las 
ting  nor  sincere.     It  constitutes,  as  it  were,  the  vital 


96  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  I. 

stamina  of  a  great  and  manly  character  ;  whereas 
scepticism  betrays  a  weak  and  sickly  understanding, 
and  a  levity  of  mind,  from  which  nothing  can  be  ex 
pected  but  inconsistence  and  folly.  In  conjunction 
ivith  ill-nature,  bad  taste,  and  a  hard  heart,  steadiness 
and  strong  conviction  will  doubtless  make  a  bad  man, 
and  scepticism  will  make  a  worse  :  but  good-nature, 
elegant  taste,  and  sensibility  of  heart,  when  united 
with  firmness  of  mind,  become  doubly  respectable 
and  lovely ;  whereas  no  man  can  act  on  the  princi 
ples  of  scepticism,  without  incurring  universal  con 
tempt. But  to  return  : 

Mathematicians,  and  natural  philosophers,  do  in 
effect  admit  the  distinction  between  common  sense 
and  reason,  as  illustrated  above  ;  for  they  are  content 
to  rest  their  sciences  either  on  self-evident  axioms, 
or  on  experiments  warranted  by  the  evidence  of  ex 
ternal  sense.  The  philosophers  who  treat  of  the 
mind,  do  also  sometimes  profess  to  found  their  doc 
trines  on  the  evidence  of  sense  :  but  this  profession 
23  merely  verbal ;  for  whenever  experience  contra 
dicts  the  system,  they  question  the  authenticity  of. 
that  experience,  and  show  you,  by  a  most  elaborate 
investigation,  that  it  is  all  a  cheat.  For  it  is  easy  to 
write  plausibly  on  any  subject,  and  in  vindication  of 
any  doctrine,  when  either  the  indolence  of  the  reader, 
or  the  nature  of  the  composition,  gives  the  writer  an 
opportunity  to  avail  himself  of  the  ambiguity  of 
language.  It  is  not  often  that  men  attend  to  the  o- 
pe  ions  of  the  mind  ;  and  when  they  do,  it  is  per 
haps  with  some  metaphysical  book  in  their  hands,, 
which  they  read  with  a  resolution  to  admire  or  des 
pise,  according  as  the  fashion  or  their  humour  directs 
them.  In  this  situation,  or  even  when  they  are  dis 
posed  to  judge  impartially  of  the  Writer,  their  atten 
tion  to  what  passes  in  their  own  mind  is  but  super 
ficial,  and  is  very  apt  to  be  swayed  by  a  secret  bias 
in  favour  of  some  theory.  And  then,  it  is  sometimes 
difficult  to  distinguish  b^tvfeen  a  natural  feeling  and 


CHAP.    II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  97 

a  prejudice  of  education  ;  and  our  deference  to  the 
opinion  of  a  favourite  author  makes  us  think  it  more 
difficult  than  it  really  is,  and  very  often  leads  us  to 
mistake  the  one  for  the  other.  Nay,  the  very  act  of 
studying  discomposes  our  minds  a  little,  and  prevents 
that  free  play  of  the  faculties  from  which  alone  we 
can  judge  with  accuracy  of  their  real  nature. — Be 
sides,  language,  being  originally  intended  to  answer 
the  obvious  exigencies  of  life,  and  express  the  qua 
lities  of  matter,  becomes  metaphorical  when  applied 
to  the  operations  of  mind.  Thus  we  talk  metapho 
rically,  when  we  speak  of  a  warm  imagination,  a 
sound  judgment,  a  tenacious  memory,  an  enlarged 
understanding  ;  these  epithets  being  originally  and 
properly  expressive  of  material  qualities.  This 
circumstance,  however  obvious,  is  not  always  attend 
ed  to  5  and  hence  we  are  apt  to  mistake  verbal  ana 
logies  for  real  ones,  and  to  apply  the  laws  of  matter 
to  the  operations  of  mmd  ;  and  thus,  by  the  mere 
delusion  of  words,  are  led  into  error  before  we  are  a- 
ware,  and  while  our  premises  seem  to  be  altogether 
unexceptionable.  It  is  a  favourite  maxim  with 
LOCKE,  as  it  was  with  some  ancient  philosophers, 
that  the  human  soul,  previous  to  education,  is  like  a 
piece  of  white  paper,  or  tabula  rasa  ;  and  this  simile, 
harmless  as  it  may  appear,  betrays  our  great  modern 
into  several  important  mistakes.  It  is  indeed  one  of 
the  most  unlucky  allusions  that  could  have  been 
chosen.  The  human  soul,  when  it  begins  to  think, 
is  not  extended,  nor  inert,  nor  of  a  white  colour,  nor 
incapable  of  energy,  nor  wholly  unfurnished  with 
ideas,  ('for,  if  it  think  at  all,  it  must  have  some  ideas, 
according  to  LOCKE'S  definition  of  the  word*),  nor  as 
susceptable  of  any  one  impression  or  character  as  of 

*-  The  word  idea  serves  best  to  stand  for  whatsoever  is 
tae  object  of  the  understanding  when  a  man  thinks. — I 
have  used  it  to  express  whatever  it  is  which  the  mind  can 
be  employed  about  in  thinking. 

Introduction  to  Essay  on  Human  Understanding,  sect.  8, 


9  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUIH,  PART    t, 

any  other.  In  what  respect  then  does  the  human 
soul  resemble  a  piece  of  white  paper  ?  To  this  philo 
sophical  conundrum  I  confess  I  can  give  no  serious 
answer. — Even  when  the  terms  we  u^e  are  not  meta 
phorical,  the  natural  abstruseness  of  the  subject 
makes  them  appear  somewhat  mysterious  ;  and  we 
are  apt  to  consider  them  as  of  more  significancy  than 
they  really  are.  Had  Mr  HUME  told  the  world  in 
plain  terms,  that  virtue  is  a  species  of  vice,  darkness 
a  sort  of  light,  and  existence  a  kind  of  non  existence, 
I  know  not  what  .metaphysicians  might- have  thought 
of  the  discovery  ;  but  sure  I  am,  no  reader  of  toler 
able  understanding  would  have  paid  him  any  compli 
ments  upon  it*.  But  when  he  says,  that  contrariety 
is  a  mixture  of  causation  and  resemblance  ;  and,  still 
more,  when  he  brings  a  formal  proof  of"  this  most 

*  Mr  HUME  bad  said,  that  the  only  principles  of  corr- 
nexion  among  ideas  are.  three,  to  wit,  resemblance,  conti 
guity  in  time  or  place,  and  cause  or  effect  :  Inquiry  CM* 
cerning  Human  Understanding ,  sect.  3*  It  afterwards  oc 
curred  to  him,  that  contrary  ideas  have  a  tendency  to  intrcr- 
duce  one  another. into  the  mind.  But  instead  of  adding 
contrariety  to  the  list  of  connecting  principles,  .which  he 
ought  to  have  done,  and  which  would  have  been-  philoscv 
phical,  he  assumes  the  metaphysician,  and  endeavours  to 
prove  his  enumeration  right,  by  resolving  contrariety,  as  a 
species,  into  resemblance  -and  causation,  as  genera,  '*  con 
trariety,"  says  he,  "  is  a  connexion  among  ideas,  which  may 
"  perhaps  be  considered  as  a  mixture  of  causation  and  re- 
**  semblance.  Where,  two  objects  are  contrary,  the  one 
•**  destroys  the  other,  i.  e.  is  the  cause  of  its  annihilation  j 
44  and  tke  idea  of  the  annihilation  of  an  object  implies  the 
**  idea  of  its  former  existence."  Is  impossible  to  make 
any  sense  of  this  ?  Darkness  and  light  are  contrary  j  the 
one  destroys  the  other,  or  is  the  cause  of  its  annihilation  j 
and  the  idea  of  the  annihilation'of  darkness  implies  the  idea 
of  its  former  existence.  This  is  given  as  a  proof,  that 
darkness  partly  resembles  light,  and  partly  is  the  r'puse  of 
light.  Indeed!  But,  O  st  sic  omnia  dixissei!  .This"  is  a 
harmless  absurdity. 


t'HAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  OF  TRUTH.  99 

sage  remark,  he  imposes  on  us  by  the  solemnity  of 
the  expression  ;  we  conclude,  that  "  more  is  meant 
"  than  meets  the  ear  ;"  and  begin  to  fancy,  not  that 
the  author  is  absurd  or  unintelligible,  but  that  we 
have  not  sagacity  enough  to  discover  his  meaning. 
It  were  tedious  to  reckon  up  one  half  of  the  impro 
prieties  and  errors  which  have  been  introduced  into 
the  philosophy  of  human  nature,  by  the  indefinite 
application  of  the  words,  idea,  impression.,  perception, 
sensation,  &c.  Nay,  it  is  well  known,  that  BER 
KELEY'S  pretended  proof  of  the  non-existence  of  mat 
ter,  at  which  common  sense  stood  aghast  for  many 
years,  has  no  better  foundation,  than  the  ambiguous 
use  of  a  word.  He  who  considers  these  things,  will 
not  be  much  disposed  to  overvalue  metaphysical  truth, 
(as  it  is  called)  when  it  happens  to  contradict  any  of 
the  natural  sentiments  of  mankind. 

la  the  laws  of  nature,  when  thoroughly  understood, 
there  appear  no  contradictions  :  It  is  only  in  the  sys 
tems  of  philosophers  that  reason  and  common  sense 
are  at  variance.  No  man  of  common  sense  ever  did 
or  could  believe,  that  the  horse  he  saw  coming  to 
wards  him  at  full  gallop,  was  an  idea  in  his  mind,  and 
nothing  else  ;  no  thief  was  ever  such  a  fool  as  to 
plead  in  his  own  defence,  that  his  crime  was  necessary 
and  unavoidable,  for  that  man  is  born  to  pick  pockets 
as  the  sparks  fly  upward.  When  Reason  invades 
the  Rights  of  Common  Sense,  and  presumes  to.  arraign 
that  authority  by  which  she  herself  acts,  nonsense 
and  confusion  must  of  necessity  ensue  ;  science  will 
soon  come  to  have  neither  head  nor  tail,  beginning 
nor  end  ;  philosophy  will  grow  contemptible  ;  and  its 
adherents,  far  from  being  treated,  as  in  former  times, 
upon  the  footing  of  conjurors,  will  be  thought  by  the 
vulgar,  and  by  every  man  of  sense,  to  be  little  better 
than  downright  fools. 


ico  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  u. 

PART     II. 

ILLUSTRATIONS    OF    THE    PRECEDING    DOC 
TRINE,    WITH  INFERENCES. 

BUT  now  a  difficulty  occurs,,.,  which  it  is  not  per 
haps  easy  to  solve.  Granting  what  is  said  above- 
to  be  true  ;,  that  all  legitimate  reasoning,  whether 
of  certain  or  of  probable  evidence.,  does  finally  re. 
solve  itself  into  principles  of  common  sense,  which 
we  must  admit  as  certain,  or  as  probable,  upon  their 
own  authority  ;  that  therefore  common  sense  is  the 
foundation  and  the  standard  of  all  just  reasoning; 
and  that  the  genuine  sentiments  of  nature  are  never 
erroneous  : — yet,  by  what  criterion  shall  we  know 
a  sentiment  of  nature  from  a  prejudice  of  education, 
a  dictate  of  common  sense  from  the  fallacy  of  an  in 
veterate  opinion  ?  Must  every  principle  be  admitted 
as  true,  which  we  believe  without  being  able  to  as 
sign  a  reason  ?  then  where  is  our  security  against 
prejudice  and  implicit  faith  !  Or  must  every  princi 
ple  that  seems  intuitively  certain,  or  intuitively  pro 
bable,  be  reasoned  upon,  that  we  may  know  whe 
ther  it  be  really  what  it  seems  ?  then  where  our  se 
curity  against  the  abuse  so  much  insisting  on,  of 
subjecting  common  sense  to  the  test  of  reasoning  ! 
— At  what  point  must  reason  stop  in  its  investiga- 
dons,  and  the  dictates  of  common  sense  be  admitted 
as  decisive  and  final  ? 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted,  that  this  matter  has. 
been  so  little  attended  to  :  for  a  full  and  satisfactory, 
discussion  of  it  would  do  more  real  service  to  the 
philosophy  of  human  nature,  than  all  the  system. -a 
of  logic  in  the  world  ;  would  at  once  exalt  pneuma  — 
tology.  to  the  dignity  of  science,  by  settling,  it  on  a- 
firm  and  unchangeable  foundation  ;  and  would  go  a. 
great  way  to  banish  sophistry  from  science,  and  rid 
the  world  of  scepticism.  This  is  indeed  the  grand 
desideratum  in  logic  j  of  no  less  importance  to  tha.;- 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  10  t 

moral  sciences,  than  the  discovery  of  the  longitude 
to  navigation.  That  I  shall  fully  solve  this  difficul 
ty,  I  am  not  so  vain,  nor  so  ignorant,  as  to  imagine. 
But  I  humbly  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  throw  some 
light  on  the  subject,  and  contribute  a  little  to  facili 
tate  the  progress  of  those  who  may  hereafter  engage 
in  the  same  pursuit.  If  I  can  accomplish  even  this, 
I  shall  do  a  service  to  truth,  philosophy,  ?.nd  man-, 
kind  :  if  I  should  be  thought  to  fail,  there  is  yet 
something  meritorious  in  the  attempt.  To  have  set 
the  example,  may  be  of  consequence. 

I  shall  endeavour  to  conduct  the  reader  to  the 
conclusion  J  have  come  to  on  this  subject,  by  the 
same  steps  that  led  me  thither  ;  a  method  which  I 
presume  will  be  more  perspicuous,  and  more  satis 
fying,  than  if  I  were  first  to  lay  down  a  theory,  and 
then  assign  the  reasons.  By  the  way,  I  cannot  help 
expressing  a  wish,  that  this  method  of  investiga 
tion  were  less  uncommon,  and  that  philosophers 
would  sometimes  explain  to  us,  not  only  their  dis 
coveries,  but  also  the  process  of  thought  and  expe 
riment,  whether  accidental  or  intentional,  by  which 
they  were  led  to  them. 

If  the  boundary  of  Reason  and  Common  Sense 
had  never  been  settled  in  ar-  science,  I  would  aban 
don  my  present  scheme  as  altogether  desperate.  But 
when  I  reflect,  that  in  some  of  the  sciences  it  has 
been  long  settled,  with  the  utmost  accuracy,  and  to 
universal  satisfaction,  I  conceive  better  hopes;  and 
flatter  myself,  that  it  may  perhaps  be  possible  to  fix 
it  even  in  the  philosophy  of  the  mind.  The  sciences 
in  which  this  boundary  has  been  long  settled  and  ac 
knowledged,  are,  mathematics,  and  natural  philoso 
phy  ;  and  it  is  remarkable,  that  more  truth  .has  been 
discovered  in  those  sciences  than  in  any  other.  Now, 
there  is  not  a  more  effectual  way  of  learning  the 
rules  of  any  art,  than  by  attending  to  the  practice  of 
those  who  have  performed  in  it  most  successfully  : 
a  maxim  which,  I  suppose,  h  no  less  applicable  to 


102  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

the  art  of  investigating  truth,  than  to  the  mechani 
cal  and  the  fine  arts.  Let  us  see,  then,  whether,  by- 
attending  to  the  practice  of  mathematicians  and  na 
tural  philosophers,  as  contrasted  with  the  practice 
of  those  who  have  treated  of  the  human  mind,  we 
can  make  any  discoveries  preparatory  to  the  solution 
of  this  difficulty. 

CHAP.     I. 

Confirmation  of  this  Theory  from  the  Practice  of 
Mathematicians  and  Natural  Philosophers. 

SECT.     I. 

rlpHAT  the  distinction  between  Reason  and  Com- 
•*•  mon  Sense,  as  here  explained,  is  acknowledged 
by  mathematicians,  we  have  already  shown  *.  They 
have  been  wise  enough  to  trust  to  the  dictates  of 
common  sense,  and  to  take  that  for  truth  which 
they  were  tinder  a  necessity  of  believing,  even  tho' 
it  was  not  in  their  power  to  prove  it  by  argument. 
When  a  mathematician  arrives,  in  the  course  of  his 
reasoning,  at  a  principle  which  he  must  believe,  and 
which  is  of  itself  so  evident,  that  no  arguments 
could  either  illustrate  or-enforce  it,  he  then  knows, 
that  his  reason  can  carry  him  no  further,  and  he  sits 
down  contented  :  and  if  he  can  satisfy  himself,  that 
the  whole  investigation  is  fairly  conducted,  and  does 
indeed  terminate  in  this  self-evident  principle,  he  is 
persuaded,  that  his  conclusion  is  true,  and  cannot 
possibly  be  false.  Whereas  the  modern  sceptics, 
from  a  strange  conceit,  that  the  dictates  of  their  un 
derstanding  are  fallacious,  and  that  nature  has  her 
roguish  emissaries  in  every  corner,  commissioned 
and  sworn  to  play  tricks  with  poor  mortals,  cannot 
find  in  their  heart  to  admit  any  thing  as  truth,  upon 
the  bare  authority  of  their  common  sense.  It  is 

*  See  part  1.  chap.  2.  sect.  1. 


CHAP.  1.        AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.          103 

doubtless  a    great    advantage  to  geometry,  that  its 
first  principles  are  so  few,  its  ideas  so  distinct,  and 
its  language   so  definite.     Yet  a  captious  and  para 
doxical  wrangler  might,  by   dint   of  sophistry,  in 
volve  the  principles  even  of  this  science  in  confusion, 
provided  he  thought  it  worth  his  while  *.      But  geo 
metrical  paradoxes  would  not  rouse  the  attention  of 
the    public  ;  whereas   moral  paradoxes,   when  men 
begin  to  look  about  for  arguments  in  vindication  of 
impiety,  debauchery,  and  injustice,  become  wonder 
fully  interesting,   and  can  hardly  fail  of  a  powerful 
and   numerous  patronage.     The  corrupt  judge  ;  the 
prostituted   courtier  ;  the   statesman    who  enriches 
himself  by  the  plunder   and  blood  of  his   country  ; 
the  pettifogger,   who  fattens  on  the  spoils  of  the  fa 
therless  and  widow;  the  oppressor,  who,  to  pamper 
his  own   beastly  appetite,  abandons   the   deserving1 
peasant  to  beggary   and  despair ;  the  hypocrite,  the 
debauchee,  the  gamester,  the  blasphemer, — prick  up 
their  ears    when   they  are    told,  that    a   celebrated 
author  has  written  a  book  full  of  such  comfortable 
doctrines  as  the  following : — That   justice  is   not  a 
natural,  but    an  artificial  virtue,  depending  wholly 
on  the  arbitrary  institutions  of  menf,  and,  previous 
to  the  establishment   of  civil  society,  not  at  all  in 
cumbent  ; — That  moral,  intellectual,   and  corporeal 
virtues,  are  all  of  the  same  kind  J  ;  in  other  words, 
That  to  want  honesty,  to  want  understanding,  and  to 
want  a  leg,  are  equally  the  objects  of  moral  disap 
probation  ;  and  therefore  that  it  is  no  more  a  man's 
duty  to  be  grateful  or  pious,  than  to  have  the  genius 
of  Homer,  or  the  strength  and  beauty  of  Achilles  : 

*  The  author  of  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  has  ac~ 
tually  attempted  this  in  his  first  volume :  but  finding,  no 
doubt,  that  the  public  would  not  tsike  any  concern  in  that 
part  of  his  system,  he  has  not  republished  it  in  his  ES 
SAYS. 

f  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  3.  p.  37. 
t  Ibid.  vol.  3.  part  3.  sect.  4, « 


AN    ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  PART   If. 

— That  every  human  action  is  necessary,  and  could 
not  have  been  different  from  what  it  is  t : — That 
when  we  speak  of  power  as  an  attribute  of  any  be 
ing,  God  himself  not  excepted,  we  use  words  with 
out  meaning  :• — That  we  can  form  no  idea  of  power, 
nor  of  any  being  endued  with  any  power,  much  less 
of  one  endued  with  infinite  power  ;  and  that  we  can 
never  have  reason  to  believe,  that  any  object,  or  qua 
lity  of  an  object,  exists,  of  which  we  cannot  form  an 
idea  *  : — That  it  is  unreasonable  to  believe  God  to 
be  infinitely  wise  and  good,  while  there  is  any  e- 
vil  or  disorder  in  the  universe  ;  and  that  we  have  no 
good  reason  to  think,  that  the  universe  proceeds 
from  a  cause  f  : — That  the  external  material  world 
does  not. exist  ,J  ;  and  that  if  the  exteinal  world  be 
once  called  in  doubt  as  to  its  existence,  we  shall  be 
at  a  loss  to  find  arguments  by  which  we  may  prove 

the  Being  of  God,  or  any  of  his   attributes  ||  : 

That  those  who  believe  any  thing  certainly  are 
fools  **  : — That  adultery  must  be  practised,  if  men 
would  obtain  all  the  advantages  of  life  ;  that,  if  ge 
nerally  practised,  it  would  soon  cease  to  be  scanda 
lous  ;  and  that,  if  practised  secretly  and  frequently, 
it  would  by  degrees  come  to  be  thought  no  crime  at 
all  *  : — That  the  question  concerning  the  substance 
of  the  soul  is  unintelligible  f  :  That  matter  and  mo 
tion  may  often  be  regarded  as  the  cause  of  thought;): : 

J  Hume's  Essays,  vol.  2.  p.  91.  edit.  1767. 

•  Treatise  of  Human    Nature,  vol.   1.  p.   284.  302. 
432.  &c. 

f  Hume's  Essay  on  a  Particular  Providence  and  Fu 
ture  State. 

|  Berkeley's  and  Hume's  Works  passim. 

||  Hume's  Essay  on  the  Academical  or  Sceptical  Phi 
losophy,  part  1. 

**  Treatise  on  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  468. 

*  Hume's  Essays,  vol.  2.  p.  409.  edit.  1767. 
f  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  434. 
t  Id.  ibid. 


CHAP.  I.        AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  105 

—That  the  soul  of  man  becomes  every  different  mo 
ment  a  different  being  |l  :  so  that  the  actions  I  per 
formed  last  year,  or  yesterday,  or  this  morning, 
whether  virtuous  or  vicious,  are  no  more  imputable 
to  me,  than  the  virtues  of  Aristides  are  imputable 
to  Nero,  or  the  crimes  of  Nero  to  the  MAN  of 
Ross. 

I  know  no  geometrical  axiom,  more  perspicuous, 
more  evident,  more  generally  acknowledged,  than 
this  proposition,  (which  every  man  believes  of  him 
self,)  "  My  body  exists  ;  yet  this  has  been  denied, 
and  volumes  written  to  prove  it  false.  Who  will 
pretend  to  set  bounds  to  this  spirit  of  scvQpticism 
and  sophistry  ?  Where  are  the  principles  that  can 
stop  its  progress,  when  it  has  already  attacked  the 
existence,  both  of  the  human  bodv,  and  of  the  hu 
man  soul  ?  When  it  denies,  and  attempts  to  disprove 
this,  I  cannot  see  why  it  may  not  as  well  deny  a 
whole  to  be  greater  than  a  part^  the  radii  of  the 
same  circle  to  be  equal  to  one  another  ;  ?;nd  affirm, 
that  two  right  lines  do  contain  a  space,  and  that  it  is 
possible  for  the  same  thing  to  be  and  not  to  be. 

Had  our  sceptics'  been  consulted  when  trie  first 
geometrical  institutions  were  compiled,  they  would' 
have  given  a  strange  turn  to  the  face  of  affairs. 
They  would  have  demanded  reasons  for  the  belief  of 
every  axiom  ;  and  as  none  could  have  been  given,, 
would  have  suspected  a  fallacy  ;  and  probably  (for 
the  art  of  metaphysical  book-making  is  not  of  diffi 
cult  attainment)  have  made  books  to  prove  a  pri 
ori,  that  an  axiom,  from  its  very  nature  cannot  be 
true  ;  or  at  least  that  we  cannot  with  certainty  pro 
nounce  whether  it  is  so  or  not.  "  Take  heed  to 
"  yourselves,  gentlemen  ;  you  are  going  to  lay  the 
«<  foundations  of  a  science  ;  be  careful  to  lay  them  as 
"  deep  as  possible.  Let  the  love  of  doubt  and  dis- 
"  putation  animate  you  to  invincible  perseverance. 
«*  You  must  go  deeper  ;  truth  (if  there  be  any  such 
II  Id.  vol.  1.  p.  48.. 


IC6  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  TART  II. 

<f  thing)  loves  profundity  and  darkness.  Hitherto 
(t  I  see  you  quite  distinctly  ;  and,  Jet  me  tell  you, 
"  that  is  a  strong  presumption  against  your  method 
<(  of  operation.  I  would  not  give  twopence  for  that 
*'  philosophy  which  is  obvious  and  intelligible.* 
"  Tear  up  that  prejudice,  that  I  may  see  what  sup- 
"  ports  it.  1  see  you  cannot  move  it,  and  therefore 
"  am  violently  disposed  to  question  its  stability  ;  you 
"  cannot  pierce  it,  therefore  who  knows  but  it  may 
"  be  made  of  unsound  materials  ?  There  is  no  trus- 
"  ting  to  appearances.  It  is  the  glory  of  a  philosopher 
"  to  doubt ;  yea,  he  must  doubt,  both  when  he  is 
"  doubtful,  and  when  he  is  not  doubtful  f.  Some- 
"  times,  indeed,  we  philosophers  are  absolutely 
"  and  necessarily  determined  to  live,  and  talk,  and 
**  act,  like  ether  people,  and  to  believe  the  exist- 
•*  ence  both  of  ourselves  and  of  others  :  but  to  this 
"  absolute  and  necessary  determination  we  ought 
"  not  to  submit,  but  in  every  incident  of  life  still  to 
"  preserve  cur  scepticism.  Yes,  friend,  I  tell  you, 
4<'we  ought  still  to  do  what  is  contrary  to  that  to 
"  which  we  are  absolutely  and  necessarily  determin- 
*'  ed  J.  I  sec  you  preparing  to  speak,  but  I  tell 
"  you  once  for  all,  that  if  you  reason  or  believe  any 

*  See  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  3,  4. 

f  '*  A  true  sceptic  will  be  diffident  of  his  philosopbi- 

'*  cal  doubts,  as  well  as  cf  his  philosophical  conviction." 

Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  414. 

t  "  I  dine,  I  play  a  game  at  hack-gammon,  I  converse 
"  and  am  merry  with  my  friends ;  and  when,  after  three 
*4  or  four  hours  amusement,  I  would  return  to  these  spec- 
*'  ulations,  they  appear  so  cold,  so  strained,  and  so  ridicu- 
"'  lous  that  I  cannot  find  in  my  heart  to,  enter  into  them 
**  £ny  further.  Here  then  I  find  myself  absolutely  and 
*'  necessarily  determined  to  live,  and  talk,  and  set  like 
4<  other  pecple  in  the  common  affairs  of  life."  Trea 
tise  of  Human  Nature,  vo/.  1.  /».  467. 

44  In  all  the  incidents  of  life  we  ought  still  to  preserve 
44  cur  scepticism.  If  we  believe  that  fire  warms,  or  water 
*'  refreshes  'tis  only  because  it  costs  us  too  much  pains  to 


CHAP.    I.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  107 

"  thing  certainly  you  are  a  fool*. — Good  Sir,   hoxv 
**  deep  must  we  dig  ?  Is  not  this  a  sure  foundation  ? 

« I  have  no  reason  to    think  so,    as  I  cannot    see 

*'  what  is  under  it.  Then  we  must  dig  downward 
**  in  infinitum  ! — And  why  not  ?  You  think  you  are 
"  arrived  at  certainty.  This  very  conceit  of  yours 
**  is  a  proof  that  you  have  not  gone  deep  enough  ; 
"  for  you  must  know,  that  the  understanding,  when 
"  it  acts  alone,  and  according  to  its  most  general 
«  principles,  entirely  subverts  itself,  and  leaves  not 
*'  the  lowest  degree  of  evidence  in  any  proposition, 
iV  either  in  philosophy  or  common  lifef;  This  to 
"  the  illiterate  vulgar  may  seem  as  great  a  contra- 
**  diction  or  paradox,  as  if  we  were  to  talk  of  a 
"  man's  jumping  down  his  own  throat  :  but  we 
*c  whose  brains  are  heated  with  metaphysic,  are  not 
*'  startled  at  paradoxes  or  contradictions,  because  we 
**  are  ready  to  reject  aril  belief  and  reasoning,  and 
"  can  look  upon  no  opinion  even  as  more  probable  or 
"  more  likely  than  another  $,  You  are  no  true  phi- 
I  3^  iosopher 

"  think  otherwise.     Nay,  if  we  are  philosophers,  it  ought 
"  only  to  be  upon  sceptical  principles." 

Id.  p.  469. 

*  "  If  I  must  be  a  fool,  as  all  those  who  reason  or  believe 
"  any  thing  certainly  are,  my  follies  shall  at  least  be  na- 
"  tural  and  agreeable."  Id.  p.  468; 

The  inaccuracy  of  the  expression  makes-  it  difficult  to 
guess,  whether  Mr  HUME  means,  that  all  who  believe 
any  thing  are  certainly  fools,  or  that  all  are  fools  who  be 
lieve  any  thing  to  be  certain. — But  whether  we  suppose  it 
to  have  the  former  meaning,  or  the  latter,  is  a  thing  ef 
small  concern. 

f  Verbatim  from  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1    p 
464,  465. 

J  '^  The  intense  view  of  these  manifold   contradictions 
"  and  imperfections  inhuman  reason,  has  so  wrought  up- 
"  on  me^  and  heated  my  brain,  that  I  am  ready  to  reject  .• 
"  all  belief  and  reasoning,  and   can  look  upon  no  opinion 
"  even  as  more  probable  or  likely  than  another. 

Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  i>c/,  I,  /.  466, 


JOS  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  FRAT  If. 

*'  losopher  if  you  either  begin  or  end  your  inquiries 
*'  with  the  belief  of  any  thing. — Well,  Sir,  you  may 
*'  doubt  and  dispute  as  long  as  you  please  ;  but  I 
"  believe  that  1  am  come  to  a  sure  foundation  :  here 
"  therefore  will  I  begin  to  build,  for  I  am  certain 
"  there  can  be  no  danger  in  trusting  to  the  stability 
"  of  that  which  is  immoveable. — Certain !  Poor 
"  credulous  fool  !  Hark  ye,  sirrah  !  you  may  be 
**  what  the  vulgar  call  an  honest  man,  and  a  good 
*'  workman  ;  but  I  am  certain  (I  mean  I  am  in 
•'*'  doubt  whether  I  may  not  be  certain  J  that  you  are 
*•'  no  philosopher.  Philosopher  indeed  !  to  take  a 
w<  thing  of  such  consequence  for  granted,  without 
*-  proof,  without  examination  !  I  hold  you  four  to 
**  one,  that  I  shall  demonstrate  a  priori,  that  this 
**  same  edifice  of  yours  will  be  good  for  nothing. 
f<  I  am  inclined  to  think,  that  we  live  in  too  early  a 
*<  period  to  discover  ANY  PRINCIPLES  that  will  bear 
**  the  examination  of  the  latest  posterity  pthe  world, 
"  Sir,  is  not  yet  arrived  at  the  years  of  discretion  : 
"*  it  will  be  time  enough,  two  or  three  thousand 
"  years  hence,  for  men  to  begin  to  dogmatize,  and  af- 
*•'  firm,  that  two  and  two  are  four,  that  a  triangle  is 
**  not  a  square,  that  the  radii  of  the  same  circle  are 
**'  equal,  that  a  whole  is  greater  than  one  of  its  parts  ; 
•'  that  ingratitude  and  murder  are  crimes,  that  bene- 
*"'  volence,  justice,  and  fortitude,  are  virtues  ;  that 
"  fire  burns,  that  the  sun  shines,  that  human  crea- 
**  tures  exist,  or  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  exis- 
"  tence.  These  are  points  which  our  posterity,  if 
4i  they  be  wise,  will  very  probably  reject  *.  These 

*  "  Perhaps  we  are  still  in  too  early  an  age  of  the 
li  world,  to  discover  any  principles  \vhich  will  bear  the 
c<  examination  of  the  latest  posterity." 

Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  voL  1.  p.  473. 

Some  perhaps  may  blame  me  for  laying  any  stress  on 
detached  sentences,  and  for  understanding  these  strong  ex 
pressions  in  a  strict  signification.  But  it  is  not  my  inten- 


CHAP.  I.        AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH,  109 

"  are  points,  which  if  they  do  not  reject,  they  will 
"  be  arrant  fools.  This  is  my  judgment,  and  I  am 
te  certain  it  is  right.  I  maintain,  indeed,  that  man- 
tl  kind  are  certain  of  nothing  :  but  1  maintain,  not- 
"  withstanding,  that  my  own  opinions  are  true.  And 
"  if  any  body  is  ill-natured  enough  to  call  this  a  c'»n- 
"  tradiction,  I  protest  against  his  judgment,  and  --  nee 
"  for  all  declare,  that  I  mean  not  either  to  contradict 
"  myself,  or  to  acknowledge  myself  guilty  of  self- 
"  contradiction." 

I  am  well  aware,  that  mathematical  certainty  is 
not  to  be  expected  in  any  science  but  mathematics. 
But  I  suppose  that  in  every  science,  some  kind  of 
certainty  is  attainable,  or  something  at  least  sufficient 
to  command  belief :  and  whether  this  r^st  on  self- 
evident  axioms,  or  on  the  evidence  of  sense,  memory 
or  testimony,  it  is  still  certain  to  me,  if  I  feel  that 
I  must  believe  it.  And  in  every  science,  as  well  as 
in  geometry,  I  presume  it  would  be  inconsistent  both 

with 

tion  to  take  any  unfair  advantages.  I  should  willingly  im 
pute  these  absurd  sentences  and  expressions  to  the  author's 
inadvertency  :  but  then  I  must  impute  the  whole  system  to 
the  same  cause  i-for  they  imply  nothing  that  is  not  again  and 
again  inculcated,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  in  Mr  HUME'S 
writings.  It  is  true  some  of  them  are  self  contradictory, 
and  all  of  them  strongly  display  the  futility  cf  this  pre 
tended  science.  But  who  is  to  blame  for  this  ?  They  who 
allow  themselves  to  contradict  matter  cf  fact,  either  in 
conversation  or  writing,  will  find  it  no  easy  matter  to  a- 
void  contradicting  themselves.— —  Again,  if  this  science  be 
so  useless,  and  if  its  inutility  be  sometimes  acknowledged 
even  by  Mr  HUME  himself,  why,  it  may  be  said,  so  much 
zeal  in  confuting  it  ?  For  this  plain  reason,  Because  it  is 
immoral  and  pernicious,  as  well  as  unprofitable  and  absurd  ; 
and  because,  with  all  its  absurdity,  it  has  been  approved 
and  admired  by  sciolists,  fops,  and  profligates  ,  and  been 
the  occasion  of  much  evil  to  individuals,  and  of  much  de 
triment  as  well  as  danger  to  society. 


AW  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

with  logic  and  good  sense,  to  take  that  for  an  ulti 
mate  principle,  which  forces  our  belief  by  its  own  in 
trinsic  evidence,  and  which  cannot  by  any  reasoning 
be  rendered  more  evident. 

SECT.    II. 

TN  natural  philosophy,  the  evidence  of  sense  and 
•^  mathematical  evidence  go  hand  in  hand  ;  and  the 
one  produces  conviction  as  effectually  as  the  other. 
A  natural  philosopher  would  make  a  poor  figure, 
should  he  take  it  in  his  head  to  disbelieve  or  distrust 
the  evidence  of  his  senses.  The  time  was,  indeed, 
when  matters  were  on  a  different  footing  ;  when  phy 
sical  truths  \vere  made  out,  not  by  experiment  and 
observation,  but  by  dint  of  syllogism,  or  in  the  more 
compendious  way  of  ipse  -dixit.  But  natural  philo 
sophy  W-as  then,  what  the  philosophy  of  the  mind  in 
the  hands  of  our  sceptics  is  now,  a  system  of  sophisms, 
contrived  for  the  vindication  of  false  theories. 

That  natural  philosophers  never  question  the  evi 
dence  of  sense,,  nor  seek  either  to  disprove  or  to  cor 
rect  it  by  reasoning,  is  a  position,  which  to  many 
may  at  first  sight  seem  disputable.  I  foresee  several 
objections,  but  shall  content  myself  with  examining 
two  of  the  most  important.  And  these  I  shall  set 
in  such  a  light,  as  will,  I  hope,  show  them  to  be  in 
conclusive,  and  at  the  same  time  preclude  all  other 
objections. 

i.  Do  we  not,  (it  will  be  said),  both  in  our  phy 
sical  observations,  and  in  the  common  affairs  of  life, 
reject  the  evidence  of  sight  in  regard  to  the  magni 
tude,  extension,  figure  and  distance  of  visible  objects, 
and  trust  to  that  of  touch,,  which  we  know  to  be  less 
fallacious  ?  1  see  two  buildings  on  the  top  of  yonder 
mountain  j  they  seem  to  my  eyes  to  be  only  three  or 
four  feet  asunder,  of  a  round  shape,  and  not  larger 
than  my  two  thumbs  :  but  I  have  been  at  the  place, 
and  haying  ascertained  their  distance,  size;  and  figure, 


CHAP.  I.     AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  Itl 

by  touch  or  mensuration,  I  know,  that  they  are 
square  towers,  forty  yards  asunder,  and  fifty  feet  high. 
Do  I  not  in  this  case  reject  the  evidence  of  my  sight 
as  fallacious,  and  trust  to  that  of  touch  ?  And  what 
is  it  but  reason  that  induces  me  to  do  so  ?  How  then 
can  it  be  said,  that  from  the  evidence  of  sense  there 
is  no  appeal  to  reason  ? — It  will,  however,  be  easy  to 
show,  that  in  this  instance  we  distrust  neither  sight; 
nor  touch,  but  believe  implicitly  in  both  ;  not  because 
we  can  coniirm  their  evidence  by  reasoning,  but  be 
cause  the  law  of  our  nature  will  not  permit  us  to 
disbelieve  their  evidence. 

Do  you  perceive  these  two  objects  when  you  shut 
your  eyes  ?  No. — It  is,  then, by  your  sight  only  that 
you  perceive  them  ?  It  is. — Does  your  sight  per 
ceive  any  thing  in  these  two  objects,  but  a  certain 
visible  magnitude,  extension  and  figure  ?  No. — Do 
you  believe  that  these  towers  really  appear  to  your 
eyes  round,  three  feet  asunder,  and  of  the  size  of 
your  thumbs?  Yes,  I  believe  they  have  that  ap 
pearance  to  my  eyes — And  do  you  not  also  believe 
that,  to  the  eyes,  of  all  men  who  see  as  you  do, 
and  look  at  these  objects  from  the  place  in  which 
you  now  stand,  they  have  the  very  same  appearance  ? 
I  have  no  reason  to  think  otherwise. — You  believe, 
then,  that  the  visible  magnitude,  distance  and  shape, 
of  these  towers,  is  what  it  appears  to  be  ?  or  do  you 
think  that  your  eyes  see  wrong  ?  Be  sure,  the  visible 
magnitude,  figure  and  distance,  are  not  different  from 
what  I  perceive  them  to  be. — But  how  do  you  know 
that  what  you  perceive  by  sight  either  exists,  or  is 
what  it  appears  to  be?  Not  by  reasoning,  but  by 
instinct. 

Of  the  visible  magnitude,  extension,  and  figure,, 
our  eyes  give  us  a  true  perception.  It  is  a  law  of 
nature,  That  while  visible  objects  retire  from  the 
eye,  the  visible  magnitude  becomes  less  as  the  distance 
becomes  greater  :  and  the  proportion  between  the  in 
creasing  distance  and  the  decreasing  visible  magnitude 


n.2  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  ?ART  u. 

is  so  well  known,  that  the  visible  magnitude  of  any 
given  object  placed  at  a  given  distance,  may  be  as 
certained  with  geometrical  exactness.  The  true  visi 
ble  magnitude  of  objects  is  therefore  a  fixed  and  de 
terminate  thing  ;  that  is,  the  visible  magnitude  of  the 
same  object,  at  the  same  distance,  is  always  the  same  : 
we  believe,  that  if  is  what  our  eyes  perceive  it  to 
be  ;  if  we  did  not,  the  art  of  perspective  would  be  im 
possible  ;  at  least  we  could  not  acknowledge,  that 
there  is  any  truth  in  that  art. 

But  the  object  (you  reply)  seems  no  bigger  than 
your  thumb  ;  and  you  believe  it  to  be  fifty  feet  high  ; 
how  is  that  sensation  reconcileable  with  this  belief  ? 
You  may  easily  reconcile  them,  by  recollecting, 
("what  is  obvious  enough,)  that  the  object  of  your 
belief  is  the  tangible  magnitude  ;  that  of  your  sensa 
tion,  the  visible.  The  visible  magnitude  is  a  per 
ception  of  sense  ;  and  we  have  seen  already,  that  it 
is  conceived  to  be  a  true,  and  not  a  fallacious  percep 
tion  :  the  tangible  magnitude  you  do  not  at  present 
perceive  by  sense  ;  you  only  remember  it  j  or  perhaps 
you  infer  it  from  the  visible,  in  consequence  of  your 
knowledge  of  the  laws  of  perspective.  When  we 
see  a  lump  of  salt  at  a  little  distance,  we  may  per 
haps  take  it  for  sugar.  Is  this  a  false  sensation  ?  it 
is  a  proof,  either  that  our  taste,  or  that  our  sight, 
is  fallacious  ?  No:  this  is  only  an  erroneous  opinion' 
formed  upon  a  true  sensation.  A  false  sensation  wer 
cannot  suppose  it  to  be,  without  supposing  that  tastes- 
are  perceived  by  the  eyes.  And  you  cannot  believe 
your  opinion  of  the  magnitude  of  these  towers  to  be 
a  false  sensation*  except  you  believe  that  tangible 
qualities  are  perceived  by  sight.  When  we  speak 
of  the  magnitude  of  objects,  we  generally  mean  the 
tangible  magnitude,  which  is  no  more  an  object  of 
sight  than  of  hearing.  For  it  is  demonstrated  in  op 
tics,  that  a  person  endued  with  sight,  but  so  fettered 
from  his  birth  as  to  have  no  opportunity  ot  gaining 
experience  by  touch,  could  never  form  any  distinct- 


CHAP.    I.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH, 

notion  of  the  distance,  extension,  magnitude,  or  figure 
of  any  thing.  ,These  are  perceptions,  not  of  sight, 
but  of  touch.  We  judge  of  them  indeed  from  the 
.visible  .appearance ;  but  it  is  only  in  consequence  of 
our  having  found,  that  certain  changes  in  the  visible 
appearance  do  always  accompany,  and  intimate,  cer 
tain  changes  in  the  tangible  distance,  magnitude,  and 
figure.  Visible  magnitude,  and  tangible  magnitude 
are  quite  .different  things  ;  the  former  changes  with 
.every  change  of  distance,  the  .latter  .is  always  the 
same  ;  the  one  is  perceived  by  one  sense,  the  other 
by  another.  So  that  when  you  say,  I  see. a  tower 
two  miles  off,  which  appears  no  bigger  .than  my 
thumb,  and  yet  I  believe  it  to  be  a  thousand  times 
bigger  than  my  whole  body  ; — your  sensation  is  per. 
fectly  consistent  with  your  belief :  the  contrariety  is 
merely  verbal  ;  for  the  word  bigger,  in  the  first  clause 
refers  to  visible,  in -the  second,  to  tangible  magni 
tude.  There  is  here  no  more  real  inconsistency  than 
if  you  were  to  say,  I  see  a  conical  body  of  a  white 
colour,  acd  I  believe  it  to  have  a  sweet  taste.  If 
there  be  any  difficulty  in  conceiving  this,  it  must  a- 
rise  from  our  being  more  apt  to  confound  the  objects 
of  sight  and  touch,  than  those  of  any  other  two 
senses.  As  the  knowledge  of  tangible  qualities  is 
of  more  consequence  to  our  happiness  and  preserva 
tion,  than  the  knowledge  of  visible  appearances  which 
in  themselves  can  do  neither  good  nor  harm  ;  \\e  fix 
our  principal  attention  on  the  tangible  magnitude, 
the  visible  appearance  serving  only  as  a  sign  by 
which  we  judge  of  it :  the  mind  makes  an  instantane 
ous  transition  from  the  visible  appearance,  which  it 
overlooks,  to  the  tangible  quality,  on  which  it  fixeth 
its  attention  j  and  the  sign  is  as  little  attended  to,  in 
comparison  of  the  thing  signified,  as  the  shape  of 
written  characters,  or  the  sound  of  articulate  voices, 
in  comparison  of  the  ideas  which  the  writer  qr  speaker 
means  to  communicate. 


-114  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  IT. 

But  all  men  Cit  may  be  said)  do  not  thus  distin 
guish  between  visible  and  tangible  magnitude.  Many 
philosophers  have  affirmed,  and  the  vulgar  still  be 
lieve,  that  magnitude  is  a  sensation  both  of  sight 
and  touch  :  those  people,  therefore,  when  sensible  of 
the  diminished  visible  appearance  of  the  distant  ob 
ject,  must  suppose,  that  the  perception  they  receive 
by  sight  of  the  magnitude  of  that  object,  is  really  a 
false  perception  ;  because  different  from  what  they 
should  receive  by  touch,  or  even  by  sight  if  the 
object  were  within  three  yards  of  their  eyes.  At 
any  rate,  they  must  suppose,  that  what  their  sight 
perceives  concerning  magnitudes  is  not  always  to  be 
-depended  on.;  and  therefore  that  their  sight  is  a  fal 
lacious  faculty. 

Let  this  objection  have  as  much  weight  as  you 
please  ;  yet  will  it  not  prove,  that  the  evidence  of 
sense  may  be  either  confirmed  or  confuted  by  rea 
son.  Suppose  then  I  perceive  real  magnitude,  both 
by  sight  and  touch.  I  observe,  that  what  my  sight 
perceives  of  magnitude  is  not  always  consistent, 
either  vith  Jtself,  or  with  the  sensations  received  by 
touch  from  the  same  object.  The  same  man,  with 
in  the  same  hour,  appears  six  feet  high,  and  not  one 
foot  high,  according  as  I  view  him  at  the  distance 
of  two  yards  or  of  two  miles.  What  is  to  be  done 
;in  this  case  ?  both  sensations  I  cannot  believe  ?  for 
-that  the  man  really  changes  his  stature,  is  altogether 
incredible.  I  believe  his  stature  to  be  always  the 
•same  ;  and  I  find,  that  to  my  touch  it  always  ap 
pears  the  same  ;  and  that,  when  I  look  at  the  man 
at  the  distance  of  a  few  feet,  my  visible  perception 
of  his  magnitude  coincides  with  my  tangible  per 
ception.  I  must  therefore  believe,  that  what  my 
sight  intimates  concerning  the  magnitude  of  distant 
objects  is  not  to  be  depended  on.  But  whence  a- 
rises  this  belief?  Can  I  prove,  by  argument,  that 
the  man  does  not  change  his  stature  ?  that  the  sense, 
•whose  perceptions  are  all  consistent,  is  a  true,  and 


CHAP.  i.  AN  ESSAY  o>7  TRUTH.  115 

not  a  fallacious  faculty  ?  or  that  a  sense  is  not  falla 
cious,  when  its  perceptions  coincide  with  the  percep 
tions  of  another  sense  ?  No,  I  can  prove  none  of 
these  points.  It  is  instinct,  and  not  reason,  that  de 
termines  me  to  believe  my  touch  ;  it  is  instinct,  and 
not  reason,  that  determines  me  to  believe,  that  visi 
ble  sensations,  when  consistent  with  tangible,  are  not 
fallacious  ;  and  it  is  either  instinct,  or  reasoning 
founded  on  experience,  (that  is,  on  the  evidence  of 
sense),  that  determines  rne  to  believe  the  man's  sta 
ture  a  permanent,  and  not  a  changeable  thing.  The 
evidence  of  sense  is  therefore  decisive  ;  from  it  there 
is  no  appeal  to  reason  :  and  if  I  were  to  become 
sceptical  in  regard  to  it,  I  should  believe  neither  the 
one  sense  nor  the  other ;  and  of  all  experience,  and 
experimental  reasoning,  I  should  become  equally  dis 
trustful. 

As  the  experience  of  an  undiscerning  or  careless 
spectator  may  be  confirmed,  or  corrected,  by  that  of 
one  who  is  more  attentive,  or  more  sagacious,  so  the 
evidence  of  au  imperfect  sense  may  be  corrected  by 
that  of  another  sense  which  we  conceive  to  be  more 
perfect.  But  the  evidence  of  sense  can  never  be 
corrected  by  any  reasoning,  except  by  that  which 
proceeds  on  a  supposition,  that  our  senses  are  not 
fallacious.  And  all  our  notions  concerning  the  per 
fection  or  imperfection  of  sense  are  either  instinc 
tive,  and  therefore  principles  of  common  sense  ;  or 
founded  in  experience,  and  therefore  ultimately  re. 
solvable  into  this  maxim,  That  things  are  what  our 
senses  represent  them. 

Lucretius  is  much  puzzled  (as  his  master  Epicu 
rus  had  been  before  him)  about  the  degree  of  credit 
due  to  our  visible  perceptions  of  magnitude.  He 
justly  enough  observes,  that  no  pi  inciple  can  be  con 
futed,  except  by  another  more  evident  principle  ; 
and,  therefore,  that  the  testimony  of  sense,  thaa 
which  nothing  is  more  evident,  cannot  be  confuted 
K 


Il6  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

at  all  *  :  that  the  testimony  of  the  nostrils  concern 
ing  odour  cannot  be  corrected  or  refuted  by  that  of 
the  eye,  nor  the  eye  by  the  ear,  nor  the  ear  by  the 
touch,  nor  the  touch  by  the  taste  ;  because  each  of 
these  senses  hath  a  set  of  objects  peculiar  to  itself, 
of  which  the  other  senses  cannot  judge,  because  in 
deed  they  cannot  perceive  them.  All  this  is  ve-ry 
well;  but  there  is  one  thing  wanting,  which  I  should 
think  obvious  enough,  even  to  one  of  Epicurean 
principles.  Of  tastes  we  judge  by  the  palate  only  ; 
of  smell,  by  the  nostrils  only  ;  of  sound,  by  the 
earsonly;  of  colours,  by  the  sight  only;  of  hard 
ness,  softness,  heat,  cold,  &c.  by  the  touch  only  ; 
but  of  magnitude  we  judge  both  by  sight  and 

*  See  Diogenes  Laertius,  book  10. — Lucretius  de  re- 
rum  natura,  lib.  4.  ver.  480.  This  author  had  sagacity 
enough  to  perceive  the  absurdity  of  Pyrrhonism,  and  to 
make  several  judicious  remarks  on  the  nature  of  evidence. 
But  in  applying  these  to  his  own  theory,  every  one  knows 
that  he  is  by  no  means  consistent.  The  poem  of  Lucre 
tius  is  a  melancholy  spectacle  j  it  is  the  picture  of  a  gieat 
genius  in  the  state  of  lunacy.  Except  when  the  whim  of 
his  sect  comes  across  his  imagination,  "he  argues  with  pro 
priety,  perspicuity,  and  elegance.  Pathos  of  sentiment, 
swreetness  of  style,  harmony  of  numbers,  and  a  beauty, 
and  sometimes  a  majesty  of  description,  not  unworthy  of 
Virgil,  render  his  poem  highly  amusir-g,  in  spite  of  its  ab 
surd  philosophy.  A  talent  for  extensive  observation  he 
seems  to  have  possessed  in  an  -extraordinary  degree  5  but 
\vherever  the  peculiar  tenets  .of  Epicureanism  are  con 
cerned,  he  sees  every  thing  through  a  false  medium.  So 
fatal  is  the  admission  of  wrong  principles.  Persons  of  the 
most  exalted  undsrstanding  have  as  much  need  to  guard 
against  them,  as  those  of  the  meanest  capacity.  If  they 
are  so  imprudent,  or  so  unfortunate  as  to  adopt  them, 
their  superior  genius,  like  the  strength  of  a  madman,  will 
serve  no  other  purpose  than  to  involve  them  in  greater  dif- 
f>rH'es,  and  give  them  the  power  of  doing  more  mis 
chief. 


CHAP.  I.  Atf  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  1 1  7 

touch.  In  regard  to  magnitude,  we  must  therefore 
believe  either  our  sight,  or  our  touch,  or  both,  or 
neither.  To  believe  neither  is  impossible  :  if  we  be 
lieve  both,  we  shall  contradict  ourselves  :  if  we  trust 
our  sight,  and  not  our  touch,  our  belief  at  one  time 
will  be  inconsistent  with  our  belief  at  another  ;  we 
shall  think  the  same  man  six  feet  high,  and  not  one 
foot  high  :  we  must  therefore  believe  our  touch,  if 
we  would  exert  any  consistent  belief  in  regard  to 
magnitude. 

a-.  But  do  we  not,  in  physical  experiments  ac 
knowledge  the  deceitfulness  of  sense,  when  we  have 
recourse  to'the  telescope  and  microscope ;  and  when, 
in  order  to  analyse  light,  which,  to  our  unassisted 
sight,  appears  one  uniform  uncompounded  thing, 
we  transmit  the  rays  of  it  through  a'  prism  ?  I  an 
swer,  this  implies  the  imperfection,  not  the  deceitful* 
nvss,  of  sense.  For  if  I  suppose  my  sight  fallacious, 
I  can  no  more  trust  it,  when  assisted  by  a- telescope 
or  microscope,  than  when  unassisted*  I  cannot 
prove,  that  things  are  as  they  appear  to-  my  unas 
sisted  sight;  and  lean  as  little  prove, that  the  things 
are  as  they  appear  to  my  sight  assisted  by  glasses. 

But  is  it  not  agreeable  to  common  sense  to  be 
lieve,  that  light  is  one  uniform  uncompounded  thing? 
and  if  so,  is  not  common  sense  in  an  error  ?  and  what 
can  rectify  this  error  but  reasoning  ? — 1  answer,  it 
is  undeniable,  that  light  to  the  unassisted  eye  appears 
uncompoundeJ  and  uniform.  If  from  this  I  infer, 
that  light  is  precisely  what  it  appears  to  be,  I  form 
a.  wrong  judgment,  which  I  may  afterwards  rectify, 
upon;  the  evidence  of  sense,,  when  I  see  a  ray  of  light 
transmitted  through'  a  prism.  Here  an  error  of 
judgment,  or  a  false  inference  of  reason,  is  rectified 
by  my  trusting  to  the  evidence  of  sense  ;  to  which 
evidence,  instinct,  or  common  sense  determines  me  to 
trust. 

Bat  is  it  not  common  sense  that  leads  me  to  form 
this  wrong  judgment  ?  Do  not  all  mankind  naturally, 
K  2 


Il8  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  PART    II. 

and  previously  to  all  influence  from  education,  judge 
in  the  same  manner?  Did  not  all  philosophers  be 
fore  Newton,  and  do  not  all  the  unlearned  to  this 
day,  believe  that  light  is  a  simple  fluid  : — I  answer, 
Common  Sense  teacheth  me,  and  all  mankind,  to 
trust  to  experience  :  Experience  tells  us,  that  our 
unassisted  sight,  though  sufficiently  acute  for  the  or 
dinary  purposes  of  life,  is  not  acute  enough  to  dis 
cern  the  minute  texture  of  visible  objects.  If,  not 
withstanding  this  experience,  we  believe,  that  the 
minute  texture  of  light,  or  of  any  other  visible  sub- 
stance,  is  nothing  different  from  that  appearance 
which  we  perceive  by  the  naked  eye  ;  then  our  be 
lief  contradicts  our  experience,  and  consequently  is 
inconsistent  with  common  sense. 

But  what  if  you  have  had  no  experience  sufficient 
to  convince  you,  that  your  senses  are  not  acute  e- 
nough  to  discern  the  texture  of  the  minute  parts  of 
bodies  ? — Then  it  is  certain,  that  I  can  never  attain 
this  conviction  by  mere  reasoning.  If  a  man  were  to 
reason  a  priori  about  the  nature  of  light,  he  might 
chop  logic  till  doomsday,  before  he  convinced  me, 
that  light  is  compounded  of  rays  of  seven  different 
colours.  But  if  he  tell  me  of  experiments  which  he 
has  made,  or  which  he  knows  to  have  been  made, 
this  is  quite  another  matter.  I  believe  his  testimony, 
and  it  makes  up  for  my  own  want  of  experience. 
When  I  confide  in  his  veracity,  I  conceive,  and  be 
lieve,  that  his  senses  communicated  a  true  percep 
tion  ;  and  that,  if  I  had  been  in  his  place,  I  should 
also  have  been  convinced,  by  the  evidence  of  my  sense, 
that  light  is  truly  compounded  of  rays  of  seven  dif 
ferent  colours.  But  I  must  repeat,  that  a  supposi 
tion  of  my  senses  being  fallacious,  would  render  me 
wholly  inaccessible  to  conviction,  both  on  the  one 
^ide  and  on  the  other. 

Suppose  a  man,  on  seeing  the  coloured  rays  thrown 
off  from  the  prism,  should  think  the  whole  a  delusion, 
and  owing  to  the  nature  of  the  medium  through 


CHAP.    I.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  lip 

which  the  light  is  transmitted,  not  to  the  nature  of 
the  light  itself ;  and  should  tell  me,  that  he  could  as 
easily  believe  my  face  to  be  of  a  green  colour,  be 
cause  it  has  that  appearance  when  viewed  through  a 
pair  of  green  spectacles,  as  that  every  ray  of  light 
consists  of  seven  distinct  colours,  because  it  has  that 
appearance  when  transmitted  through  a  prism  :-— 
would  it  be  possible  to  get  the  better  of  this  prejudice, 
without  reasoning  ?  I  answer,  it  would  not  :  but  the 
reasoning  used  must  all  depend  upon  experiments  ;. 
every  one  of  which  must  be  rejected,  if  the  testimony 
of  sense  be  not  admitted  as  decisive.  I  could  thinlc 
of  several  expedients,  in  the  way  of  appeals  to  sense, 
by  which  it  might  be  possible  to  reconcile  him  to  the. 
Newtonian  theory  of  light;  but,  in  the  way  of  ar 
gument,  I  cannot  devise  a  single  one. 

On  an  imperfect  view  of  nature,  false  opinions  may 
be  formed  :  but  these  may  be  rectified  by  a  more  per 
fect  view  ;  or,  which  in  many  cases  will  amount  to 
the  same  thing,  by  the  testimony  of  those  who  have 
obtained  a  more  perfect  view.  The  powers  of  man 
operate  only  within  a  certain  sphere  ;  and  till  an  ob 
ject  be  brought  within  that  sphere,  it  is  impossible 
for  them  to  perceive  it.  T  see  a  smallx  object,  which 
I  know  to  be  a  man  at  the  distance  of  half  a  mile  ; 
but  cannot  discern  his  complection,  whether  it  be- 
black  or  fair  ;  nor  the  colour  of  his  clothes,  whether 
it  be  brown,  or  black,  or  blue  ,  nor  his  nose,  whether, 
it  be  long  or  short :  I  cannot  even  discern,  whether  he- 
have  any  nose  at  all :  and  his  whole  body  seems  to  be 
of  one  uniform  black  colour,  Perhaps  I  am  so  foolish 
as  to  infer,  that  therefore  the  man  has  no  nose  ;  that 
his  clothes  are  black,,  and  his  face  of  the  colour  of  his 
clothes.  On  going  up  to  him,  I  discover  that  he  is  a 
handsome  man,  of  a  fair  complexion,  dressed  in  blue* . 
Surely  it  is  not  reasoning  that  sets  me  right  in  this, 
instance  ;  but  it  is  a  perfect  view  of  an  object  that, 
rectifies  a  wrong  opinion  formed  upon  an  imperfect 
view. 

K-3 


120  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART   If, 

I  hear  the  sound  of  a  musical  instrument  at  a  dis 
tance  ;  but  hear  it  so  faintly,  that  1  cannot  determine 
whether  it  be  that  of  a  trumpet,  a  hautboy,  a  Ger 
man  flute,  a  French  horn,  or  a  common  flute.  I  want 
to  know  from  what  instrument  the  sound  proceeds;  and 
I  have  no  opportunity  of  knowing  from  the  infor 
mation  of  others.  Shall  I  stand  still  where  I  am, 
and  reason  about  it  ?  no ;  that  would  make  me  no 
wiser.  I  go  forward  to  the  place  from  whence  the 
sound  seems  to  come  ;  and  by  and  by  I  can  perceive, 
that  the  sound  is  different  from  that  of  a  French  horn 
and  of  a  trumpet  :  but  as  yet  I  cannot  determine  whe 
ther  it  be  the  sound  .of  a  hautboy  or  of  aiilute.  I 
go  on  a  little  further,  and  now  I  plainly  distinguish 
the  sound  of  a  flute  ;  but  perhaps  I  shall  not  be  able 
to  know  whether  it  be  a  German  or  common  flute, 
except  by  means  of  my  other  senses,  that  is,  by  hand 
ling  or  looking  at  it. 

It  is  needless  to  multiply  instances  for  illustrating 
the  difference  between  a  perfect  and  an  imperfect  view 
of  an  object,  and  for  shewing,  that  the  mind  trusts 
to  the  former,  but  distrusts  the  latter.  For  obtain 
ing  a  perfect  view,  (or  perfect  perception),  we  some 
times  employ  the  same  sense  in  a  nearer  situation  ; 
sometimes  we  make  use  of  instruments,  as  ear-trum 
pets,  spectacles,  microscopes,  telescopes  ;  sometimes 
we  have  recourse  to  the  testimony  of  our  other  senses, 
or  of  the  senses  of  other  men  :  in  a  word,  we  rectify  or 
ascertain  the  evidence  of  sense  by  the  evidence  of 
sense :  but  we  never  subject  the  evidence  of  sense  to 
the  cognisance  of  reason  ;  for  in  sensations  that  are 
imperfect  or  indistinct, reasoning  could  neither  supply 
what  is  deficient,  nor  ascertain  what  is  indefinite. 

Oar  internal,  as  well  as  external  senses,  may  be, 
and  often  are,  imposed  upon,  by  inaccurate  views 
cf  their  objects.  We  may  in  sincerity  of  heart  ap 
plaud,  and  afterwards  condemn  the  same  perso-i  for 
the  same  action,  according  to  the  different  lights  in 
•which  that  action  is  presented  to  our  moral  faculty. 


CHAP.  I.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

Just  now  I  hear  a  report,  that  a  human  body  is  found 
dead  in  the  neighbouring  fields,  with  marks  of  vio 
lence  upon  it.  Here  a  confused  suspicion  arises  in 
my  mind  of  murder  committed  ;  but  my  conscience 
suspends  its  judgment  till  the  true  state  of  the  case 
be  better  known  :  I  am  not  as  yet  in  a  condition  to 
perceive  those  qualities  of  this  event  which  ascertain 
the  morality  of  the  action  ;  no  more  than  I  can  per 
ceive  the  beauty  or  deformity  of  a  face  while  it  is 
veiled,  or  at  too  great  distance.  A  passenger  informs 
me,  that  a  person  has  been  apprehended  who  con 
fesses  himself  the  murderer  ;  my  moral  faculty  in 
stantly  suggests,  that  this  person  has  committed  a 
crime  worthy  of  a  most  severe  and  exemplary  punish 
ment.  By  and  by  I  learn,  from  what  I  think  good 
authority,  that  my  former  information  is  false,  for 
that  the  man  now  dead  had  made  an  unprovoked  as 
sault  on  the  other,  who  was  thus  driven  to  the  ne 
cessity  of  killing  him  in  self-defence  ;  my  con 
science  immediatci^  acquits  the  man-slayer.  I  send 
a  messenger  to  make  particular  enquiry  into  this 
affair  ;  who  brings  word  that  the  man  was  acciden 
tally  killed  by  a  fowler  shooting  at  a  bird,,  who,  be 
fore  he  fired,  had  been  at  all  possible  pains  to  dis 
cover  whether  any  human  creature  was  in  the  way  ; 
but  that  the  deceased  was  in  such  a  situation  that  he 
could  not  be  discovered.  I  regret  the  accident ;  but 
I  blame  neither  party.  Afterwards  I  learn,  that 
this  fowler  was  a  careless  fellow,  and  though  he  had 
no  b?;d  intention,  was  not  at  due  pains  to  observe 
whether  any  human  creature  would  be  hurt  by  his 
firing.  I  blame  his  negligence  with  great  severity,, 
but  I  cannot  charge  him  with  guilt  so  enormous  as 
that  of  murder.  Here  my  moral  faculty  passes  se 
veral  different  judgments  on  tie  same  action  ;  and  each 
of  them  is  right,  and  will  be  in  its  turn  believed  to 
be  right,  and  trusted  to  accordingly,  as  long  as  the 
information  which  gave  rise  to  it  is  believed  to  be 
true.  I  say  tbe  saf?2e  action,  not  the  same  intention  ,• 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  ir. 

a  different  intentjon  appears  in  the  man-slayer  from 
each  information  ;  and  it  is  only  the  intention  and  af 
fections  that  the  moral  faculty  condemns  or  approves-. 
To  discover  the  intention  wherewith  actions  are  per 
formed,  reasoning  is  often  necessary  ;  but  the  design 
of  such  reasoning,  is  not  to  sway  or  inform  the  con 
science,  but  only  to  ascertain  those  circumstances  or 
qualities  of  the  action  from  which  the  intention  of 
the  agent  may  appear.  When  this  becomes  manifest 
the  conscience  of  mankind  immediately  and  intui 
tively  declares  it  to  be  virtuous,  or  vitious,  or  inno^- 
cent. — These  different  judgments  of  the  moral  facul 
ty  are  so  far  from  proving  it  fallacious,  that  they 
prove  the  contrary  ;  at  least  this  faculty  would  bs 
extremely  fallacious,  and  absolutely  useless,  if,  in 
the  case  now  supposed,  it  did  not  form  different  judg 
ments. — While  the  intention  of  the  agent  is  wholly 
unknown,  an  action  is  upon  the  same  footing  in  re 
gard  to  its  morality,  as  a  human  face,  in  regard  to 
its  beauty,  while  it  is  veiled,  or  at  too  great  distance, 
By  removing  the  veil,  or  walking  up  to  the  object, 
we  perceive  its  beauty  and  features  ;  and  by  reason 
ing,  or  by  information  concerning  the  circumstances 
of  the  action,  we  are  enabled  to  discover  or  infer  the 
intention  of  the  agent.  The  act  of  removing  the 
veil,  or  of  walking  up  to  the  object,  has  no  effect  en 
the  eye  ;  nor  has  the  reasoning  any  effect  on  the  con* 
science. — While  we  view  an  object  through  an  im 
pure  or  unequal  medium,  through  a  pair  of  green 
spectacles,  or  an  uneven  pane  of  glass,  we  see  it  dis 
coloured  or  distorted  ;  just  so,  when  misrepresented, 
a  good  action  may  seem  evil,  and  an  evil  action  good. 
If  we  be  suspicious  of  the  representation,  if  we  be 
aware  of  the  improper  medium,  we  distrust  the  ap 
pearance  accordingly  ;.  if  not,  we  do,  and  must  believe 
it  genuine.  It  is  by  reasoning  from  our  experience 
of  human  actions  and  their  causes,  or  by  the  testi 
mony  of  credible  witnesses,  that  we  detect  misrepre 
sentations  concerning  moral  conduct  5  and  it  is  also 


CHAP.  I.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  12$ 

by  the  experience  of  our  own  senses,  or  by  our  be 
lief  in  those  who  have  had  such  experience,  that  we 
become  sensible  of  inequalities  or  obscurities  in  the 
medium  through  which  we  contemplate  visible  ob 
jects.  In  either  case  the  evidence  of  sense  is  admit 
ted  as  finally  decisive.  A  distempered  sense,,as  well 
as  an^  impure  or  unequal  medium,  may  doubtless 
communicate  false  sensations  ;  but  we  are  never  im 
posed  upon  by  them  in  matters  of  consequence.  A 
person  in  a  fever  may  think  honey  bitter,  and  the 
smell  of  a  rose  offensive ;  but  the  delusion  is  of  so 
short  continuance,  and  of  so  singular  a  kind,  that  it 
can  do  no  harm,  either  to  him,  or  to  the  cause  of 
truth.  To  a  jaundiced  eye,  the  whole  creation  may 
seem  tinctured  with  yellow  ;  but  the  patient's  former 
experience,  and  his  belief  in  the  testimony  of  others, 
who  assure  him,  that  they  perceive  no  alteration  in 
the  colour  of  bodies,  and  that  the  alteration  he  per 
ceives  is  a  common  attendant  on  his  disease,  \vill  suf 
ficiently  guard  him  against  mistakes.  If  he  were  to 
distrust  the  evidence  of  sense,  he  could  believe 
neither  his  own  experience  nor  their  testimony. 
He  corrects,  or  at  least  becomes  sensible  of  the  false 
sensation,  by  means  of  sensations  formerly  received 
ivhen  he  was  in  health  ;  that  is,  he  corrects  the  evi 
dence  of  an  ill-informed  sense  by  that  of  a  well-in 
formed  sense,  or  by  the  declaration  of  those  whose 
senses  he  believes  to  be  better  informed  than  his 
own.  Still  it  is  plain,  that  from  the  evidence  of 
sense  there  can  be  no  appeal  to  reason. 

We  conclude,  therefore,  that  in  natural  philosophy 
our  sensations  are  not  supposed  fallacious,  and  that 
reasoning  is  not  carried  beyond  the  principles  of  com 
mon  sense.  And  yet  in  this  science  full  scope  is 
given  to  impartial  investigation.  If,  after  the  first 
experimental  process,  you  suspect  that  the  object 
may  be  set  in  a  still  fairer  light,  I  know  no  law  in 
logic,  or  in  good  sense,  that  can  or  ought  to  hinder 
you  from  making  a  new  trial :  but  if  this  new  trial 


124  AN  ESSAY  ON   TRUTH.  FART  II. 

turn  to  account  ;  if  the  object  still  appear  the  same, 
or  if  it  appear  less  distinct  than  before,  it  wer  -  folly 
not  to  remain  satisfied  with  the  first  trial.  Newton 
transmitted  one  of  the  refracted  primitive  colours 
through  a  second  prism,  thinking  it  not  impost,,  u:e 
that  tljus  colour  might  resolve  itself  into  other  still 
more  simple,  but  finding  it  remain  unaltered,  he  was 
satisfied  that  the  primitive  colours  are  not  com  pound 
ed,  but  simple,  and  that  the  experimental  process  had 
already  been  carried  far  enough. — I  take  in  my  hand 
a  perspective  glass,  whose  tube  may  be  lengthened 
and  shortened  at  pleasure  ;  and  I  am  to  find  out  by 
my  own  industry,  that  precise  length  at  which  the 
maker  designed  it  should  be  used  in  looking  at  dis 
tant  objects.  I  make  several  trials  to  no  purpose  ; 
the  distant  object  appears  not  at  all,  or  but  very  con 
fusedly.  I  hold  one  end  of  the  perspective  at  my 
eye  with  one  hand,  and  with  the  other  I  gradually 
shorten  the  tube,  having  first  drawn  it  out  to  its 
greatest  length.  At  first  all  is  confusion  ;  now  I  can 
discern  the  inequalities  of  the  mountains  in  the  hori 
zon  ;  now  the  object  I  am  in  quest  of  begins  to  ap 
pear  ;  it  becomes  less  and  less  confused  ;  I  see  it  dis 
tinctly.  I  continue  to  shorten  the  tube  ;  the  object 
loses  its  distinct  appearance,  and  begins  to  relapse 
into  its  former  obscurity.  After  many  trials,  I  find 
that  my  perspective  exhibits  no  distinct  appearance 
except  when  it  is  of  one  particular  length.  Here 
then  I  fix  ;  I  have  adjusted,  the  glasses  according  to 
the  intentio  i  of  the  maker  ;  and  I  believe  that  the 
distinct  appearance  is  an  accurate  representation  of 
the  distant  obj-ect,  or  at  least  more  accurate  than  any 
of  the  confused  appearances  ;  of  which  I  believe,  that 
they  come  the  nearer  to  truth  the  more  they  ap 
proach  to  distinctness,  and  that  the  most  confused 
representations  are  the  most  false. 

It  was  not  by  reasoning  about  the  fallacy  of  the 
senses,  and  prosecuting  a  train  of  argument  beyond 
the  principles  of  common  sense,  that. men  discovered 


CHAP.  F.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  1.2$ 

the  tru  svstetn  of  the  world.  In  the  earlier  ages, 
when  they  imagined  the  sun  to  be  little  bigger  than 
the  mountain  beyond  which  he  disappeared,  it  was 
absurd  to  think  of  the  earth  revolving  round  him. 
Bat  in  process  of  time,  ingenious  men,  who  applied 
themselves  to  the  observation  of  the  heavenly  bo 
dies,  not  with  a  view  to  confute  popular  errors,  for 
they  could  not  as  yet  even  suspect  the  vulgar  opi 
nion  to  be  erroneous,  bu-t  merejy  to.  gratify  their  own 
laudihle  curiosity,  began  to  conceive  more  exalted 
notions  of  the  mundane  system.  They  soon  distin 
guished  the  planets  from  the  fixed  stars,  by  observ 
ing  the  former  to  be  more  variable  in  their  appear 
ances.  After  a  long  succession  of  years,  employed, 
not  in  reasoning,  but  attentive  observation,  they 
came  at  last  to  understand  the  motions  of  the  sun 
and  moon  so  well,  that,  to  the  utter  astonishment  of 
the  vulgar,  they  began  to  calculate  eclipses:  a  de 
gree  of  knowledge  they  could  not  attain,  without  be 
ing  convinced,  that  the  sun  and  moon  are  very  large 
bodies,  placed  at  very  gjreat  distances  from  the  earth, 
the  former  much  larger,  and  more  remote,  than  the 
latter.  Thus  far  it  is  impossible  to  shew,  that  any 
reasoning  had  been  employed  by  those  ancient  as 
tronomers,  either  to  prove,  or  to  disprove,  the  evi 
dence  of  the  senses.  On  the  contrary,  they  must  all 
along  have  taken  it  for  granted,  that . the  senses  are 
not  fallacious  ;  supposing  only,  (what  it  is  certainly- 
agreeable  to  common  sense  to  suppose),  that  the  ex 
perience  of  a  diligent  observer  is  more  to  be  depen 
ded  on  than  that  of  the  inattentive  .multitude.  As 
men  grew  more  and  more  acquainted  with  the  motions 
and  appearances  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  they  became 
more  and  more  sensible,  that  the  sun,  earth,  and 
planets,  bear  some  very  peculiar  relation  to  one  a- 
nother  :  and  having  learned  from  the  phenomena  of 
eclipses,  and  some  other  natural  appearances,  that 
the  sun  is  bigger  than  the  earth  *,  they  might, 

*    Heraclitus  maintained,  that   the    sun  is    but  a   foot 
broad  5  Anaxagoras,  that  he  is   much. larger  than   the 


J26  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

•without  absurdity,  begin  to  suspect,  that  possibly 
the  sun  might  be  the  centre  round  which  the  earth 
and  other  planets  revolve  ^especially  considering  the 
magnificence  ot  that  glorious  luminary,  and  the  won 
derful  and  delightful  effects  produced  by  the  influ 
ence  of  his  beams,  while  at  the  same  time  he  seems 
not  to  derive  any  advantage  from  the  earth,  or  other 
planets.  But  if  the  matter  had  been  carried  no  fur 
ther,  no  reasoning  from  these  circumstances  could 
ever  have  amounted  to  a  proof  of  the  point  in  ques 
tion,  tnough  it  might  breed  a  faint  presumption  in 
its  favour.  For  still  the  evidence  of  sense  seemed 
to  contradict  it  ;  an  evidence  which  nothing  can  dis 
prove,  but  the  evidence  of  sense  placed  in  circum 
stances  more  favourable  to  accurate  observation. 
The  invention  of  optical  glasses  did  at  last  furnish 
the  means  of  making  experiments  with  regard  to 
this  matter,  and  of  putting  man  in  circumstances 
more  favourable  to  accurate  observation  ;  and  thus 
the  point  was  brought  to  the  test  of  common  sense. 
And  r.ow,  we  not  only  know:,  that  the  Copernican 
theory  is  true,  for  every  person  who  understands  it 
is  convinced  of  its  truth  ;  but  we  also  know  to  what 
causes  the  universal  belief  of  the  contrary  doctrine 
is  to  be  ascribed.  We  know  that  men,  considering 
the  remote  situation  of  our  earth,  and  the  imperfec 
tion  of  our  senses,  could  not  have  judged  otherwise 
than  they  did,  till  that  imperfection  was  remedied, 
either  by  accuracy  of  observation,  or  by  the  inven 
tion  of  optical  instruments.  We  speak  not  of  reve 
lation  5  which  has  indeed  been  vouchsafed  to  man 

country  of  Peloponnesus  ^  and  Epicurus,  that  he  is  no 
bigger  than  he  appears  to  the  eye.  But  the  astronomers  p£ 
antiquity  maintained,  that  he  is  bigger  than  the  earth  j 
eight  times,  according  to  the  Egyptians  •,  eighteen  times, 
according  to  Eratosthenes  j  three  hundred  times,  accord 
ing  to  Cleomedfes  j  one  thousand  and  fifty  times,  accord 
ing  to  Hi^parchus  -?  and  fifty -nine  thousand  three  hundred 
add  nineteen  times,  according  to  Possidonius. 


CHAP.  I.          AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.          127 

fol*  the  regulation  of  his  moral  conduct  ;  but  which 
it  would  be  presumption  to  expect  or  desire,  mere 
ly  for  the  gratification  of  curiosity. 

It  is  evident,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  in 
natural  philosophy,  as  well  as  in  mathematics,  no 
argumentation  is  prosecuted  beyond  self-evident 
principles  ;  that  as  in  the  latter  all  reasoning  termi 
nates  in  intuition,  so  in  the  former  all  reasoning  ter 
minates  in  the  evidence  of  sense.  And  as,  in  ma~ 
thematics,  that  is  accounted  an  intuitive  axiom, which 
is  of  itself  so  clear  and  evident,  that  it  cannot  be  il 
lustrated  or  inforced  by  any  medium  of  proof,  and 
which  must  be  believed,  and  is  in  fact  believed  by 
all  on  its  own  authority  ;  so,  in  natural  philosophy, 
that  is  accounted  an  ultimate  principle,  undeniable 
and  unquestionable,  which  is  supported  by  the  evi 
dence  of  a  well-informed  sense,  placed  so  as  to  per 
ceive  its  object.  In  mathematics,  that  is  accounted 
false  doctrine  which  is  inconsistent  with  any  self- 
evident  principle  ;  in  natural  philosophy,  that  is  re 
jected  which  contradicts  matter  of  fact,  or,  in  other 
words,  which  is  repugnant  to  the  appearances  of 
things  as  perceived  by  external  sense. 

Regulated  by  this  criterion  of  truth,  mathematics 
and  natural  philosophy  have  become  of  all  sciences 
the  most  respectable  in  point  of  certainty.  Hence 
I  am  encouraged  to  hope,  that  if  the  same  criterion 
were  universally  adopted  in  the  philosophy  of  the  , 
mind,  the  science  of  human  nature,  instead  of  being, 
as  at  present,  a  chaos  of  uncertainty  and  contradiction, 
would  acquire  a  considerable  degree  of  certainty,  per 
spicuity,  and  order.  If  truth  be  at  all  attainable  in 
this  science,  ("and  if  it  is  not  attainable,  why  should 
we  trouble  our  heads  about  it?)  surely  it  must  be  at 
tained  by  the  same  means  as  in  those  other  sciences. 
For  of  the  eternal  relations  and  fitnesses  of  things, 
we  know  nothing :  all  that  we  know  of  truth  and 
falsehood  is,  that  our  constitution  determines  us  in 
spine  cases  to  believe,  in  others  to  disbelieve  j  and 

L 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  u. 

that  to  us  is  truth  which  we  feel  that  we  must  be 
lieve  ;  and  that  to  us  is  falsehood  which  we  feel  that 
we  must  disbelieve*.  There  are  innumerable  truths 
with  which  we  are  wholly  unacquainted  ;  there  are 
perhaps  some  truths  which  we  reject  as  falsehood  : 
but,  surely,  we  must  both  know  and  believe  a  truth 
before  we  can  acknowledge  it  as  such  :  and  belief  is 
nothing  but  a  perception,  or,  if  you  please,  an  action 
of  the  mind,  the  peculiar  nature  of  which  we  all  know 
by  internal  feeling  or  consciousness,  and  cannot  pos 
sibly  know  in  any  other  way. 

I  therefore  would  propose,  "  That  in  the  philo- 
**  sophy  of,  human  nature,  as  well  as  in  physics  and 
*'  mathematics.,  principles  be  examined  according  to 
"  the  standard  of  common  sense,  and  be  admitted  or 
"  rejected  as  they  are  found  to  agree  or  disagree  with 
"  it :"  more  explicitly,  "  That  those  doctrines  be 
"  rejected  which  contradict  matter  of  fact,  that  is, 
**  which  are  repugnant  to  the  appearances  of  things, 
66  as  perceived  by  external  and  internal  sense ;  and  that 
-e  those  principles  be  accounted  ultimate,  undeniable, 
**  and  unquestionable,  which  are  warranted  by  the 
*'  evidence  of  a  well-informed  sense,  placed  in  cir- 
**  cumstauces  favourable  to  a  distinct  perception  of 
*'f  its  object." 

But  what  do  you  mean  by  a  well  informed  sense  ? 
How  shall  I  know,  that  any  particular  faculty  of 
mine  is  not  defective,  depraved,  or  fallacious  ? — 
Perhaps  it  is  not  easy,  at  least  it  would  furnish  mat 
ter  for  too  long  a  digression,  to  give  a  full  answer 
to  this  question.  Nor  is  it  at  present  necessary; 
because  it  will  appear  in  the  sequel,  that,  however 
difficult  it  may  be  in  some  .cases  to  distinguish  a 
first  principle,  yet  there  are  certain  marks,  by  which 
those  reasonings  that  tend  to  the  subversion  of  a 
first  principle,  may  be  detected,  at  least  in  all  cases 
of  importance.  However,  we  shall  o^er  a  remark 

*  See  the  next  section,. 


CHAP.  I.  AN  ESSAY   ON    TRUTH.  129 

or  two  in  answer  to  the  question  ;  which,  though 
they  should  not  appear  perfectly  unexceptionable, 
may  yet  throw  light  on  the  subject,  and  serve  to  pre 
pare  the  mind  of  the  reader  for  some  things  that  are 
to  follow.  o 

First,  then,  if  I  wanted  to  certify  myself  concern- o 
ing  any  particular  sense  or  percipient  faculty,  that 
k  is  neither  depraved  nor  defective,  I  should  attend 
to  the  feelings  or  sensations  communicated  by  it  j 
and  observe,  whether  they  be  clear  and  definite,  and 
such  as  I  am,  of  my  own  accord,  disposed  to  confide 
in  without  hesitation,  as  true,  genuine,  and  natural. 
If  they  are  such,  I  should  certainly  act  upon  them 
till  I  had  some  positive  reason  to  think  them  falla 
cious. — Secondly,  I  consider,  whether  the  sensations 
received  by  this  faculty  be  uniformly  similar  in  similar 
Circumstances  :  if  they  are  not,  I  should  suspect, 
either  that  it  is  now  depraved,  or  was  formerly  so  ; 
and  if  I  had  no  other  criterion  to  direct  me,  should 
be  much  at  a  loss  to  know  whether  I  ought  to  trust 
the  former  or  the  latter  experience  ;  perhaps  I  should 
distrust  both.  If  they  are  uniform,  if  my  present 
and  my  past  experience  do  exactly  coincide,  t  shall 

then  b?  disposed  to  think  them  both  right Thirdly, 

I  consider,  whether,  in  acting  upon  the  supposition 
that  the  facalty  in  question  is  well-informed,  I  have 
ever  been  miskd  to  rny  hurt  or  inconvenience  ;  if 
not,  then  have  I  good  reason  to  think,  that  I  was 
not  mistaken  when  I  formed  that  supposition,  and 
that  this  faculty  is  really  what  I  supposed^  to  be. 
— Fourthly,  If  the  sensations  communicated  by  this 
faculty  be  incompatible  with  one  another,  or  irrecon- 
cileable  to  the  perceptions  of  my  other  faculties,  I 
should  suspect  a  depravation  of  the  former  :  for  the 
laws  of  nature,  as  far  as  my  experience  goes,  are  con 
sistent  ;  and  I  have  a  natural  tendency  to  believe  that 
they  are  universally  so.  It  is  therefore  a  presump 
tion,  that  my  faculties  are  well  informed,  when  the 
perceptions  of  one.  are  quite  consistent  witli  those  of 
L  2 


130  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART    II* 

the  rest,  and  with  one  another. —  In  a  state  of  soli 
tude  1  must  satisfy  myself  with  these  criteria  ;  but 
in  society  I  have  access  to  another  criterion,  which, 
in  many  cases,  will  be  reckoned  more  decisive  than 
any  o^f  these,  and  which,  in  concurrence  with  these, 
will  be  sufficient  to  banish  doubt  from  every  ra 
tional  mind.  1  compare  my  sensations  and  notions 
with  those  of  other  men  ;  and  if  I  find  a  perfect  coin 
cidence,  I  shajl  then  be  satisfied  that  my  sensations 
are  according  to  the  law  of  human  nature,  and  there 
fore  right. — To  illustrate  all  this  by  an  example  : 

r>I  want  to  know  whether  my  sense  of  seeing  be  a 
well-in forTned  faculty. — First,  I  have  reason  to  think 
that  it  is  ;  because  my  eyes  communicatfe  to  me  such 
sensations  as  I,  of  my  own  accord,  am  disposed  to 
confide  in.  There  is  something  in  my  perceptions 
of  sight  ,so  distinct,  and  so  definite,  that  I  do  not 
find  myself  in  the  least  disposed  to  doubt  whether 
things  be  what  my  eyes  represent  tbem.  Even  the 
obscurer  informations  of  this  faculty  carry  along  with 
them  their  own  evidence,  and  my  belief.  I  am  con 
fident,  that  the  sun  and  moon  are  round,  as  they  ap 
pear  to  be,  that  the  rainbow  is  arched,  that  grass  is 
green,,  snow  white  and  the  heavens  azure  ;  and  this  I' 
should  have  believed,  though  I  had  passed  ail  my 
days  in  solitude,  and  never  known  any  thing  of  other 
animals,  or  their  senses. — Secondly,  I  find  that  my 
notions  of  the  visible  qualities  of  bodies  are  the  same 
now  they  have  always  been.  If  this  were  riot  the 
case  ;  if  $here  I  saw  greenness  yesterday  I  were  to 
see  yellow  to-day,  I  should,  be  apt  to  suppose,  that 
my  sight  had  suffered  some  depravation,  except  I 
had  reason  to  think,  that  the  object  had  really  chang 
ed  colour.  Rut  indeed  we  have  so  strong  a  tendency 
to  believe  our  senses,  that  I  doubt  riot  but  fn  such  a 
case  I  should  be  more  disposed  to  suspect  a  change 
in  the  object  than  in  my  eye-sight  :  much  would  de 
pend  on  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  We  rub  our 
eyes  when  we  want  to  look  at  any  thing  with  acc.u- 


CHAP.    I.  AN   ESSAY    ON    TRUTH. 

racy  ;  for  we  know  by  experience,  that  motes,  and 
cloudy  specks,  which  may  be  removed  by  rubbing, 
do  sometimes  float  in  the  eye,  and  hurt  the  sight. 
But  if  the  alteration  of  the  visible  qualities  in  the 
external  object  be  such  as  we  have  never  experienced 
from  a  depravation  of  the  organ,  we  should  be  in 
clined  to  trust  our  eye-sight,  rather  than  to  suppose 

that  the   external  object   has  remained  unaltered 

Thirdly,  no  evil  consequence  has  ever  happened  to 
me  when  acting  upon  the  supposition,  that  my  fa 
culty  of  seeing  is  a  well  informed  sense  :  whereas,  if 
if  I  were  to  act  on  the  contrary  supposition, 
I  should  soon  have  cause  to  regret  my  scepticism.  I 
see  a  post  in  my  way  ;  by  turning  a  little  aside,  I 
pass  it  unhurt :  but  if  I  had  supposed  my  sight  falla 
cious,  and  gone  straight  forward,  a  bloody  nose,  or 
something  worse,  might  have  been  the  consequence. 
If,  when  I  bend  my  course  obliquely,  in  order  to 
avoid  the  post  that  seems  to  stand  directly  before 
me,  I  were  to  run  my  head  full  against  it,  I  should 
instantly  suspect  a  depravation  in  my  eye-sight :  but 
as  I  never  experience  any  misfortune  of  this  kind,  I 
believe  that  my  sense  of  seeing  is  a  well-informed 
faculty. — Fourthly,  the  perceptions  received  by  this- 
sense  are  perfectly  consistent  with  one  another,  anJ 
with  the  perceptions  received  by  my  other  faculties. 
When  I  see  the  appearance  of  a  solid  body  in  rny 
way,  my  touch  always  confirms  the  testimony  of  my 
sight  ;  if  it  did  not,  1  should  suspect  a  fallacy  in  one 
or  other  of  those  senses,  perhaps  in  both.  When  I 
look  on  a  line  of  soldiers,  they  all  seem  standing  per 
pendicular,  as  I  my s; If  stand  j  but  if  the  men  at  the 
extremities  of  the  line,  without  leaning  against  any 
thing,  were  to  appear  as  if  they  formed  an  angle  of 
forty-five  degrees  with  the  earth's  surface,  I  should, 
suspec^some  unaccountable  obliquity  in  my  vision. 
— Lastly,  after  the  experience  of  several  years,  after 
all  the  knowledge  I  hax^e  been  able  to  gather,  concern- 
ing  the' sensations  of  other  men,  from  reading,  dis-* 
k  3 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH,  PART  IIw 

course,  and  observation,  I  have  no  reason  to  think 
their  sensations  of  sight  different  from  mine.     Every 
body  who  uses  the  English  language  calls  snow  whitey 
and  grass  green  ;  and  it  would  be  in  the  highest  de 
gree  absurd  to  suppose,  that  what  they  call  the  sen. 
sation.  of  whiteness,  is  not  the  same  sensation  which 
I  call  by  that  name.     Some  few,  perhaps,  see  differ 
ently  from  me.     A  man  in  the  jaundice  sees  that  rose 
yellow  which  I  see  red  -y  a  short  sighted   man  sees 
that  picture  confusedly  at  the  distance  of  three  yards,, 
•which  I  see  distinctly.       But  far  the  greater  part  of 
mankind  see  as  I  do,   and  differently  from  those  few 
individuals  ;  whose    sense  of  seeing  I  therefore  con 
sider  as  less  perfect  than  mine.     Nay,  tho'  the  gene 
rality  of  mankind   were  short-sighted,  still  it  would 
be  true,  that  we,  who  are  not  so,  have  the  most  per 
fect  sight  ;  for  our  sight  is  more  accurate  in  its  per 
ceptions,  qualifies  us  better  for  the  business  of  life,  and 
coincides  more  exactly,  or  at  least  more  immediately, 
with    the   sensations    received   by    the  other  senses* 
Yet  the  short-sighted,  as  well  as  they  who  have  ihe 
acutest  sight,  trust  to  this  sense,  as  soon  as  they  are 
placed  in  a  situation  favourable  to  accurate  observa 
tion:    all  the  difference   is,  that  it  is  more  difficult, 
and  often  more  inconvenient,   for  short   sighted   per 
sons  to  place  themselves  in  such  a  situation.      Still  it 
should  be  remembered  thjat  a  perfect  sense  and  a  well- 
informed  sense  are  not  synonymous  terms.     We  call 
a  sense  welt-informed,,  in  opposition  to  one  that  is  de 
praved  or  fallacious.       Perfection  and    imperfection 
of  sense  are  relative  terms  ;  implying  a  comparison, 
either  between  different  men,  in  respect  of  the  acute- 
ness  of  their  senses  and  faculties  ;   or   between  any 
sense,  as  it  appears  in  a  particular  man,  and  the   de 
gree  of  acuteness  which  is  found   to   belong   to   that 
sense  as    it  appears   in  the  generality  of  m^pkind. 
There  are  two  telescopes,  one  of  which    gives  a  di 
stinct  view  of  an  object  at  two,  and  the  other  at  four 
miles  distance  ;  both  are  equally  well-informed,  (if 


CHAP.  T.  AN    ESSA.Y    ON    TRUTJI.  133; 

I  may  so  speak)  ;  that  is,  equally  true  in  their  re* 
presentations  j  but  the  one  is  much  more  imperfect 
than  the  other. 

I  do  not,  at  present,  offer  any  further  illustrations 
of  these  criteria  of  a  well-informed  sense.  The 
reader  who  examines  them  by  the  rules  of  common 
prudence,  will  perhaps  be  satisfied  with  them  :  at 
least  I  arn  apt  to  think,  that  few  will  suspect  the 
veracity  of  their  faculties  when  they  stand  this  test. 
But  let  it  not  be  supposed,  that  1  mean  to  insinuate, 
that  a  man  never  trusts  his  faculties  till  he  first  ex 
amine  them  after  this  manner  :  we  believe  our  senses 
previously  to  all  reflection  or  examination  ;  and  ws 
never  disbelieve  them,  but  upon  the  authority  of  our 
senses  placed  in  circumstances  more  favourable  ta 
accurate  observation. 

If  the  reader  is  not  satisfied  with  these  criteria, 
it  is  no  great  matter.  The  question  concerning  a 
well-informed  sense  it  1*3  not  perhaps  easy  to  answer. 
I  offer  these'remarks  rather  as  hints  to  be  attended 
to  by  other  adventurers  in  (his  part  of  science,  than 
as  a  complete  solution  of  the  difficulty.  If  it  were. 
not  that  I  presume  some  advantage  may  be  derived 
from  them  in  this  way,  I  should  have  omitted  them 
altogether  ;  for  on  them  dees  not  depend  the  doctrine 
I  mean,  to  establish. 

SECT.     III. 

Tie  subject  continued.      Intuitive  truths  distinguish 
able  into  classes. 


the  notions  attending  the  perception  of  certain 
^  truth,    we    formerly    mentioned    this    as    one,, 
That  iryegaru  to  such  truth,  we  suppose  we  should 
"  entertain   the  same   sentiments    and  belief  if  we 
'  were  perfectly  acquainted  with  all  nature*."  Lest 
it  should  be  thought  that  we  mean  to  extend  this  no<* 

*  See  part  1,  chap,  1. 


f  34  AN  ESSA?  ON  TRUTH.  PRAT  II. 

tion  too  far,  it  seems  proper  to  introduce  here  the 
following  remarks. 

1.  The  axioms   and  demonstrated  conclusions  of 
geometry  are  certainly  true,  and  certainly  agreeable 
to  the  nature  of  things.     Thus  we  judge  of  them  at 
present  ;   and  thus   we  necessarily  believe,  that  we 
should  judge  of  them,  even  if  we  were  endued  with 
omniscience  and  infallibility.     It  is  a  natural  dictate 
of  human  understanding,  that  the  contrary  of  these 
truths  must  for  ever  remain  absurd  and  impossible, 
and   that   omnipotence  itself  cannot  change  their  na 
ture  ;   though   it  might  so  deprave  our  judgment  as 
to  make  us  disbelieve  or  not  perceive  them  *. 

2.  That  my  body  exists,   and   is  endued  with  a 
thinking,  active,  and  permanent  principle,  which  I 

*  Some   authors  are  of  opinion,  that  all  mathematical 
truth  is  resoiveable  into  identical  propositions.     The  fol 
lowing  remark  to  this  purpose  is  taken  from  a  Dissertation 
on  Evidence,  printed  at  Berlin  in  the  year  1764.     "  Omnes 
"  mathematicorum  propositions  sunt  iclenticae,  et  rcpraesen 
"  tantur  hac  formula,  a=a  Sunt  veritates  identicas,  sub 
'*  varia  forma  expressae,  imo  ipsum,  quod  dicitur,  contra- 
"  dictionis  principium,  vario  modo  enunciatum  et  involu- 
"  turn  j  siquidem  omnes  hujus  generis  propositiones  revera 
"  in  eo  contineantur.      Secundum  nostram  autem  intelli- 
"  gendi  facultatem  ea  est  propositionum  differentia,  quod 
'*  quaedam   longa  ratiociniorum   serie,  alia  autem  breviori 
"  via,  ad  primum  omnium  principium  reducantur,  et  in 
44  illud  resolvantur.      Sic.  v.  g.   propositio  2  -f  2=4,  statim 
"  hue  cedit  1+1+1+1=1+1+1  +  1,  i.  e.    idem  5  et, 
"  proprie  loquendo,  hoc  modo  enunciari  debet. — Si  con- 
44  tingat,  adessevel  existere  quatuor  entia  j  turn  existunt  qua- 
"  tucr entia  •?namdeexistentianonaguntgeometraE,  sedeahy- 
"  pothetice  tan  turn  subinteliigitur.  Inde  summa  oritur  certi- 
'*  tudo  ratiocinia  perspicienti  \  observat  nempe  idearum  identi- 
**  tatemjet  hxc  est  evidentia,  assensum  immediate  cogens, 
"  quam  mathematicam  aut  geometricam  vocamus.  Mathesi 
"  tamen  sua  natura  priva  non  est  et  propria ;  oritur  etenim 
"  ex  identitatis  perceptione,  quae  locum  habere  potest,  e- 
"  tiamsi  idess  non  repr^sentent  extensum."' 


CHAP.  I.          AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.        135 

call  my  soul ; — That  the  material  world  hath  such 
an  existence  as  the  vulgar  ascribe  to  it,  that  is,  a  real 
separate  existence,  to  which  its  being  perceived  is  in 
no  wise  necessary  : — That  the  men,  beasts,  houses^ 
and  mountains,  we  see  and  feel  around  us,  are  not 
imaginary,  but  real  and  material  beings,  and  suchr 
in  respect  of  shape  and  tangible  magnitude,  as  they 
appear  to  our  senses  ;  I  am  not  only  conscious  that 
I  believe,  but  also  certain,  that  such  is  the  nature  of 
these  things  j  and  that,  thus  far  at  least,  in  regard  toths 
nature  of  these  things,an  omniscient  and  infallible  being 
cannot  think  me  mistaken.  Of  these  truths  I  am  so 
certain,  that  I  scruple  not  to  pronounce  every  being  in 
an  error  who  is  of  a  contrary  sentiment  concerning 
them.  For  suppose  an  intelligent  creature,  an  angel 
for  instance,  to  believe  that  there  are  not  in  the  uni 
verse  any  such  things  as  this  solar  system,  this  earthr 
these  mountains,  houses,  animals,  this  being  whom 
I  call  myself ;  could  I,  by  any  effort,  bring  myself 
to  believe,  that  his  opinion  is  a  true  one,  and  implies 
a  proposition  expressive  of  something  agreeable  to 
the  nature  of  things  ?  It  is  impossible  and  inconcei 
vable.  My  understanding  intimates,  that  such  an 
opinion  would  as  certainly  be  false,  as  it  is  false  that 
two  and  two  are  equal  to  ten,  or  that  things  equal  to 
one  and  the,  same  thing  are  unequal  to  one  another. 
Yet  this  is  an  opinion  which, omnipotence  could  ren 
der  true,,  by  annihilating  the  whole  of  this  solar  sys 
tem  ;  or  make  me  admit  as  true,  by  depiiving  me  of 
understanding.  But  so  long  as  this  solar  system  re 
mains  unannihilated,  and  my  intellect  undepraved, 
there  is  not  a  geometrical  axiom  more  true,  or  more 
evident  tome,. than  that  this  solar  system, and  all  the 
objects  above-mentioned,  do  exist  ;  there  is  not  a  geo 
metrical  axiom  that  has  any  better  title  to  be  ac^ 
counted  a  principle  of  human  knowledge  ^  there  is 
not  a  geometrical  axiom  against  which  it  is  more  ab* 
surd,  moie  unreasonable,  more  iinphilosophica]^  to: 
a.rgue,. 


136  Ay  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART   II. 

3.  That  snow  is  white,  fire  hot,  gold  yellow,  and 
su.^ar  sweet,  we  believe  to  be  certainly  truer  These 
bodies  affect  our  eyes,  touch,  and  palate,  in  a  pecu 
liar  manner  ;-^ind  we  have  no  reason  to  think,  that 
they  affect  the  organs  of  different  men  in  a  different 
manner  :  on  the  contrary,  we  believe,  wkh  full  as 
surance,  founded  on  sufficient  reason,  that  they  af 
fect  the  senses  of  all  men  in  the  same  manner.  The 
peculiar  sensation  we  receive  from  them  depends  on 
three  things  ;  on  the  nature  of  the  object  perceived, 
on  the  nature  of  the  organ  of  perception,  and  on  the 
nature  of  the  percipient  being.  Of  each  of  these 
things  the  Deity  could  change  the  nature  ;  and  make 
sugar  bitter,  fire  cold,  snow  black,  and  gold  green. 
But  till  this  be  done  ;  in  other  words,  while  things 
continue  as  they  are,  it  is  as  certainly  true,  that  snow 
is  white,  fire  hot,  &:e.  as  that  two  and  two  are  equal 
to  four,  or  a  whole  greater  than  a  part.  If  we  sup 
pose,  that  snow,  notwithstanding  its  appearance,  is 
black,  or  not  white,  we  must  also  suppose,  that  our 
senses  and  intellect  are  fallacious  faculties  ;  and  there 
fore  cannot  admit  any  thing  as  true  which  has  no  bet 
ter  evidence  than  that  of  sense  and  intellect.  If  a 
creature  of  a  different  nature  from  man  were  to  say, 
that  snow  is  black,  and  hot,  I  should  reply,  (suppos 
ing  him  to  use  these  words  in  the  same  sense  in 
which  I  use  them),  It  may  possibly  have  that  ap 
pearance  to  your  senses,  but  it  has  not  that  appear 
ance  to  mine  :  it  may  therefore,  in  regard  to  your  facul 
ties  be  tjjue  ;  and  if  so,  it  ought  to  constitute  a  part  of 
your  philosophy  :  but  of  my  philosophy  it  cannot 
constitute  a  part,  because,  in  respect  of  my  faculties, 
it  is  a  false,  being  contrary  to  fact  and  experience. 
If  the  same  being  were  to  affirm,  that  a  part  is  equal 
to  a  whole,  I  should  answer,  it  is  impossible  ;  none 
can  think  so  but  those  who  are  destitute  of  under 
standing.  If  he  were  to  say,  the  solar  system  ex- 
plained  by  Newton  does  not  exist,  I  should  answer,. 


CHAP.  I.  AN  ESS  \Y  ON  TRUTH,  1 37 

you  are  mistaken  ;  if  your  knowledge  were  not  im 
perfect,  you  would  think,  otherwise  ;  I  am  certain 
that  it  does  exist. — We  see,  by  thus  stating  the  case, 
what  is  the  difference  between  these  three  sorts  of 
certainty.  But  still^  in  respect  to  man,  these  three 
sorts  are  all  equally  evident,  equally  certain,  at.'d  e- 
qually  unsusceptible  of  confutation  :  and  none  of 
them  can  be  disbelieved  or  doubted  by  us,  except 
we  disavow  the  distinction  between  truth  and  false 
hood,  by  supposing  our  faculties  fallacious. 

4.  Of  moral  truth,  we  cannot  bring  ourselves  to 
think  that  the  Deity's  notions  (pardon  the  expres- 
sion)  are  contrary  to  ours.  If  we  believe  Him  om 
niscient  and  infallible,  can  we  also  believe,  that,  in 
his  sight,  cruelty,  injustice,  and '  ingratitude,  are 
worthy  of  reward  and  praise,  and  the  opposite  vir 
tues  of  blame  and  punishment?  It  is  absolutely  im 
possible.  The  one  belief  destroys  the  other.  Com 
mon  sense  declares,  that  a  being  possessed  of  per 
fect  knowledge  can  no  mere  entertain  such  a  senti 
ment,  than  I  with  my  eyes  open  can  just  now  avoid 
seeing  the  li^ht.  If  a  created  being  were,  in  all  cases 
to  think  that  virtue  which  we  think  vice,  and  that 
vice  w7hich  we  think  virtue,  what  would  be  our  no 
tions  of  his  intelligence  ?  Should  we  not,  without 
hesitation,  pronounce  him  irrational,  and  his  opinion 
an  absurdity?  The  absurdity  indeed  is  conceivable 
and  may  be  expressed  in  words  that  imply  no  contra-- 
diction  :  but  that  any  being  should  think  in  this  man 
ner,  and  yet  not  think  wrong,  is  to  us  as  perfectly- 
inconceivable  as  that  the  same  thing  should  be  both 
.true  and  false*. 

*  Locke  says  that  Moral  Truth  is  susceptible  of  de 
monstration.  If  by  this  he  means,  that  it  admits  of  evi 
dence  sufficient  to  satisfy  every  rational  mind,  he  is  cer 
tainly  in  the  right.  Eut  if  by  the  word  demonstration  be 
meant,  what  Geometric ians  mean  by  it,  a  proof  that  may 
be  resolved  into  one  or  more  self-evident  axioms  whcse 


13$  AN -ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART    II. 

We  speak  here  of  the  great  and  leading  principles 
of  moral  duty.  Many  subordinate  duties  there  are, 
which  result  from  the  form  of  particular  govern 
ments,  and  from  particular  modes  of  education  ;  and 
there  are  some,  which,  though  admirably  adapted  to 
the  improvement  and  perfection  of  our  nature,  are 
yet  so  sublime,  that  the  natural  conscience  of  man 
kind,  unassisted  by  revelation,  can  hardly  be  sup 
posed  capable  of  discovering  them  :  but  in  regard  to 
justice,  gratitude,  and  those  other  virtues,  of  which 
no  rational  beings  CSQ  far  as  we  know)  are  or  can  be 
ignorant,  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  believe  that  our 
sentiments  are  wrong.  I  say,  there  are  duties  of 
which  no  rational  beings  can  be  ignorant :  for  if 
moral  sentiments  be  the  result  of  a  bias,  or  vis  insita, 
communicated  to  the  rational  soul  by  its  Creator, 
then  must  they  be  as  universal  as  rational  nature, 
and  as  permanent  as  the  effects  of  any  other  natural 
law  ;  and  it  is  as  absurd  to  argue  against  their  trutli 
or  authenticity,  as  against  the  reality  of  any  other 
matter  of  fact,  But  several  authors  of  note  have 
denied  this  inference,  as  well  as  the  principle  whence 
it  proceeds  ;  or  at  least,  by  calling  the  one  in  ques 
tion,  have  endeavoured  to  make  us  sceptical  in  re 
gard  to  the  other.  They  have  endeavoured  to  prove, 
that  moral  sentiment  is  different  in  different  coun 
tries,  and  under  different  forms  of  religion,  govern 
ment,  and  manners  ;  that  therefore,  in  respect  of  it, 
there  is  no  vis  insita  in  the  mind  ;  for  that,  previous 
to  education,  we  are  in  a  state  of  perfect  indifference 
as  to  virtue  and  vice ;  and  that  an  opposite  course  of 

contraries  are  inconceivable,  we  confess  that  neither  moral 
nor  historical  truth  is  susceptible  of  demonstration,  nor 
many  other  truths  of  the  most  unquestionable  certainty. 
However  it  is  not  to  be  supposed,  that  Locke  intended  to 
use  this  word  in  any  stricter  sense  than  what  is  fixed  by 
general  practice  j  according  to  which,  every  proof  that 
brings  indubitable  ;evidence  to  the  reason  or  senses  may 
properly  be  called  a  demonstration. 


CHAP.    I.  AN  ESSAY  ON   TRUTH. 

education   v/ould   have   made  us    think   that  virtue 
which  now  we  think  vice,  and  that  vice  which  now 
we  think  virtue  :   in  a  word,   that  moral  sentiments 
are  as  much  the  effect  of  custom  and  human  artifice, 
as  our  taste  in  dress,   furniture,    and    the    modes   of 
conversation.     In  proof  of  this  doctrine,   a   multi 
tude   of  facts  have  been  brought  together,    to    show 
the  prodigious  diversity,  and  even  contrariety,  that 
takes  place  in  the   moral  opinions  of  different  ages, 
nations,  and  climates.     Of  all  our  modern  sceptical 
notions,  this  seemed  to  me  one  of  the  most  danger 
ous.     For  my  own  satisfaction,  and  for  the  sake    of 
those  whom  it  is  my  duty  to  instruct,  I  have  been  at 
great  pains  to  examine  it  ;  and  the  examination  has 
turned  out  to  my  entire  satisfaction.      But  the  mate 
rials  I  have   collected  on   this    subject    are    far    too 
bulky  to  be  inserted  here.     The  sceptical  arguments 
are  founded,  not  only  on  mistakes  concerning  the  na 
ture  of  virtue,  but  also  on  some  historical  facts  mis 
represented,  and  on  others  so  equivocal,  and  bare  of 
circumstances,  that  they  really   have    no   meaning. 
From  the  number  of  historical,  as  well  as  philoso 
phical  disquisitions,  which  I   found  it  necessary    to 
introduce,  the   inquiry   concerning  the   universality 
and  immutability  of  moral  truth,  which   I  thought 
to  have  comprised  in  a  few  pages,  soon  swelled  into 
a  treatise.     I  meant  to  have  finished  it  some  years 
ago  ;  but  have  hitherto  been  prevented  by  a  number 
of  unforeseen  accidents. 

5.  Of  probable  truth,  a  superior  being  may  think 
differently  from  us,  and  yet  be  in  the  right.  For 
every  proposition  is  either  true  or  false  ;  and  everj- 
probable  past  event  has  either  happened,  or  not  hap 
pened,  as  every  probable  future  event  will  either 
happen  or  not  happen.  From  the  imperfection  of 
our  faculties,  and  from  the  narrowness  of  our  expe 
rience,  we  may  judge  wrong,  when  we  think  that  a 
certain  event  has  happened,  or  will  happen  :  and  a 
being  of  more  extensive  experience,  and  more  per* 
M 


143  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  ir. 

feet  understanding,  may  see  that  we  judge  wrong  ; 
for  that  the  event  in  question  never  did  happen,  nor 
ever  will.  Yet  it  does  not  follow,  that  a  man  may 
either  prudently  or  rationally  distrust  his  probable 
notions  as  fallacious.  That  which  man,  by  the  con 
stitution  of  his  nature,  is  determined  to  admit  as  pro 
bable,  he  ought  to  admit  as  probable  ;  for,  in  regard 
to  man,  that  is  probable  truth.  Not  to  admit  it 
probable,  when  at  the  same  time  he  must  believe  it 
to  be  so,  is  mere  obstinacy  :  and  not  to  believe  that 
probable,  which  all  other  men  who  have  the* same 
view  of  all  the  circumstances,  believe  probable, 
would  be  ascribed  to  caprice,  or  want  of  under 
standing.  If  one  in  such  a  case  were  refractory,  we 
should  naturally  ask,  How  comes  it,  that  you  think 
differently  from  us  in  this  matter  ?  have  you  any 
reason  to  think  us  in  a  mistake  ?  is  your  knowledge 
of  the  circumstances  from  which  we  infer  the  pro 
bability  of  this  event,  different  from  ours  ?  do  you 
know  any  thing  about  it,  of  which  we  are  ignorant? 
If  he  reply  in  the  negative,  and  yet  persist  in  con 
tradicting  our  opinion,  we  should  certainly  think 
him  an  unreasonable  man.  Every  thing,  therefore, 
which  to  huraan  creatures  seems  intuitively  proba 
ble,  is  to  .be  accounted  one  of  the  first  principles  of 
probable  Iranian  knowledge.  A  human  creature  acts 
an  irrational  part  when  he  argues  against  it  ;  and  if 
he  refuse  to  acknowledge  it  probable,  he  cannot, 
without  contradicting  himself,  acquiesce  in  any  other 
human  probability  whatsoever. 

It  appears  from  what  has  been  said,  that  there  are 
various  kinds  of  intuitive  certainty  ;  and  that  those 
who  will  not  allow  any  truth  to  be  self-evident,  ex 
cept  what  has  all  the  characteristics  of  a  geometrical 
axiom,  are  much  mistaken.  From  the  view  we  have 
given  of  this  subject,  it  would  be  easy  to  reduce 
ihese  intuitive  certainties  into  classes;  but  this  is 
not  necessary  on  the  present  occasion.  We  are  here 
treating  of  the  nature  and  immutability  of  truth  as 


GHAP.    II.  AN  ESSA5T  ON  TRUTH.  14! 

perceived  by  human  faculties.  Whatever  intuitive 
proposition  man,  by  the  law  of  his  nature,  must  be 
lieve  as  certain,  or  as  probable,  is,  in  regard  to 
him,  certain  or  probable  truth  ;  and  must  constitute 
a  part  of  human  knowledge,  and  remain  unalterably 
the  same,  as  long  as  the  human  constitution  remains 
vmajtered.  And  we  must  often  repeat,  that  he  who 
attempts  to  disprove  such  intuitive  truth,  or  to  make 
men  sceptical  in  regard  to  it,  acts  apart  as  inconsist 
ent  with  sound  reasoning,  and  as  effectually  subver 
sive  of  all  human  knowledge,  as  if  he  attempted  to 
disprove  truths  which  he  knew  to  be  agreeable  to  the 
eternal  and  necessary  relations  of  things.  Whether 
the  Deity  can  or  cannot  change  these  truths  into 
falsehoods,  we  need  not  seek  to  determine,  because 
it  is  of  no  consequence  to  us  to  know.  It  becomes 
us  better  to  inquire,  with  humility  and  rtver^iice, 
into  what  he  has  done,  than  vainly,  and  perhaps  pre 
sumptuously,  into  what  he  can  do.  Whatever  he 
has  been  pleased  to  establish  in  the  universe,  is  as 
certainly  established,  as  if  it  were  in  itself  unchange 
able  and  from  eternity  ;  and,  while  he  wills  it  to  re- 
mam  what  he  made  it,  is  as  permanent  as  his  own 
nature, 

CHAP.     II. 

The  preceding  theory  rejected  by  sceptical  writers'. 

TXTE  have  seen,  that  mathematicians  and  natural 
philosophers  do,  in  etTect,  acknowledge  the 
distinction  between  common  sense  and  reason,  as  a- 
bove  explained  ;  admitting  the  dictates  of  the  former 
as  ultimate  and  unquestionable  principles,  and  never 
attempting  either  to  prove  or  to  disprove  them  by 
reasoning.  If  we  inquire  a  little  into  the  genius  of 
modern  scepticism,  we  shall  see,  that,  there,  a  very 
difterent  plan  of  investigation  lias  been  adopted. 
Tiiis  will  best  appear  by  instances  taken  from  that 
M  2 


14 2  AN    ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  PART   II. 

pretended   philosophy.     But  first  let   us  offer  a  few 
general  remarks. 

SECTION     I. 

General   Observations.     PJse   and  Progress  of  Mo 
dern  Scepticisfti. 

i .  r~F'HE  Cartesian  philosophy  is  to  be  considered 
•*-  as  the  ground- work  of  modern  scepticism. 
The  source  of  LOCKE'S  reasoning  against  the  separate 
existence  of  the  secondary  qualities  of  matter,  of 
BERKELEY'S  reasoning  against  the  existence  of  a 
material  world,  and  of  HUME'S  reasoning  against  the 
•  existence  both  of  soul  and  body,  may  be  found  in 
the  first  part  of  the  Principia  of  DES  CARTES.  Yet 
nothing  seems  to  have  been  farther  from  the  inten 
tion  of -this  worthy  and.  most  ingenious  philosopher, 
than  to  give  countenance  to  error,  irreligion,  or  li 
centiousness.  He  begins  with  doubting  ;  but  it  is 
with  a  view  to  arrive  at  conviction  :  his  successors 
(some  of  them  at  least)  the  further  they  advance  in 
their  systems,  become  more  and  more  sceptical ;  and 
at  length  the  reader  is  told,  to  his  infinite  pleasure 
and  emolument,  that  the  understanding,  acting  alone, 
does  intirely  subvert  itself,  and  leaves  not  ,the 
lowest  degree  of  evidence  in  any  proposition  what 
soever  *. 

The  first  thing  a  philosopher  ought  to  do,  accord 
ing  to  DES  CARTES,  is  to  divest  himself  of  all  pre 
judices,  and  all  his  former  opinions  ;  to  reject  the 
evidence  of  sense,  of  intuition,  and  of  mathematical 
demonstration  ;  to  suppose  that  there  is  no  God,  nor 
heaven,  nor  earth  ;  and  that  man  has  neither  hands, 
nor  feet,  nor  body  ; — in  a  word,  he  is  to  doubt  of 
every  thing  of  which  it  is  possible  to  doubt,  and  to 
be  persuaded,  that  every  thing  is  false  which  can 
possibly  be  conceived  to  be  doubtful.  Now  there  ^is 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  I,  p.  464. 


GHAP.  II.       AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.          143 

only  one  point  of  which  it  is  possible  to  doubt, 
namely,  That  I,  the  person  who  doubts,  am  think 
ing.  This  proposition,  therefore,  /  think,  and  this 
only,  may  be  taken  for  granted  \  and  nothing  else 
whatsoever  is  to  be  believed  without  proof. 

What  is  to  be  expected  from  this  strange  intro 
duction  ?  One  or  other  of  these  two  things  must  neces 
sarily  follow.  This  author  will  eithar  believe  nothing 
at  all,  or  if  he  believe  any  thing,  it  must  be  upon  the 
recommendation  of  false  and  sophistical  reasoning.* 
But  DES  CARTES  is  no  sceptic  in  his  moral  reason 
ings,  therefore  in  his  moral  reasonings  he  must  be  a 
sophister.  Let  us  see,  whether  we  can  make  good 
this  charge  against  him  by  facts. 

Taking  it  for  granted,  that  he  thinks,  he  thence 
infers,  that  he  exists :  Ego  cogito,  ergo  sum  :  I 
think  ;  therefore  I  exist.  Now  there  cannot  be 
thought  where  there  is  no  existence  ;  before  he  take- 
it  for  granted  that  he  thinks,  he  must  also  take  it  for 
granted  that  he  exists.  This  argument,  therefore, 
proceeds  on  a  supposition,  that  the  thing  to  be  prov 
ed  is  true  ;  in  other  words,  it  is  a  sophism,  a  peti- 
tio  principii.  Even  supposing  it  possible  to  con 
ceive  thinking  without  at  the  same  time  conceiving 
existence,  still  this  is  no  conclusive  argument,  ex 
cept  it  could  be  shown,  that  it  is  more  evident  to  a 
man  that  he  thinks,  than  that  he  exists  ;  for  in  eve 
ry  true  proof  a  less  evident  proposition  is  inferred 
from  one  that  is  more  evident.  But,  /  think  and  / 
exist,  are  equally  evident.  Therefore  this  is  no 
true  proof.- — To  set  an  example  of  false  reasonincr 
in  the  very  foundation  of  a.  system,  can  hardly  fail 
to  have  bad  consequences.  .  • 

Having  in  this  manner  established  his  own  exis 
tence,  our  author  next  proceeds  to  prove  the  vera 
city  of  his  faculties;  that  is?  to  show  by  reasoning 
that  what  he  thinks  true,  is  really  true,  and  that 
what  bethinks  false  is  really  false.  He  would  have* 
*  See  the  first  part  of  this  Essay,,. 

M3 


J44  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  ir. 

done  better  to  have  taken  this  also  for  granted  :  the 
argument  by  which  he  attempts  to  prove  it,  does 
more  honour  to  his  heart  than  to  his  understanding. 
It  is  indeed  a  sophism  of  the  same  kind  with  the  for 
mer,  in  which  he  takes  that  for  granted  which  he 
means  to  prove.  It  runs  thus  :  We  aj'e  conscious, 
that  we  have  in  our  minds  the  idea  of  a  being  infi 
nitely  perfect,  intelligent,  and  powerful,  necessarily 
existent  and  eternal.  This  idea  differs  from  all  our 
ether  ideas  in  two  respects  :  — It  implies  the  notions 
of  eternal  and  necessary  existence,  and  of  infinite  per 
fection  ; — it  neither  is,  nor  can  be,  a  fiction  of  the 
imagination  ;  and  therefore  exhibits  no  chimera  or 
imaginary  being,  but  a  true  and  immutable  nature, 
-which  must  of  necessity  exist,  because  necessary  exis 
tence  is  comprehended  in  the  idea  of  it.  Therefore 
there  is  a  God,  necessarily  existent,  infinitely  wise, 
powerful  and  true,  and  possessed  of  all  perfection.  This 
Being  is  the  maker  of  us  and  of  all  our  faculties. ;  he 
cannot  deceive,  because  he  is  infinitely  perfect ; 
therefore  our  faculties  are  true,  and  not  fallacious*. 
.. — The  same  argument  has*been  adopted  by  others, 
particularly  by  Dr  Barrow.  "  Cartesius",  says 
that  pious  and  learned  author,  "  hath  well  observed, 
*(  that,  to  make  us  absolutely  certain  of  our  having 
*<  attained  the  truth,  it  is  required  to  be  known, 
*'  whether  our  faculties  of  apprehending  and  judging 
'*  the  truth,  be  true  ;  which  can  only  be  known  from 
**  the  power,  goodness  and  truth  of  our  Creator  f . 
I  object  not  to  this  argument  for  the  divine  exis 
tence,  drawn  from  the  idea  of  an  all-perfect  being,  of 
which  the  human  mind  is  conscious;  though  perhaps 
th's  is  not  the  most  unexceptionable  method  of  evin 
cing  that  great  truth.  I  allow,  that  when  a  man  be- 
.i  ves  a  God,  he  cannot,  without  absurdity  and  impiety, 
deny  or  question  the  veracity  of  his  own  faculties  ; 
end  that  to  acknowledge  a  distinction  between  truth 
i.nd  falsehood,  implies  a  persuasion,  that  certain  laws 

*  Cartesii  Princip.  Philos.  part  1.  §.  14.  15.  18. 
t  Lect,  Gee-met.  7. 


CHAP.  Hi       AN  ESSAY  OU  TRUTH.          145 

are  established  in  the  universe,  on  which  the  nature.? 
of  all  created  things  depend,  which  (to  me  at  leastj), 
is  incomprehensible,  except  on  the  supposition  of  a 
supreme,  intelligent, .  directing  cause.  But  I  ac 
quiesce  in  these  principles,  because  I  take  the  vera 
city  of  my  faculties  for  granted  ;  and  this  I  feel  my 
self  necessitated  to  do,  because  I  feel  it  to  be  the  law 
of  my  nature  which  I1  cannot  possibly  counteract. 
Proceeding  then  upon  this  innate  and  irresistible  no 
tion,  that  my  faculties  are  true,  I  infer,  by  the  just- 
est  reasoning,  that  God  exists  ;  and  the  evidence  for 
this  great  truth  is  so  clear  and  convincing,  that  lean, 
not  withstand  its  force,  if  I  believe  any  thing  else 
whatsoever. 

DKS  CARTES  argues  in  a  different  manner.  Be 
cause  God  exists,  (says  he),  and  is  perfect,  therefore 
my  faculties  are  true.  Right. — But  how  do  you 
know  that  God  exists  ?  I  infer  it  from  the  second 
principle  of  my  philosophy,,  already  established; 
Cogito  ergo  3um. — How  do  you  know  that  your  in 
ference  is  just  ?  It  satisfies  my  reason. — Your  argu* 
ment  proceeds  on  a  supposition,  that  what  satisfies 
your  reason  is  true  ?  It  does,— -Do  you  not  then  take 
it  for  granted,  that  your  reason  is  not  a  fallacious  j 
but  a  true  faculty  ?  This  must  be  taken  for  granted, 
o-thervvise  the  argument  is  good  for  nothing.  And 
if  so,  your  argument  proceeds  on  a  supposition,  that 
the  point  to  be  proved  is  true.  In  a  woid,.  you  pre 
tend  to  prove  the  truth  of  our  faculties,  by  an  argu 
ment  which  evidently  and  necessarily  supposes  their 
truth.  Your  philosophy  is  built  on  sophisms  ;  how 
then  can  it  be  according  to  common  sense  ? 

As  this  philosopher  doubted  where  he  ought  to 
have  been  confident,  so  he  is  often  confident  where 
he  ought  to  doubt.  He  admits  not  his  own  existence, 
till  he  thinks  he  has  proved  it  ;  yet  his  system  is 
replete  with  hypotheses  taken  for  granted,  without 
proof,  almost  without  examination.  He  sets  out 
•with  the  profession  of  universal  scepticism ;  but 


fc'4-6'  AN  ESSAY  ox  TRUTH.  FARTH; 

many  of  his  theories  are  founded  in  the  most  unphi- 
losophical  credulity.  Had  he  taken  a  little  more  for 
granted,  he  would  have  proved  a  great  deal  more  : 
he  takes  almost  nothing  for  granted,  ("I  speak  of  what 
lie  professes,  not  of  what  he  performs)  ;  and  there 
fore  he  proves  nothing.  In  geometry,  however,  he 
is  rational  and  ingenius  5  there  are  some  curious  re 
marks  in  his  discourse  on  the  passions  ;  his  physics 
are  fanciful  and  plausible  ;.  his  treatise  on  music  per 
spicuous,  though  superficial  :  a  lively  imagination 
seems  to- have  been  his  chief  talent  ;  want  of  know- 
ledge  in  the  grounds  of  evidence  his  principal  defect. 
We  are  informed  by  Father  MALEBRANCHE,  that 
the  senses  were  at  first  as  honest  faculties  as  one 
could  desire  to  be  endued  with,  till  after  they  were 
debauched  by  original  sin  ;  an  adventure,  from  which 
they  contracted  such  an  invincible  propensity  to 
cheating,  that  they  are  now  continually  lying  in  wait 
to  deceive  us.  But  there  is  in  man,  it  seemsj  a  cer 
tain  clear-sighted,  stout,  old  faculty,  called  reason, 
which,  without  being  deceived  by  appearances,  keeps 
an  eye  upon  the  rogues,  and  often  proves  too  cun 
ning  for  them.  MALEBRANCHE  therefore  adviseth 
us  to  doubt  with  all  our  might.  "  If  a  man  has 
*'  only  learned  to  doubt,"  says  he,  "  let  him  not  i- 
"  magine  that  he  has  made  an  inconsiderable  pro- 
"  gress  *."  Progress  !  in  what  ? — in  science  ?  Is 
it  not  a  contradiction,  or  at  least  an  inconsistency,  in 
terms,  to  say  that  a  man  makes  progress  in  science 
By  doubting  f  ?  If  one  were  to  ask  the  way  to 
Dublin,  and- to  receive  for  answer,  that  he  ought 
first  of  all  to  sit  down  ;  for  that  if  he  had  only  learned 
to  sit  still,  he  might  be  assured,  that  he  had  made  no 
inconsiderable  progress  in  his  journey  ,  I  suppose 

*   Qu'on  ne  s'imagine  pas,  que  1'on  ait  peu  avarice,  si 
on  a  seuiement  appris  a  dcuter. 

La  Recherche  de  la  Ferite,  Iw.  \.ch.  20. 
t  Est  contrarietss  inter  verba  scivi,  et  dubia  sunt* 
JDes  Cartes,  Object,  et  Respons* 


CflAF.    IP.  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  147 

he  would  hardly  trouble  his  informer  with  a  second 
question. 

It  is  true,  this  author  makes  a  distinction  between 
the  doubts  of  passion,  brutality,  and  blindness,  and 
those  of  prudence,  distrust,  and  penetration  :  the 
former,  says  he,  are  the  doubts  of  Academics  and 
Atheists  ;  the  latter  are  the  doubts  of  the  true  phi 
losopher  *•  It  is  true  also,  that  he  allows  us  to  give: 
an  entire  consent  to  the  things  that  appear  entirely 
evident  f.  But  he  adopts,  notwithstanding,  th& 
principles  of  DES  CARTES'  first  philosophy,  That 
we  ought  to  begin  our  inquiries  with  universal  doubt^ 
taking  only  our  own  consciousness  for  granted,  and 
thence  inferring  our  existence,,  and  the  existence  o£ 
God,  and  proving,- from  the  divine  veracity,  that  our' 
faculties  are  not  fallacious.  Wherever  it  is  pos 
sible  that  a  deluding  spirit  may  deceive  us,  there, 
says  MALEBRANCHE,  we  ought  to  doubt  J  ;  but  a 
deluding  spirit  may  deceive  us  wherever  our  me 
mory  is  employed  in  reasoning  ;  therefore,  in  all- 
such  reasonings,  there  may  be  error.  And  if  so,, 
there  may  be  error  in  reasoning  of  every  kind  ;  for- 
without  memory  there  can  be  no  reasoning  :  but  in 
the  truths  discovered  by  a  single  glance,  (connois* 
sauces  de  simple  <v.u'/)9.  such  as  this,  That  two  and 
two  make  four,  it  is  not  possible,  for  a  deluding  godr 
(dieu  trompeur),  however  powerful,  to  deceive  him.- 
— It  is  easy  to  see,  that  such  doctrines  must  lead- 
either  to  sophistry  or  to  universal  scepticism,  or  ra 
ther  to, both.  For  if  a  demonstrated  conclusion  may 
be  false  for  any  thing  I  know  to  the  contrary,  arr 
axiom  may  be  so  too ;  my  belief  of  the  first  is  not* 

*  Recherche  de  la  Verite,  liv.  1.  eh.  20.  sect.  3. 

t  Qu'oa  ne  doit  jamais- dormer  un  consentement  entier, 
qu,  a  des  choses  qui  paroissent  entierement  evidentes. 
Rechereke  de  la  Verite^  /iv.  1.  ch.  20.  sect.  3. — This  is  in 
deed  a  rational  scepticism,  such  as  Aristotle  recommends, 
and  every  friend  to  truth  must  approve* 
Id.  iiv,  6,  ch>  6, 


148  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

less  necessary,  than  my  belief  of  the  last.  Intuition 
is,  of  all  evidence,  the  clearest,  and  most  immediately 
convincing  ;  but  demonstration  produces  absolute 
certainty,  and  full  conviction^in  the  mind  of  him  who 
understands  it  *. — MALEB-RANCIJE,  indeed,  acknow 
ledges,  th*it  we  may  reason  when  once  we  know  that 
God  is  no  deceiver  :  but  this,  he  says,  must  be  known 
at  one  glance,  (that  is,  I  suppose,  intuitively),  or  it 
cannot  be  known  at  all  ;  for  all  reasoning  en  this/ 
subject  may  be  fallacious  f. 

But  I  do  not  pretend  to  unfold  all'  the  false  and 
sceptical  principles  of  this  author's  philosophy.  To 
confess  the  truth,  I  do  not  well  understand  it.  He 
is  generally  mystical ;  often,  if  I  mistake  not,  self- 
contradictory  ;  and  his  genius  is  strangely  warped 
by  a  superstitious  veneration  for  the  absurdities  of 
Popery.  He  rejects  the  evidence  of  sense,  because- 
it  seems  repugnant  to  his  reason  •,  he  admits  transub- 
stantiation,  though  certainly  repugnant  both  to  rea 
son  and  sense.  Of  Aristotle,  and  Seneca,  and  the  o- 
ther  ancient  philosophers,  he  says  that  their  lights 
are  nothing  but  thick  darkness,  and  their  most  illus 
trious  virtues,  nothing  but  intolerable  pride  £.  Fy, 
M.  MALEBRANCHE  !  Popery  with  all  its  absurdities,, 
requires  not  from  its  adherents  so  un candid,  and  so 
illiberal  a  declaration.  An  Aristotelian,  of  your 
own  religion  and  country,  and  nearly  of  your  own 
age,  delivers  a  very  different  doctrine  ;  "  Aristotle, 
"  supported  by  philosophy,  hath  ascended  by  the 
"  steps  of  motion  even  to  the  knowledge  of  one  first 
"  mover,  who  is  God.  In  order  to  arrive  at  the 
"  knowledge  of  divine  things,  we  must  learn  science 

*  See  the  second  chapter  of  the  first  book  of  the  latter 
Analytics  of  Aristotle.  The  great  philosopher  holds,  that 
iiituii-ion  and  demonstration  are  equally  productive  of  know 
ledge  ;  though  the  former  be  the  first,  the  clearest,  and 
most  immediate  evidence. 

f  Recherche  de  la  Verite,  liv.  6.  ch.  6. 

J.  Recherche  de  la  Verite,  liv,  6.  ch.  G. 


CHAP.  n.  A:;  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  149 

£t  otherwise  we  shall  fall  into  error.  Philosophy 
"  and  theology  bear  testimony  to,  and  mutually  con- 
"  firm  each  other,  and  produce  a  more  perfect  kriow- 
"  ledge  of  the  truth  ;  the  latter  teaches  what  we 
u  ought  to  believe,  and  reason  makes  us  believe  it 
"  more  easily,  and  with  greater  steadiness.  They 
«'  are  two  lights,  which,  by  their  union,  yield  a  more 
"  brilliant  lustre  than  either  of  them  could  yield 
**  singly,  or  both  if  separated.  Moses  learned  the 
'*  philosophy  of  the  Egyptians,  and  Daniel  in  Ba- 
"  bylon  that  of  the  Chaldeans  *."  This  learned 
and  judicious  Peripatetic  goes  on  to  show,  that  Je 
rome,  Augustine,  Gregory  of  Nice,  and  Clemens 
Alexandrinus,  entertained  the  same  honourable  opinion 
of  the  ancient  Philosophers. — If  DES  CARTKS.  and 
his  disciple  MALEBRANCHE,  had  studied  the  ancients 
more,  and  indulged  their  own  imagination  less,  they 
would  have  made  a  better  figure  in  philosophy,  and 
done  much  more  service  to  mankind.  But  it  was 
their  aim  to  decry  the  ancients  as  much  as  possible  ; 
and  ever  since  their  time,  it  has  been  too  much  the 
fashion  to  overlook  the  discoveries  of  former  ages, 
as  altogether  unnecessary  to  the  improvement  of  the 
present.  MALI/BRANCHE  often  inveighs  against  Ari 
stotle  in  particular,  with  the  most  virulent  bitter- 
ness  ;  and  atFects,  0:1  all  occasions,  to  treat  him  with 
supreme  contempt  f.  Had  this  great  ancient  em 
ployed  his  genius  in  the  subversion  of  virtue,  or  in 
establishing  tenets  incompatible  with  the  principles 
of  natural  religion,  he  would  have  deserved  the  se 
verest  censure.  But  MALE-BLANCHE  lays  nothing 
of  this  kind  to  his  charge  ;  he  only  finds  him  guilty 
of  some  .speculative  errors  in  natural  philosophy. 
Aristotle  was  not  exempted  from  that  fallibility 
which  is  incident  to  human  nature  ;  yet  it  would  not 
be  amiss,  jf  our  mcdern  wits  would  study  him  a  little 

*   Bouju.     Introduction  a  la  Philosophic,  chap.  9.  Paris 
1614.  folio. 

I  Sec  Recherche  de  la  Verite,  iiv.  6,  ch.  5. 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II, 

Before  they  venture  to  decide  so  positively  on  his 
abilities  and  character.  It  is  observable,  that  he  is 
most  admired  by  those  who  best  understand  him. 
jNow,  the  contrary  is  true  of  our  modern  sceptics  : 
they  are  most  admired  by  those  who  read  them  least, 
and  who  take  their  characters  upon  trust,  as  they  find 
them  delivered  in  coffee-houses,  and  ••drawing-rooms, 
and  other  'places  of  fashionable  conversation,  whose 
doctrines  tilo  so  much  honour  to  the  virtue  and  good 
-sense  of  this  enlightened  age. 

:I  have  sometimes  heard  the  principles  of  the  So- 
cratic  school  urged  as  a  precedent  to  justify  our  mo 
dern  Sceptics.  Modern  scepticism  is  of  two  kinds, 
.unlike  in  -.  their  nature,  though  the  one' be  the  foun 
dation  of . the  other.  BES  CARTES  begins  with  uni 
versal  doubt,  that  in  the  end  he  may  arrive  at-con- 
viction  ;  HUME  begins  •  xvith  hypothesis,  and  ends 
with,  universal  doubt.  Now,  does  not  Aristotle  pro 
pose,  that  all -investigation  should  begin  with  doubt  ? 
And  does  not  Socrates  affirm,  that  he  knows  nothing 
certainly  except  his  own  ignorance  ? 

All  this  is  true,  Aristotle  proposes,  that  inves 
tigation  should  begin  with  doubt  *.  He  compares 
doubting  to  a  knot,  which  it  is  the  end  of  investiga 
tion  to  disintangle  ;  and  there  can  be  no  solution, 
where  there  is  no  knot  or  difficulty  to  be  solved. 
But  Aristotle's  doubt  is  quite  of  a  different  nature 
from  that  of  DES  CARTES.  The  former  admits  as 
true  whatever  is  self-evident,  without  seeking  to 
prove  it  ;  nay,  he  affirms,  that  those  men  who  at 
tempt  to  prove  self-evident  principles,  or  who  think 
that  such  principles  may  be  proved,  are  ignorant  of 
the  nature  of  proof  f. '  It  differs  also  most  essential 
ly  from  the  scepticism  of  Mr  HUME.  The  reason 
ings  of  this  author  all  terminate  in  doubt ;  whereas 
Aristotle's  constant  aim  is,  to  discover  truth,  and  es- 

.*,  Aristot.  Metaphys.  lib.  3.  cap.  1.  At^x  S'  vx  fV/v 
<x'yKouyroc  rev  oe<r^c0?,  &c. 

f  Arktot.  Metaphys,  lib.  4.  cap.  4, 


CHAP.  ir.          AN  ESSAY  o>r  TRUTH.  151 

tablish  conviction.  He  defines  philosophy  the  Science 
of  Truth  ;  divides  it  into  speculative  and  practical  ; 
and  expressly  declares  that  truth  is  the  end  of  the 
former,  and  action  of  the  latter  *. 

Cicero,  in  order  to  compliment  a  sect,  of  which, 
however,  he  was  not  a  consistent  discinje,  ascribes 
to  Socrates  a  very  high  degree  of  scepticism  f  ; 
making  his  principles  nearly  the  same  with  those  of 
the  New  Academy,  who  professed  to  believe,  that 
all  things  are  so  involved  in  darkness,  that  nothing 
can  be  known  with  certainty.  The  only  difference 
between  them,  according  to  Cicero  in  this  place,  is, 
that  Socrates  affirmed,  that  he  knew  nothing  "but  his 
own  ignorance  :  whereas  Arcesilas  and  the  rest  of 
the  New  Academy,  held,  that  man  could  know  noth 
ing,  not  even  his  own  ignorance,  with  certainty  j 
and  therefore,  that  affirmation  of  every  kind  is  ab 
surd  and  unphilosophical.  But  we  need  not  take 
this  on  the  authority  of  Cicero  ;  as  we  have  access 
to  the  same  original  authors  from  whom  he  received 
his  information.  And  if  we  consult  them,  particu 
larly  Xenophon,  the  most  unexceptionable  of  them 
all  in  point  of  veracity,  we  shall  find,  that  the  rea 
sonings,  the  sentiments,  and  the  conduct  of  Socrates, 
are  altogether  incompatible  with  scepticism.  The 
first  science  that  engaged  his  attention  was  natural 
philosophy  ;  which,  as  it  was  taught  in  those  days 
by  Zeno,  Anaxagoras,  and  Xenophanes,  had  very 
little  to  recommend  it  to  a  man  of  sense  and  can 
dour.  Socrates  soon  relinquished  it,  from  a  per 
suasion  that  it  was  at  once  unprofitable,  and  founded 
in  uncertainty  ;  and  employed  the  rest  of  his  life  in. 

O^G&C   0     rp£U   £   TO    KCiKWCt. 

TVC  -a\jj9fc/af.  S-wfyriMt;  plv  yap 


.,  . 

Metapbys.  lib.  2.  cap.  1. 
t  Cic.  Academ.  lib.  1.  cap.  12. 
N 


15  2  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

the 'cultivation  of  moral  philosophy,  a  science  which 
to  him  seemed  more  satisfactory  in  its  evidence,  and 
more  useful  in  its  application*.  So  far  was  he 
from  being  sceptical  in  regard  to  the  principles  of 
moral  duty,  that  he  inculcated  them  with  earnest 
ness  wherever  he  found  opportunity,  and  thought 
it  incumbent  on  every  man  to  make  himself  acquaint 
ed  with  them.  In  his  reasonings,  indeed,  he  did 
not  formerly  lay  down  any  principle,  because  it  was 
his  method  to  deduce  his  conclusions  from  what  was 
acknowledged  by  his  antagonist:  but  is  this  any 
proof,  that  he  himself  did  not  believe  his  own  conclu 
sions?  Read  the  story  of  hislifej  his  conduct  never  be 
lied  his  principles:  observe  the  manners  of  our  sceptics  ; 
their  conduct  and  principles  do  mutually  and  invari 
ably  bely  one  another.  Do  you  seek  still  more 
convincing  evidence,  that  Socrates  felt,  believed,  and 
avowed  the  truth  ?  Read  the  defence  he  made  be 
fore  his  judges.  See  you  there  any  signs  of  doubt, 
hesitation,  or  fear  ?  any  suspicion  of  the  possibility 
.of  his  being  in  the  wrong?  any  dissimulation,  soph 
istry,  or  art  ?  See  you  not,  on  the  contrary,  the  ut 
most  plainness  and  simplicity,  the  calmest  and  most 
deliberate  fortitude,  and  that  noble  assurance  which 
so  well  becomes  the  cause  of  truth  and  virtue?  Few 
men  have  shewn  so  firm  an  attachment  to  truth, 
as  to  lay  down  their  life  for  its  sake  :  yet  this  did 
Socrates.  He  made  no  external  profession  of  any 
Dhilosophical  creed  ;  but  in  his  death,  and  through 
the  whole  of  his  life,  he  shewed  the  steadiest  adher 
ence  to  principle  ;  and  his  principles  were  all  con 
sistent.  Xenophon  has  recorded  many  of  these; 
and  tells  us,  in  regard  to  some  of  them,  that  Socrates 
scrupled  not  to  call  those  men  fools  who  differed 
from  his  opinionf. — The  sophists  of  his  age  were 
not  solicitous  to  discover  truth,  but  only  to  confute 

*  Xenoph.  Memorab.  lib.  1.  cap.  1.  et  lib.  4.  cap.  7. 
i  Xenoph.  Memorab.  lib.  1.  cap.  1.  passim. 


CHAP.  ir.  .  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  153- 

an  adversary,  and  reason  plausibly  in  behalf  of 
their  theories.  That  they  might  have  the  ampler  field 
for  this  sort  of  speculation,  they  confined  them 
selves,  like  our  modern  metaphysicians,  to  general 
topics,  such  as  the  nature  of  good,  of  beauty,  and  the 
like  j  on  which  one  may  say  a  great  many  things 
with  little  meaning,  and  offer  a  variety  of  argu 
ments  without  one  word  of  truth.  Socrates  did 
much  to  discredit  this  abuse  of  science.  In  his 
conversation  he  did  not  trouble  himself  with  the 
niceties  of  artificial  logic.  His  aim  was,  not  to? 
confute  an  adversary,  nor  to  guard  against  that 
verbal  confutation  which  the  sophists  were  per 
petually  attempting,  but  to  do  good  to  those  with 
whom  he  conversed,  by  laying  their  duty  befere 
them  in  a  striking  and  persuasive  manner*.  He 
was  not  fond  of  reasoning  on  abstract  subjects,  espe 
cially  when  he  had  to  do  with  a  sophist  ;  well  know 
ing,  that  this  could  answer  no  other  purpose  than  to 
furnish  matter  for  endless  and  unprofitable  logoma 
chy.  When,  therefore,  Aristippus  asked  him  con- 
cerning  the  nature  of  good  f,  with  a  view  to  confute, 
or  at  least  to  tease  him,  with  quibbling  evasions,  So 
crates  declined  to  answer  in  general  terms  ;  and  De 
sired  the  sophist  to  limit  his  question,  by  confining 
the  word  good  to  some  particular  thing.  Do  you 
ask  me,  says  he,  what  is  good  for  a  fever,  for  sore 
-eyes,  or  for  hunger  ?  No,  says  the  sophist.  If,  re 
plies  he,  you  ask  me  concerning  the  nature  of  a  good 
which  is  good  for  no  particular  purpose,  1  tell  you- 
once  for  all,  that  I  know  of  none  such,  and  have  no 
desires  after  it.  In  like  manner,  he  answers  to  the 


'" 


TVJ    ffwvTxe  0$tXt*  o  'Z 

01  puxarra^ctrofj    (A.YI  TTV  o  Koyoq 


Xenopk.  Memorab.  lib.  3.  cap.  8, 
t  Id.  Ibid. 

N2 


154  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

general  question  concerning  beauty,  by  desiring  his 
adversary  to  confine  himself  to  some  particular  kind 
of  beauty.  What  would  the  great  moralibt  have 
thought  of  those  modern  metaphysical  treatises, 
which  seem  to  have  nothing  ehe  in  view, but  to  con 
trive  vain  and  questionable  definitions  of  general  i- 
deas  !  Simple,  certain,  and  useful  truth,  was  the 
constant,  and  the  only  object  of  this  philosopher's 
iaquiry. 

True  it  is,  he  sometimes  said,  that  he  knew  no 
thing  but  his  own  ignorance.  And  surely  the  high 
est  attainments  in  human  knowledge  are  imperfect 
and  unsatisfying.  Yet  man  knows  something  :  So 
crates  was  consciovis  that  he  knew  something;  other 
wise  Xenophon  would  not  have  asserted,  that  his  o- 
pimons  concerning  God,  and  Providence,  and  Reli 
gion,  and  Moral  Duty,  were  well  known  to  nil  the 
Athenians  *.  But  Socrates  was  humble,  and  made 
n  pretensions  to  any  thing  extraordinary,  either  in 
virtue  or  in  knowledge.  He  professed  no  science  ; 
he  instructed  others,  without  pedantry,  and  without 
parade  ;  exemplifying  the  beauty  and  the  practica 
bility  of  virtue,  by  the  innocence  and  integrity  of 
his  life,  and  by  the  charms  of  an  instructive,  though 
most  insinuating,  conversation  f.  I  shall  allow  our 
modern  sceptics  to  avail  themselves  all  they  can  of 
the  authority  of  DES  CARTES  and  MALEBRANCHE, 
of  Pyrrho  and  Anaxarchus  ;  but  let  them  not  pre 
sume  to  sanctify  their  trash  with  the  venerable  names 
of  Socrates  and  Aristotle. 

Cicero  seems  to  have  been  an  Academic  rather  in 
name  than  in  reality.  And  I  am  apt  to  think,  from 
several  passages  in  his  works  t,  that  he  made  choice 
of  this  denomination,  in  order  to  have  a  pretence  for 
reasoning  on  either  side  of  every  question,  and  conse 
quently  an  ampler  field  for  a  display  of  his  rhetori- 

*  Xenoph.  Memcrab.  lib.  1.  cap.  1. 

t  Ibid.  cap.  2. 

J  See  particularly  DeOJkiis,  lib.  3.  cap.  4.  De  Fato,cap.2. 


CHAP.  rr.  AN  ESSAY  ON  IRUTH.  155 

cal  talents  ||.  To  Pyrrho,  Herillus,  Aristo,  and  ci 
ther  sceptics,.  who,  by  asserting  that  all  things  are 
indifferent,  destroy  the  distinction  of  virtue  and  vice, 
he  will  not  allow  even  the  name  of  philosopher  :  nay, 
he  insinuates  that  it  is  impudence  in  such  persons  to 
pretend  to  it  *.  "  I  wish,','  says  he  in  another 
place,  "  that  they  who  suppose  me  a  sceptic  were 
'*  sufficiently  acquainted  with  my  sentiments.  For 
"  I  am  not  one  of  those  whose  mind  wanders  in  er- 
"  ror,  without  any  fixed  principle.  For  what  sort 
"  of  understanding  must  that  man  possess,  what  sort 
*'  of  life  must  that  man  lead,  who,  by  divesting  him- 
"  self  of  principle,,  divests  himself  of  the  means, 
"  both  of  reasoning  and  of  living  f  !"  Let  it  be  ob» 
served  also,  that  when  the  subject  of  his  inquiry  is 
of  high  importance,  .  as  in  his  books  on  moral  duties, 
and  on  the  nature  of  the  gods,  he  follows  the  doc 
trine  of  the  Dogmatists,  particularly  the  Stoics  ;  and 
ssserts  his  moral  and  religious  principles  with  a 
warmth  and  energy  which  prove  him  to  have  been  in 
earnest. 

2.  Nothing  was  further  from  the  intention  of 
LOCKE,  than  to  encourage  verbal  controversy,  or 
advance  doctrines  favourable  to  scepticism.  To  do 
good  to  mankind,  by  inforcing  virtue,  illustrating 
truth,  and  vindicating  liberty,  was  his  sincere  pur 
pose  :  and  lie  did  not  labour  in  vain.  His  writings 
are  to  be  reckoned  among  the  few  books  that  have 
been  productive  of  real  utility  to  mankind.  But 
candour  obliges  me  to  remark,  that  some  of  his  te 


ll   See  this  point  illustrated  in  REMARKS  UPON  A 
COURSE  OF  FREKTH  INKING,  &c.  By  Phileleutherus  Lip" 
siensis  (Dr  Bent/ey),.E,dh.  7th,  page  262. 

*  De  officiis,  lib.  1.  cap.  2, 

-f  Quibus  vellern  satis  cognita  esset  nostra  sententia,, 
Non  enim  sumus  ii,  quorum  vagetur  animus  errore,  nee 
habeat  unquam  quid  sequatur.  Quae  enim  esset  ista  mens, 
vel  quoe  vita  potius,  non  modo  di'sputandi,  sed  vivendi  nu 
ticne  sublata  !  Cic.  de  Officiis^  lib.  2.  cap.  g, 

^  3 


Ij6  ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  PART    II. 

nets  seem  to  be  too  rashly  admitted,  for  the  sake  of 
a  favourite  hypothesis.  That  some  of  them  have 
promoted  scepticism,  is  undeniable.  He  seems  in 
deed  to  have  been  sensible,  that  there  were  inaccu 
racies  in  his  work  ;  and  candidly  owns,  that  "  some 
*  hasty  and  indigested  thoughts  on  a  subject  never 
"  before  considered,  gave  the  first  entrance  to  his 
"'*  Essay  ;  which,  being  begun  by  chance,  was  con- 
"  tinued  by  intrtaty,  written  by  incoherent  parcels, 
*'  and  after  long  intervals  of  neglect  resumed  again, 
*'  as  humour  or  occasion  permitted  *." 

The  first  book  of  his  Essay,  which,  with  submis 
sion,  I  think  the  worst,  tends  to  establish  this  dan 
gerous  doctrine,  That  the  human  mind,  previous  to 
education  and  habit,  is  as  susceptible  of  any  one  im 
pression  as  of  any  other  :  a  doctrine  which,  if  true,, 
would  go  near  to  prove,  that  truth  and  virtue  are 
no  better  than  human  contrivances  ,  or,  at  least,  that: 
they  have  nothing  permanent  in  their  nature,  but 
may  be  as  changeable  as  the  inclinations  and  capaci 
ties  of  men  ;  and  that,  as  we  understand  the  term, 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  common  sense  in  the  world. 
Surely  this  is  not  the  doctrine  that  LOCKE  meant  to 
establish  j  but  his  zeal  against  innate  ideas,  and  in 
nate  principles,  put  him  off  his  guard,  and  made  him 
allow  too  little  to  instinct,  for  fear  of  allowing  too 
much.  This  controversy,  so  far  as  it  regards  moral 
sentiment,  we  have  examined  in  another  place.  At 
present  we  would  only  observe,  that  if  truth  be  any 
thing  permanent,  which  it  must  be  if  it  be  any  thing 
at  all,  those  perceptions  or  impulses  of  understand 
ing,  by  which  we  become  conscious  of  it,  must  be 
equally  permanent ;  which  they  could  not  be,  if  they 
depended  on  education,  and  if  there  were  not  a  law 
of  nature,  independent  on  man,  which  determines 
the  understanding  in  some  cases  to  believe,  in  others 
to  disbelieve.  Is  it  possible  to  imagine,  that  any 

*  Preface  to  the  Essay  on  Human  Understanding. 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  Ttf; 

course  of  education  could  ever  bring  a  rational  crea 
ture  to  believe,  that  two  and  two  are  equal  to  three,, 
and  that  he  is  not  the  same  person  to-day  he  was  yes 
terday,,  that  the  ground  he  stands  on  does  not  exist  ? 
could  make  him  disbelieve  the  testimony  of  his  own 
senses,  or  that  of  other  men  ?   could  make  him   ex 
pect  unlike   events    in  like  circumstances  ?   or  that 
the  course  of  nature,  of  which  he   has  hitherto  had 
experience,  will  be  changed,  even  when  he  foresees 
no  cause  to  hinder  its  continuance  ?   I  can  no  more, 
believe,  that  education  could  produce  such  a  depra 
vity  of  judgment,  than  that   education  could   make, 
me  see  all  human  bodies  in  an  inverted  position,  or 
hear  with  my  nostrils,  or  take  pleasure  in  burning, 
or  cutting  my  flesh.    Why  should  not  our  judgments 
concerning  truth  be  acknowledged  to  result  from  a. 
bias  impressed  upon  the  mind  by  its  Creator,  as  well 
as    our   desire  of  self-preservation,  our  love  of  so 
ciety,  our  resentment  of  injury,  our  joy  in  the  pos 
session  of  good  ?   If  those  judgments  be  not  instinc 
tive,  I  should  be  glad  to  know  how  they  come  to  be 
universal :  the  modes    of  sentiment    and    behaviour 
produced  by  education   are  uniform  only  where  edu 
cation  is  uniform  ;  but  there  are  many  truths  which, 
have  obtained  universal  acknowledgment  in  all  ages 
and  nations.     If  those  judgments  be  not  instinctive, 
I  should  be  glad  to  know  how  men  find  it  so  diffi 
cult,  or  rather  impossible,  to  lay  them  aside  :  the  false- 
opinions  we  imbibe  from  habit  and  education,  may 
be,  and  often  are,  relinquished  by  those  who  make  a 
proper  use  of  their  reason  ;   and  the  msn  who  thus, 
renounces  former  prejudices,  upon  conviction  of  their 
falsity  ?  is  applauded  by  all  as   a   man   of  candour^ 
sense,  and  spirit  j  but  if  one  were  to  suffer  himself 
to  be   argued  out  of  his  common  sensej  the  whole, 
world  would  pronounce  him  a  fool. 

The  substance,  or  at  least  the  foundation,  of 
BERKELEY'S  argument  against  the  existence  of  mat-* 
ter,  may  be  found  in  LOCKE'S  Essay,  and  in  the. 


£58  AW  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

Prlncipia  of  DES  CARTES.  And  if  this  argument 
be  conclusive,  it  proves  that  to  be  false  which  every 
man  must  necessarily  believe  every  moment  of  his 
life  to  be  true,  and  that  to  be  true  which  no  man 
since  the  foundation  of  the  world  was  ever  capable 
of  believing  for  a  single  moment.  BERKELEY'S  doc 
trine  attacks  the  most  incontestable  dictates  of  com 
mon  sense  ;  and  pretends  to  demonstrate,  that  the 
clearest  principles  of  human  conviction,  and  those 
which  have  determined  the  judgment  of  all  men  in 
all  ages,  and  by  which  the  judgment  of  all  rational 
men  must  be  determined,  are  certainly  fallacious. 

Mr  HUME,  more  subtle,  and  less  reserved,  than 
any  of  his  predecessors,  hath  gone  still  greater 
lengths  in  the  demolition  of  common  sense  ;  and 
reared  in  its  place  a  most  tremendous  fabric  of  doc 
trine  ;  upon  which,  if  it  were  not  for  the  flimsiness 
of  its  materials,  engines  might  easily  be  erected,  suf 
ficient  to  overturn  all  belief,  science,  religion,  virtue, 
and  society,  from  the  very  foundation.  He  calls  this 
work,  "  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature;  being  an  at- 
"  tempt  to  introduce  the  experimental  method  of 
**  reasoning  into  moral  subjects.7'  This  is,  in  the 
style  of  Edmund  Curl,  a  taking  title  page  ;  but,  a- 
]as  ;  "  Fronti  nulla  fides  !"  The  whole  of  this 
author's  system  is  founded  on  a  false  hypothesis  ta 
ken  for  granted  ;  and  whenever  a  fact  contradictory 
to  that  false  hypothesis  occur?  to  his  observation,  he 
either  denies  it,  or  labours  hard  to  explain  it  away. 
This,  it  seems,  in  his  judgment,  is  experimental  rea 
soning  :  in  mine,  it  is  just  the  reverse. 

He  begins  his  book  with  affirming,  That  all  the 
perceptions  of  the  human  mind  resolve  themselves 
into  two  classes,  impressions  and  ideas  ;  that  the 
latter  are  all  copied  from  the  former  ;  and  that  ?.n  i- 
dea  differs  from  its  correspondent  impression  only  in 
being  n  weaker  perception.  Thus,  when  I  sit  by 
the  fire,  I  have  an  impression  of  heat,  and  I  can  form 
sn  idea  of  heat  when  I  am  shivering  with  cold  j  in 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON    1RUTH. 

the  one  ca:>e  I  have  a  stronger  perception  of  heat,  in 
the  other  a  weaker.     Is    there   any    warmth  in  this 
idea  of  heat  ?    There  must,  according  to  Mr  HUME'S 
doctrine  j   only   the   warmth  of  the  idea  is  not  quite 
so  strong  as  that  of  the  impression.       For  this  pro 
found  author  repeats  it  again  and  again,  that  an  idea 
is  by  its  nature  weaker  and  fainter  than  an  impres 
sion,  but  is  in  every  other  respect  (not  only  similar, 
but)  the  same*.      Nay,  he   goes   further,  and  says, 
that  whatever  is  true  of  the  one  must  be  acknowledg 
ed  concerning  the  other f  ;   and  he  is  so  confident  of 
the  truth  of  this  maxim,  that  he  makes  it  one  of  the 
pillars  of  his  philosophy.      To  those  who  may  be  in 
clined  to  admit  this  maxim  on  his  authority,  I  would 
propose  a  few  plain  questions.      Do   you   feel  any, 
even  the  least,  warmth,  in  the  idea  of  a  bonefire,  a 
burning  mountain,  or  the  general  conflagration  ?   Do 
you  feel  more  real  cold  ia  VirgiPs  Scythian  winter, 
than  in  Milton's  description    of  the  flames  of  hell  ? 
Do  you  acknowledge  that  to   be   true  of  the  idea  of 
eating,  which  is  certainly  true  of  the  impression  of 
it,  that  it  alleviates  hunger,  fills  the  belly,  and  contri 
butes  to  the  support  of  human  life  ?      If  you  answer 
these  questions  in  the  negative,  you  deny  one  of  the 
fundamental   principles  of  Mr  HUME'S  philosophy. 
We  have,  it  is  true,  a  livelier  perception  of  a  friend 
when  we  see  him  than  when  ave  think  of  him  in  his 
absence.   But  this  is  not  all :  every  person  of  a  sound 
mind  knows,  that  in  the  one  case  we  believe,  and  are 
certain,  that  the  object  exists,  and  is  present  with  us  ; 
in  the  other  we  believe,  and  are  certain,  that  the  ob 
ject  is  not  present :  which,  however,  Mr  HUME  must 
deny  j   for  he  maintains,  that  an  idea  differs  from  an 
impression  only  in  being  weaker,  and  in  no  other  re 
spect  whatsoever. 

That  every  idea  should  be  a  copy  and  resemblance 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  131. 

*  Ibid.  p.  41. 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART   II. 

of  the  impression  whence  it  is  derived  ; — that,  for 
example,  the  idea  of  red  should  be  a  red  idea  ;  the 
idea  of  a  roaring  lion  a  roaring  idea ;  the  idea  of  an  ass, 
a  hairy,  long-eared,  sluggish  idea,  patient  of  labour, 
and  much  addicted  to  thistles  ;  that  the  idea  of  exten 
sion  should  be  extended,  and  that  of  solidity  solid  , — 
that  a  thought  of  the  mind  should  be  endued  with  all, 
or  any,  of  the  oualities  of  matter, — is,  in  my  judg 
ment,  inconceivable  and  impossible.  Yet  Mr 
HUME  takes  it  for  granted;  and  it  is  another  of  his 
fundamental  maxims.  Such  is  the  credulity  of  Scep 
ticism  ! 

If  every  idea  be  an  exact  resemblance  of  its  corres 
pondent  impression,  (or  object  ;  for  these  terms  ac 
cording  to  this  author,  amount  to  the  same  thing*)  ; 
—if  the  Idea  of  whiteness  be  white,  of  solidity  solid, 
and  of  extenbion  extended,  as  the  same  author  al 
lows]-  ; — then  the  idea  of  a  line,  the  shortest  that 
sense  can  perceive,  must  be  equal  in  length  to  the 
line  itself ;  for  if  shorter,  it  would  be  imperceptible  ; 
and  it  will  not  be  said,  either  that  an  imperceptible 
idea  can  be  perceived,  or  that  the  idea  of  an  imper 
ceptible  object  can  be  formed :—— consequently 
the  idea  of  a  line  a  hundred  times  as  long,  must  be 
a  hundred  times  as  long  as  the  former  idea  j  for  if 
shorter,  it  would  be  the  idea,  not  of  this,  but  of  some 
other  shorter  line.  And  so  it  clearly  follows,  nay  it 
admits  of  mathematical  demonstration,  that  the  idea 
of  an  inch  is  really  an  inch  long  ;  and  that  of  a  mile,  a 
mile  long.  In  a  word,  every  idea  of  any  particular  ex 
tension  is  equal  in  length  to  the  extended  object.  The 
same  reasoning  holds  good  in  regard  to  the  other  di 
mensions  of  breadth  and  thickness.  All  ideas,  there 
fore,  of  solid  objects,must  beCaccording  to  MrHuME's 
philosophy)equal  in  magnitude  and  solidity  to  the  ob 
jects  themselves.  Now  mark  the  consequence.  lam  just 
now  in  an  apartment  containing  a  thousand  cubic  feet,, 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  1,  2,  362. 
t  Ibid,  p.  416,  417- 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  l6l 

being  ten  feet  square,  and  ten  high ;  the  door  and  win 
dows  are  shut,  as  well  as  my  eyes  and  ears.  Mr  HUME 
will  allow, that,in  this  situation,  I  may  form  ideas,  not 
only  of  the   visible   appearance,  but  also  of  the  real 
tangible  magnitude  of  the  whole  house,  of  a  first-rate 
man  of  war,  of  St   Paul's   cathedral,   or   even  of  a 
much   larger  object.     But  the  solid    magnitude   of 
these  ideas  is  equal  to  the  solid  magnitude  of  the  ob 
jects  from  which   they   are  copied  :  therefore  I  have 
now  present  with  me  an  idea,  that  is,  a  solid  extend 
ed   thing,   whose  dimensions  extend   to  a  million  of 
cubic  feet  at  least.      The  question   now  is,  where  is 
this  thing  placed  ?  for  a  place  it  certainly  must  have, 
and  a  pretty  large  one  too.     I  should  answer,  in  my 
mind  ;  for  I  know  not  where  else  the  ideas  of  my 
mind  can  be  so  conveniently  deposited.     Now  my 
mind  is  lodged  in  a  body  of  no  extraordinary  dimen 
sions,  and  my  body  is  contained  in  a  room   ten  feet 
square  and  ten  feet   high.       It  seems  then,  that,  into 
this  room,  I  have  it  in  my   power  at   pleasure  to  in 
troduce  a  solid  object  a  thousand,  or  ten  thousand, 
times  larger  than  the  room  itself.      I  contemplate  it 
a  while,  and  then,  by  another  volition,  send  it  a  pack 
ing,  to  make    way  for  another  object  of  equal  or  su 
perior  magnitude.     Nay,  in  no  larger  vehicle  than  a 
common  post-chaise,  I  can  transport  from  one  end  of 
the  kingdom  to  the  other,  a  building  equal  to  the 
largest  Egyptian  pyramid,  and  a  mountain  as  big  as 
the  peak   of  Teneriff. — Take    care,  ye  disciples  of 
HUME,  and  be  very  well  advised  before  ye  reject  this 
mystery  as  impossible  and  incomprehensible.      It  is 
geometrically  deduced  from  the  principles,  nay  from 
the  first  principles,    of  your   master.       By   denying 
this,  you  give    his    system   such  a  stab  as  it  cannot 
survive. 

Say,  ye  candid  and  intelligent,  what  are  we  to  ex 
pect  from  a  logical  and  systematic  treatise  founded 
on  a  supposition,  that  a  part  may  be  ten  or  a  hundred 
thousand  times  greater  than  the  whole  ?  Shall  we 


l62  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART   It, 

expect  truth  ?  Then  it  must  be  inferred  by  false 
reasoning. — Shall  we  expect  sound  reasoning  ?  Then 
surely  the  inferences  must  be  false. — Indeed,  though 
I  cannot  much  admire  this  author's  sagacity  on  the 
present  occasion,  I  must  confess  myself  not  a  little 
astonished  at  his  courage.  A  witch  going  to  sea  in 
an  egg-shell,  or  preparing  to  take  a  trip  through  the 
air  on  a  broom-stick,  would  be  a  surprising  phe 
nomenon  ;  but  it  is  nothing  to  Mr  HUME,  on  such  a 
bottom,  "launching  out  ('as  he  somewhere  expresses 
"  it)  into  the  immense  depths  of  philosophy." 

To  multiply  examples  for  the  confutation  of  so 
glaring  an  absurdity,  is  really  ridiculous.  I  there 
fore  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  determine,  whether,  if 
this  doctrine  of  solid  and  extended  ideas  be  true,  ic 
will  not  follow,  that  the  idea  of  a  roaring  lion  must 
emit  audible  sound,  almost,  if  not  altogether,  as  loud 
and  as  terrible,  as  the  royal  beast  in  person  could  ex 
hibit  ; — that  two  ideal  bottles  of  brandy  will  intox 
icate  as  far  at  least  as  two  genuine  bottles  of  wine  ; 
— and  that  I  must  be  greatly  hurt,  if  not  dashed  to 
pieces,  if  I  am  so  imprudent,  as  to  form  only  the  idea 
of  a  bomb  bursting  under  my  feet.  For  has  not  our 
author  said,  that  "  impressions  and  ideas  comprehend 
"  all  the  perceptions  (or  objects)  of  the  human  mind; 
"  that  whatsoever,  is  true  of  the  one  must  be  ac- 
"  knowledged  concerning  the  other  ;  nay,  that  they 
"  are  in  every  respect  the  same,  except  that  the  for- 
"  mer  strike  with  more  force  than  the  latter  ?" 

The  absurdity  and  inconceivableness  of  the  dis 
tinction  between  objects  and  perceptions  is  another 
of  our  author's  capital  doctrines.  "  Philosophers," 
says  he,  "have  distinguished  between  objects,  and 
"  perception,  of  the  senses;  but  this  distinction  is 
"  not  comprehended  by  the  generality  of  mankind."* 
Now  how  are  we  to  know,  whether  this  distinction, 

*  See  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  L  p.  353.  365. 
The  word  perception  (and  the  same  is  true  of  the  words 
sensation,  smelly  taste,  and  many  others)  has,  in  common 


CHAP.  II.  Air  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  163 

be  conceived  and  acknowledged  by  the  generality  S 
If  we  put  the  question  to  any  of  them,  we  shall  find 
it  no  easy  matter  to  make  ourselves  understood,  and, 
after  all,  perhaps  be  laughed  at  for  our  pains.  Shall 
we  reason  a.  priori  about  their  sentiments  and  com 
prehensions  ?  this  is  often  Mr  HUME'S  method  ;  but 
it  is  neither  philosophical  nor  fair.  Will  you  allow 
me  to  reckon  myself  one  of  the  generality  $  Then 
I  declare,  for  my  own  part,  that  I  do  comprehend 
and  acknowledge  this  distinction,  and  have  done  so 
ever  since  I  was  capable  of  reflection.  I  remember 
when  a  child,  to  have  had  my  fingers  scorched  with 
burning  coals,  and  stung  by  bees :  but  I  never  con 
founded  the  object  with  the  perception  ;  I  never 
thought  that  the  pain  I  felt  could  either  make  honey 

or  melt  lead The  instance,   you  say,  is  somewhat 

equivocal — Then,  I  hope  the  following  is  explicit 
enough. 

language,  two,  and  sometimes  three,  distinct  significations. 
It  means,  1.  The  thing  perceived.  Thus  v/e  speak  of  the 
taste  of  a  fig,  the  smell  vl  a  rose.  2.  The  power  or  faculty 
perceiving  j  as  when  we  say,  "  I  have  lost  my  smell  by  a 
"  severe  cold,  and  therefore  my  taste  is  not  so  quick  as 
"  usual."  3.  It  sometimes  denotes  that  impulse  or  impres 
sion  which  is  communicated  to  the  mind  by  the  external 
object  operating  upon  it  through  the  organ  of  sensation. 
Thus  we  speak  of  a  sweet  or  bitter  taste,  a  distinct  or  con 
fused,  a  clear  or  obscure,  sensation  or  perception.  Most  of 
our  sceptical  philosophers  have  either  been  ignorant  of,  or 
inattentive  to  this  distinction  :  MALEBRANCHE,  indeed, 
(liv.  1.  ch.  10.)  seeiris  to  have  had  some  notion  of  it  j  but 
either  I  do  not  understand  this  author,  or  there  is  a  strange 
obscurity  and  want  of  precision  in  almost  every  thing  he 
says.  Mr  HUME'S  philosophy  does  not  allow  this  to  be  a 
rational  distinction  5  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  know  pre 
cisely  what  he  means  by  the  word  perception  in  this  and 
many  other  places.  I  have  proved,  however,  that  his  as 
sertion  is  false,  whatever  sense  (consistent  with  coimnon 
use)  we  aiTix  to  the  word. 

O 


164  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

Suppose  me  to  address  the  common  people  in  these 
words  :  "  I  see  a  strange  sight  a  little  way  off;  but 
"  my  sight  is  weak,  so  that  I  see  it  imperfectly  ;  let 
"  me  go  nearer,  that  I  may  have  a  more  distinct 

"  sight  of  it." If  the  generality  of  mankind  be 

at  all  incapable  of  distinguishing  between  the  object 
and  the  perception,  this  incapacity  wil)  doubtless  dis 
cover  itself  most,  when  ambiguous  words  are  used 
on  purpose  to  confound  their  ideas  ;  but  if  their  ideas 
on  this  subject  are  not  confounded  even  by  ambiguous 
language,  there  is  reason  to  think,  that  they  are  ex 
tremely  clear,  distinct,  and  accurate.  Now  I  have 
here  proposed  a  sentence,  in  which  there  is  a  studied 
ambiguity  of  language  ;  and  yet  I  maintain,  that 
every  person  of  common  sense,  who  understands 
English,  will  instantly,  on  hearing  these  words,  per 
ceive  that  by  the  word  sight  I  mean,  in  the  first  > 
clause,  the  thing  seen  ;  in  the  second  the  power,  or 
perhaps  the  organ,  of  seeing  ;  in  the  third,  the  per 
ception  itself,  as  distinguished  both  from  the  per 
cipient  faculty,  and  from  the  visible  object*.  If  one 

*  To  every  person  of  common  sense  this  distinction  is 
In  reality  and  practice  quite  familiar.  But  as  the  words 
we  use  in  expressing  it  are  of  ambiguous  signification,  it  is 
not  easy  to  write  about  it  so  as  to  be  immediately  under 
stood  by  every  reader. — The  thing  seen  or  perceived  is 
something  permanent  and  extern?!,  and  is  believed  to  exist, 
whether  perceived  or  not  *,  the  faculty  of  seeing  or  per 
ceiving  is  also  something  permanent  in  the  mind,  and  is 
believed  to  exist  whether  exerted  or  not  ;  but  what  I  here 
call  the  perception  itself  v&  temporary,  and  is  conceived  to 
have  no  existence  but  in  the  mind  that  perceives  it,  and  to 
exist  no  longer  than  while  it  is  perceived  j  for  in  being 
perceived,  its  very  essence  does  consist  j  so  that  to  be,  and 
to  be  perceived,  when  predicated  of  it,  do  mean  precisely 
the  same  thing.  Thus,  I  just  now  see  this  paper,  which  I 
call  the  external  object :  I  turn  away,  or  shut  my  eyes, 
and  then  I  see  it  no  longer,  but  I  still"  believe  it  to  exist  5 
though  buried  an  hundred  fathom  deep  in.  the  earth,  or 


iiHA?.  If.  AN    E5SAT    ON    TRUTH.  l6$ 

of  the  multitude,  on  hearing  me  pronounce  this  sen 
tence,  were  to  reply  as  follows  ;  "  The  sight  is  not 
w  at  all  strange  ;  it  is  a  man  on  horseback  :  but  your 
"  sight  must  needs  be  weak,  as  you  are  lately  reco- 
"  vered  from  sickness  :  however,  if  you  wait  a  little 
"  till  the  man  and  horse,  which  are  aow  in  the  shade, 
(<  come  into  the  sunshine,  you  will  then  have  a  much 

"  more  distinct  sight  of  them  :" 1  would  ask,  is 

the  study  of  any  part  of  philosophy  necessary  to 
make  a  man  comprehend  the  meaning  of  these  two 
sentences  ?  Is  there  any  thing  absurd  or  unintelligible 
either  in  the  former  or  in  the  latter  ?  Js  there  any 
thing  in  the  reply,  that  seems  to  exceed  the  capacity 
of  the  vulgar,  and  supposes  them  to  be  more  acute 
than  they  really  are  ?  If  there  be  not,  and  i  am  cer 
tain  there  is  not,  here  is  an  unquestionable  proof, 
that  the  vulgar,  and  indeed  all  men  whom  metaphy- 
iic  has  not  deprived  of  their  senses,  do  distinguish 

O    2 

left  in  an  uninhabitable  island,  its  existence  would  be  as 
real,  as  if  it  were  eazed  at  by  ten  thousand  men.  Again, 
when  I  shut  ray  eyes  or  tie  a  bandage  over  them,  or  go  in 
to  a  dark  place,  I  see  no  longer  •,  that  is,  my  faculty  of 
seeing  acts,  or  is  acted  upon,  no  longer  j  but  I  still  believe 
it  to  remain  in  my  mind,  ready  to  act,  or  to  be  acted  upon, 
whenever  it  is  again  placed  in  the  proper  circumstances  ; 
for  nobody  supposes,  that  by  shutting  our  eyes,  or  going 
into  a  d-^rk  place,  we  annihilate  our  faculty  of  seeing.  But 
thirdly,  m.y  perception  of  this  paper  is  no  permanent  thing  -. 
tier  has  it  any  existence,  but  while  it  is  perceived  :  nor 
cces  it  at  all  exist  but  in  the  mind  that  perceives  it  ;  I  can 
put  an,  end  to,  or  annihilate  it,  whenever  1  please,  by  shut 
ting  my  eyes  $  and  I  can  at  pleasure  renexv  it  again  by  o- 
petiing  them.— It  is  really  astonishing,  that  so  many  of 
our  modern  philosophers  should  have  overlooked  a  distinc- 
ticn,  which  is  of  so  great  importance,  that  if  we  were  un 
acquainted  with  it,  a  great  part  of  human  language  would 
seem  to  be  perfect  nonsense.  Such  ?.n  oversight  would  be 
unpardonable  in  a  dictionary -maker  ;  but,  I  know  not  ho\v 
it  is,  some  of  our  philosophers  have  been  admired  and  cele 
brated  for  their  acumen  in  committing  it. 


AN   ESSAY  ON   TRUTH*  PART    II. 

between  the  object  perceived,  the  faculty  perceiving 
and  the  perception  or  impulse  communicated  by  the 
external  object  to  the  mind  through  the  organ  of  sen- 
sation.  What  though  all  the  three  are  sometimes 
expressed  by  the  same  name  ?  This  only  shows, 
that  accuracy  of  language  is  not  always  necessary  for 
answering  the  common  purposes  of  life.  If  the  ideas 
of  the  vulgar  are  sufficiently  distinct,  notwithstand 
ing,  what  shall  we  say  of  that  philosopher,  whose 
ideas  are  really  confounded  by  this  inaccuracy,  and 
who,  because  there  is  no  difference  in  the  signs,  i- 
inagines  that  there  is  none  in  the  things  signified  ! 
That  the  understanding  of  such  a  philosopher  is  not  a 
vulgar  one,  will  be  readily  allowed  ;  whether  it  ex 
ceeds,  or  falls  short,  let  the  reader  determine.* 

*  Mr  HUME  is  not  always  consistent  with  himself  in 
affirming,  that  the  vulgar  do  not  comprehend  the  distinc 
tion  between  perceptions  and  objects.  "  It  is  not,"  he 
says,  vol.  1.  p.  337,  '"  by  arguments,  that  children,  pea- 
"  sants,  and  the  greatest  part  of  mankind,  are  induced  to 
44  attribute  objects  to  some  impressions,  and  deny  them  to 
"  others." — So  !  it  seems  the  greatest  part  of  mankind  do 
acknowledge  a  distinction  between  objects  and  perceptions, 
*'  accordingly  we  find,  that  all  the  conclusions  which  the 
"  vulgar  form  on  this  head,  are  directly  contrary  to  those 
"  which  are  confirmed  by  philosophy." — The  more  shame 
to  that  philosophy  !  say  I. — "  For  philosophy  informs  us, 
"  that  every  thing  which  appears  to  the  mind,  is  nothing 
"  but  a  perception,  and  is  interrupted,  and  dependent  on  the 
**  mind  -?  whereas  the  vulgar  confound  perceptions  and  ob- 
*'  jects," — that  is,  I  suppose,  do  not  distinguish  the  former 
from  the  latter. — How  !  in  the  last  sentence  it  was  said, 
that  the  greatest  part  of  mankind  do  distinguish  between 
impressions  (which  are  a  species  of  perceptions)  and  ob 
jects, — "  and  attribute  a  distinct  continued  existence  to 

44  the  very  things  they  feel  or  see." So,  now  again  the 

objects  have  a  distinct  continued  existence  j  that  is,  are 
something  different  from  perceptions,  which  every  body 
knows  have  no  continued  existence.  Here  Mr  HUME, 
within  the  compass  of  half  a  page,  contradicts  himself,  and 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

This  author's  method  of  investigation  is  no  less 
extraordinary  than  his  fundamental  principles.  There 
are  many  notions  in  the  human  mind,  of  which  it  is 
not  easy  perhaps  to  explain  the  origin.  If  you  can 
describe  in  words  what  were  the  circumstances  in 
which  you  received  an  impression  of  any  particular 
notion,  it  is  well ;  Mr  HUME  will  allow  that  you 
may  form  an  idea  of  it.  But  if  you  cannot  do  this, 
then  says  he,  there  is  no  such  notion  in  your  minds, 
for  all  perceptions  are  either  impressions  or  ideas  ; 
and  it  is  not  possible  for  us  so  much  as  to  conceive 
any  thing  specifically  different  from  ideas  and  im 
pressions  *  :  now  all  ideas  are  copied  from  impres 
sions  :  therefore  you  can  have  no  idea  nor  concep 
tion  of  any  thing  of  which  you  have  not  received  an 
impression. — All  mankind  have  a  notion  of  power 
of  energy.  No  says  Mr  HUME  ;  an  impression  of 
power  or  energy  was  never  received  by  any  man,  and 
therefore  an  idea  of  it  can  never  be  formed  in  the 
human  mind.  If  you  insist  on  your  experience  and 
consciousness  of  power,  it  is  all  a  mistake  :  his  hy 
pothesis 

contradicts  that  contradiction,  and  finally  acquiesces  in  the 
first  contradiction.  To  hunt  such  a  writer  through  so 
many  shiftings  and  doublings,  is  not  worth  the  reader's 
while  nor  mine.  I  hope  we  both  know  how  to  employ 
our  time  to  better  purpose.  How  often  our  author  may 
affirm  and  deny,  and  deny  and  affirm,  this  doctrine,  in  the 
coarse  of  his  work,  I  neither  know  nor  care  :  it  is  cer 
tain,  that,  upon  the  whole,  he  holds  the  distinction  between 
objects  and  perceptions  to  be  unreasonable  ("p.  338.)  mi~ 
philosophical,  (ibid.),  and  unsupported  by  the  evidence  of 
sense,  (p.  330.— 337.) And  indeed,  when  this  distinc 
tion,  as  we  have  explained  it,  is  acknowledged,  and  attend 
ed  to,  all  BERKELEY'S  pretended  demonstration  of  the  non- 
existence  of  matter,  and  all  HUME'S  reasonings  against  the 
existence  both  of  matter  and  spirit,  appear  to  be  no  better, 
than  a  play  upon  words.  For  this  key  unlocks  that  whole 
mystery  of  sophism  and  quibble. 

Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1,  p.  123, 
°3 


168  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  ir. 

pothesis  admits  not  the  idea  of  power,  and  therefore 
there  is  no  such  idea  *. — AH  mankind  have  an  idea, 
of  self.  That  I  deny,  says  Mr  HUME  ;  I  maintain-, 
that  no  man  ever  had,  or  can  have,  an  impression  of 
self ;  and  therefore  no  man  can  form  any  idea  of  it  f. 
If  you  persist,  and  say,  that  certainly  you  have  some 
notion  or  idea  of  yourself:  My  dear  Sir,  he  would 
say,  you  do  not  consider,  that  this  assertion  contra 
dicts  my  hypothesis  of  impressions  and  ideas  ;  how 
then  is  it  possible  it  should  be  true  !  This,  it  seems, 
is  experimental  reasoning  ! 

But  though  Mr  HUME  denj^,  that  I  have  any  no 
tion  of  self,  surely  he  does  not  mean  to  affirm,  that 
I  do  not  exist,  or  that  I  have  no  notion  of  myself  as 
an  existent  being.  In  truth,  it  is  not  easy  to  say 
what  he  means  on  this  subject.  Most  philosophical 
subjects  become  obscure  in  the  hands  of  this  author ; 
for  he  has  a  notable  talent  at  puzzling  his  readers  and 
himself:  but  when  he  treats  of  consciousness,  of  per 
sonal  identity,  and  of  the  nature  of  the  soul,  he  ex 
presses  himself  so  strangely,  that  his  words  either 
have  no  meaning,  or  imply  a  contradiction.  "  The 
"  question,"  says  he,  "  concerning  the  substance  of 
"  the  soul  is  unintelligible  J." — Well,  Sir,  if  you 
think  so,  you  may  let  it  alone. — No  ;  that  must  not 
be  neither.  "  What  we  call  a  mind,  is  nothing  but 
*'  a  heap  or  collection  of  different  perceptions  (or 
4<  objects)  united  together  by  certain  relations,  and 
"  supposed,  though  falsely,  to  be  endowed  with  per- 
u  feet  simplicity  and  identity  || . — If  any  one,  upon 
ci  serious  and  unprejudiced  reflection,  thinks  he  has 
Ci  a  different  notion  of  himself,  I  must  confess  1  can 
*(  reason  with  him  no  longer.  All  1  can  allow  him 
*'  is  that  he  may  be  in  the  right  as  well  as  I,  and  that 
"  we  are  essentially  different  in  this  particular.  He 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  282. 
t  Ibid.  p.  437.  4S8.  J  Ibid.  p.  434.  435. 

!i  Ibid.  p.  361,  362, 


CHAP.  IT.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH, 

i(  may  perhaps  perceive  something  simple  and  con- 
"  tinued,  which  he  calls  himself  \  though  I  am  cer- 
"  tain  there  is  no  such  principle  in  me.  But  setting 
"  aside  some  metaphysicians  of  this  kind," — that  is, 

who  feel  and  believe,    that   they  have    a   soul, 

"  I  may  venture  to  affirm  of  the  rest  of  mankind, 
"  that  they  are  nothing  but  a  bundle  or  collection  of 
"  different  perceptions,  which  succeed  each  other  with 
*'  inconceivable  rapidity,  and  are  in  a  perpetual  flux 

*'  and  movement There  is  properly  no  simplici- 

"  ty  in  the  mind  at  one  time,  nor  identity  in  different 
"  (times^),  whatever  natural  propension  we  may  have 
"  to  imagine  that  simplicity  and  identity. — They  are 
"  the  successive  perceptions  only  that  constitute  the 
"  mind  *." 

If  these  words  have  any  meaning,,  it  is  this  :  My 
soul  (or  rather  that  which  I  call  my  soul)  is  not  one 
simple  thing,  ncr  is  it  the  same  thing  to-day  it  was 
yesterday^  nay,  it  is  not  the  same  this  moment  it 
was  the  last  ;  it  is  nothing  but  a  mass,  collection,, 
heap,  or  bundle,  of  different  perceptions,  or  objects, 
-that  fleet  away  in  succession,,  with  inconceivable  ra 
pidity,  perpetually  changing,,  and  perpetually  in  me- 
tion.  There  may  be  some  metaphysicians  to  whose 
souls  this  description  cannot  be  applied  ;  but  I  (Mr 
HUME)  am  certain,  that  this  is  a  true  and  complete 
description  of  my  soul,  and  of  the  soul  of  every  other 
individual  of  the  human  race,  those  few  metaphysi 
cians  excepted. 

4  That  body  has  no  existence,  but  as  a  bundle  of 
perceptions,  whose  existence  consists  in  their  being 
perceived,  our  author  all  along  maintains.  He  now 
affirms,  that  the  soul,  in  like  manner,  is  a  bundle  of, 
perceptions,  and  nothing  else.  It  follows,  then,  that 
there  is  nothing  in  the  universe  but  impressions  and 
ideas  ;  all  possible  perceptions  being  by  our  author 
comprehended  in  those  two  classes.  This  philosophy 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p,  438,  439,  440. 


AN  ESSAt  ON  TRUTH*  PART  II. 

admits  of  no  other  existence  whatsoever,  nor  even  of 
a  percipient  being  to  perceive  these  perceptions.  So 
that  we  arc  now  arrived  at  the  height  of  human 
wisdom  ;  at  that  intellectual  eminence,  from  whence 
there  is  a  full  prospect  of  all  that  we  can  reasonably 
believe  to  exist,  and  of  all  that  can  possibly  become 
the  object  of  our  knowledge.  Alas  I  what  is  be 
come  of  the  magnificence  of  external  nature,  and  the 
wonders  of  intellectual  energy,  the  immortal  beauties 
of  truth  and  virtue,  and  the  triumphs  of  a  good  con 
science  !  Where  now  the  warmth  of  benevolence, 
the  fire  of  generosity,  the  exultations  of  hope,  the 
tranquil  ecstasy  of  devotion,  and  the  pang  of  sympa 
thetic  delight !  All,  around,  above,  and  beneath,  is  one 
vast  vacuit}^,  or  rather  an  enormous  chaos,  encom 
passed  with  darkness  universally  and  eternally  im 
penetrable.  Body  and  spirit  are  utterly  annihilated  ; 
and  there  remains  nothing  (for  we  must  again  descend 
into  the  gibberish  of  metaphysic)  but  a  vast  collec 
tion,  bundle,  mass,  or  heap,  of  unperceived  percep 
tions. 

Such,  if  Mr  HUME'S  words  have  any  meaning,  is 
the  result  of  his  system.  And  what  is  this  result  ? 
If  he,  or  his  admirers,  can  prove,  that  there  is  a  pos 
sibility  of  expressing  it  in  words  which  do  not  imply 
a  contradiction,  I  will  not  call  it  nonsense.  If  he  or 
they  can  prove,  that  it  is  compatible  with  any  one 
acknowledged  truth  in  philosophy,  in  morals,  in  re 
ligion  natural  or  revealed,  I  will  not  call  it  impious. 
If  he  or  they  can  prove,  that  it  does  not  arise  from 
common  facts  misrepresented,  and  common  words  mis 
understood,  I  shall  admit  that  it  may  have  arisen  from 
accurate  observation,  candid  and  liberal  inquiry,  per 
fect  knowledge  of  human  nature,  and  the  enlarged 
views  of  true  philosophic  genius. 


CHAP.   H.  AK  ESSAY  ON  TRt7TH.  1 7* 

SECT.     II. 

Of  the  Non-existence  of  Matter. 

TN  the  preceding  section  I  have  taken  a  slight  sur- 
**•  vey  of  the  principles,  and  method  of  investiga 
tion,  adopted  by  the  most  celebrated  promoters  of 
modern  scepticism.  And  it  appears  that  they  have 
not  attended  to  the  distinction  of  reason  and  common 
sense,  as  explained  in  the  first  part  of"  this  Essay, 
and  as  acknowledged  by  mathematicians  and  natural 
philosophers.  Erroneous,  absurd,  and  self-contra 
dictory  notions,  have  been  the  consequence.  And 
now,  by  entering  into  a  more  particular  detail,  we 
might  easily  shew,  tnat  many'  of  those  absurdities 
thatdisgrace  the  philosophy  of  human  nature,  would 
never  have  existed,  if  men  had  acknowledged  and 
attended  to  this  distinction;  regulating  their  enqui 
ries  by  the  criterion  above-mentioned,  and  never 
prosecuting  any  chain  of  argument  beyond  the  self- 
evident  principles  of  common  sense.  We  shall  con 
fine  ourselves  to  two  instances  ;  one  of  which  is  con 
nected  with  the  evidence  of  external  sense,  and  the 
other  with  that  of  internal. 

That  matter  or  body  has  a  real,  separate,  inde 
pendent  existence  *  ;  that  there  is  a  real  sun  above 
us,  a  real  air  around  us,  and  a  real  earth  under 
our  feet  ;  has  been  the  belief  of  all  men  who  were 
not  mad,  ever  since  the  creation.  This  is  believed, 
not  because  it  is  or  can  be  proved  by  argument,  but 
because  the  constitution  of  our  nature  is  such  that 
we  must  believe  it.  There  is  here  the  same  ground 
of  belief,,  that  there  is  in  the  following  propositions  : 

*  By  independent  existence^  we  mean  an  existence  that 
does  not  depend1  on  us,  nor  so  far  as  \\e  knoxv,  on  any  be 
ing,  except  the  Creator.  BERKELEY,  and  others,  say,, 
that  matter  exists  not  but  in  the  minds  that  perceive  it  \ 
and  consequently  depends,  in  respect  of  its  existence^ 
upon  those  minds. 


Atf  ESSAY  or;  Thffffc.  PAST  i*. 

I  exist  ;  whatever  is,  is  ;  two  and  two  make  four. 
It  is  absurd,  nay,  it  is  impossible,  to  believe  the 
contrary.  I  could  as  easily  believe,  that  I  do  not 
exist,  that  two  and  two  are  equal  to  ten,  that  what 
ever  is,  is  not  j  as  that  I  have  neither  hands,  nor 
feet,  nor  head,  nor  clothes,  nor  house,  nor  country, 
nor  acquaintance  ;  that  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars, 
ocean,  and  tempest,  thunder,  and  lightning,  moun 
tains,  rivers,  and  cities,  have  no  existence  but  as 
ideas  or  thoughts  in  my  mind,  and,  independent  on 
me  and  my  faculties,  do  not  exist  at  all,  and  could 
not  exist  if  I  were  to  be  annihilated  ;  that  fire,  and 
burning,  and  pain,  which  I  feel,  and  the  recollec 
tion  of  pain  that  is  past,  and  the  idea  of  pain 
xvhich  I  never  felt,  are  all  in  the  same  sense 
ideas  or  perceptions  in  my  mind,  and  nothing 
else  ;  that  the  qualities  of  matter  are  not  qualities  of 
matter,  but  affections  of  spirit ;  and  that  I  have  no 
evidence  that  any  being  exists  in  nature  but  myself. 
Philosophers  may  say  what  they  please  ;  and  the 
world,  who  are  apt  enough  to  admire  what  is  mon 
strous,  may  give  them  credit  ;  but  I  afHrm,  that 
it  is  not  in  the  power,  either  of  wit  or  of  madness,  to 
contrive  any  conceit  more  inconsistent,  more  absurd, 
or  more  nonsensical,  than  this,  That  the  material 
world  has  no  existence  but  in  my  mind. 

DES  CARTES  admits,  that  every  person  must  be 
persuaded  of  the  existence  of  a  material  world  :  but 
he  does  not  allow  this  point  to  be  self-evident,  or  so 
certain  as  not  to  admit  of  doubt;  because,  says  he, 
we  find  in  experience,  that  our  senses  are  sometimes 
in  an  error,  and  because,  in  dreams  we  often  mis 
take  ideas  for  external  things  really  existing.  He 
therefore  begins  his  philosophy  of  bodies  with  a  for 
mal  proof  of  the  existence  of  body  *. 

But  however  imperfect,  and  however  fallacious, 
we  acknowledge  our  senses  to  be  in  other  matters,  it 
is  certain,  that  no-  man  ever  thought  them  fallacious 

*  Cartesii  Principia,  part  1.  §  4.  part  2.  §  1, 


C.UAP.    If.  AN    ESSAY    OK    TRUTH.- 

in  regard  to  the  existence  of  body  :  nay,  every  man 
of  a  sound  mind,  is,  by  the  law  of  his  nature,  convin 
ced,  that,  in  this  respect  at  least,  they  are  not,  and 
cannot  be  mistaken.  Men  have  sometimes  been  de 
ceived  by  sophistical  arguraent,  because  the  human 
understanding  is  in  some,  and  indeed  in  many,  re 
spects  fallible  -,  but  does  it  follow,  that  we  cannot, 
without  proof,  be  -certain  of  any  thing,  not  even  of 
our  own  existence,  nor  of  the  truth  of  a  geometrical 
axiom  ?  Some  diseases  are  so  fatal  to  the  mind,  as 
to  confound  mens  notions  even  of  their  own  i^-r  ci 
ty  ;  but  does  it  follow,  that  I  cannot  be  certain  of 
my  being  the  same  person  to-day  I  \va*  yes.eraav, 
and  twenty  years  ago,  till  I  have  firs:  proved  this 
point  by  argument  r  And  because  we  are  sometimes 
deceived  by  our  senses,  does  it  therefore  follow,  that 
wenever  areceitainof  ournot  being  deceived  by  them, 
till  we  have  first  convinced  ourselves  by  reascnir.g, 
that  they  are  not  deceitful  ? — If  a  Caitesian  can 
prove,  that  there  have  been  a  few  persons  of  sound 
understanding,  who  from  a  conviction  of  the  de- 
ceitfulness  of  their  senses,  have  really  disbelieved, 
or  seriously  doubteu,  the  existence  of  a  material 
world,  I  shall  allow  a  conviction  of  this  deceitful- 
ness  to  be  a  sufficient  ground  for  such  doubt  or  dis 
belief,  in  one  or  a  few  instances  ;  and  if  lie  can  prove 
that  such  doubt  or  disbelief  has  at  any  time  been  ge 
neral  among  mankind,  I  shall  allow  that  it  may  pos 
sibly  be  so  again  ; — but  if  it  be  certain,  as  I  think  it 
is,  that  no  man  of  a  sound  mind,  however  suspi 
cious  of  the  veracity  of  his  senses,  ( ver  did  or  could 
really  disbelieve,  or  seriously  doubt,  the  existence 
of  a  material  world,  then  is  this  point  self-evident, 
and  a  principle  of  common  sense,  even  on  the  sup 
position  that  o^r  senses  are  as  deceitful  as  Djfc'-s 
C-  RTES  and  MALEBRAJJCHE  chuse  to  represent 
them.  But  we  have  formerly  proved,  that  our  sen-, 
ses  are  never  supposed  to  be  deceitful,  except  whea 
we  are  conscious^  that  our  excellence  is  pan.ial,  or 


174  AN    ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  PART    If. 

c»ur  observation  inaccurate  ;  and  that  even  then,  the 
fallacy  is  detected,  and  rectified,  only  by  the  evi 
dence  of  sense  placed  in  circumstances  more  favour 
able  to  accurate  observation.  In  regard  to  the  ex 
istence  of  matter,  there  cannot  possibly  be  a  suspi 
cion,  that  our  observation  is  inaccurate,  or  our  ex 
perience  partial ;  and  therefore  it  is  not  possible, 
that  ever  we  should  distrust  our  senses  in  this  par 
ticular.  If  it  were  possible,  our  distrust  could  ne 
ver  be  removed  either  by  reasoning  or  by  expe 
rience. 

As  to  the  suspicion  against  the  existence  of  mat 
ter  that  is  supposed  to  arise  from  our  experience  of 
the  delusions  of  dreaming  ;  we  observe,  in  the  first 
place,  that  if  this  be  allowed  a  sufficient  ground  for 
suspecting,  that  our  waking  perceptions  are  equally 
delusive,  there  is  at  once  an  end  of  all  truth,  rea 
soning,,  and  common  sense.  That  I  am  at  present 
awake,  and  not  asleep,  I  certainly  know  ;  but  I  can- 
riot  prove  it  :  for  there  is  no  criterion  for  distin 
guishing  dreaming  fancies  from  waking  perceptions, 
more  evident,  th*n  that  I  am  now  awake,  which  is 
the  point  in  question  ;  and,  as  we  have  often  remark 
ed,  it  is  essential  to  every  proof,  to  be  more  evident 
than  that  which  is  to  be  proved.  That  I  am  now  a- 
wake,  must  therefore  carry  its  ow7n  evidence  along 
with  it ;  if  it  be  evident  at  all,  it  must  be  self-evi 
dent.  And  so  it  is  :  we  may  mistake  dreams  for 
realities,  but  no  rational  being  ever  mistook  a  reali 
ty  for  a  dream.  Had  we  the  command  of  our  un 
derstanding  and  memory  in  sleep,  we  should  pro 
bably  be  sensible,  that  the  appearances  of  our  dreams 
are  all  delusive  :  which,  in  fact  is  sometimes  the 
case  ;  at  least  I  have  sometimes  been  conscious,  that 
my  dream  was  a  dream  ;  and  when  it  was  disagreea 
ble,  have  actually  made  efforts  to  awake  myself, 
which  have  succeeded.  But  sleep  has  a  wonderful 
power  over  all  our  faculties.  Sometimes  we  seem 
to  have  lost  our  moral  faculty  j  as  when  we  dream 


CHAP.  II.       AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  175 

of  doing  that,  without  scruple  or  remorse,  which 
when  awake  we  could  not  bear  to  think  of. 
Sometimes  memory  is  extinguished  ;  as  when  we 
dream  of  conversing  with  our  departed  friends, 
without  remembering  any  thing  of  their  death,  tho* 
it  was,  perhaps,  one  of  the  most  striking  incidents! 
we  had  ever  experienced,  and  is  seldom  or  never  out 
of  our  thoughts  when  we  are  awake.  Sometimes 
our  understanding  seems  to  have  quite  forsaken  us  ; 
as  when  we  dream  of  talking  with  a  dead  friend,  re 
membering  at  the  same  time  that  he  is  dead,  but 
without  being  conscious  of  any  thing  absurd  or  unu 
sual  in  the  circumstance  of  conversing  with  a  dead 
man.  Considering  these  and  the  other  effects  of 
sleep  upon  the  mind,  we  need  not  be  surprised,  that 
it  should  cause  us  to  mistake  our  own  ideas  for  real 
things,  and  be  affected  with  those  in  the  same  man 
ner  as  with  these.  But  the  moment  we  awake,  and 
recover  the  use  of  our  faculties,  we  are  sensible  that 
the  dream  was  a  delusion,  and  that  the  objects  which 
now  solicit  our  notice  are  real.  To  demand  a  rea 
son  for  the  implicit  confidence  we  repose  in  our  wa-  • 
king  perceptions ;  or  to  desire  us  to  prove,  that 
things  are  as  they  appear  to  our  waking  senses,  and 
not  as  they  appear  to  us  in  sleep,  is  as  unreasonable 
as  to  demand  a  reason  for  our  belief  in  our  own  ex 
istence  :  in  both  cases  our  belief  is  necessary  and 
unavoidable,  the  result  of  a  law  of  nature,  and  what 
we  cannot  in  practice  contradict,  but  to  our  shame 
and  perdition. 

If  the  delusions  of  dreaming  furnish  any  reasona 
ble  p-retence  for  doubting  the  authenticity  of  our 
waking  perceptions,  they  may,  with  equal  reason, 
make  me  doubtful  of  my  own  identity  :  for  I  have 
often  dreamed  that  I  was  a  person  different  from  what 
I  am  ;  nay,  that  I  was  two  or  more  distinct  persons 
a  one  and  the  same  time. 

Further:  If  DES   CARTES   thought  an  argument 
nece.sary  to  convince  him,  tr.at  his  pf  rception  of  the 
P 


176  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

external  world  was  not  imaginary,  but  real,  I  would 
ask,  how  he  could  know  that  his  argument  was  real, 
and  not  imaginary.  How  could  he  know  that  he 
was  awake,  and  not  asleep,  when  he  wrote  his  prin 
ciples  of  philosophy,  if  his  waking  thoughts  did  not, 
previous  to  all  reasoning,  carry  along  with  them  un 
deniable  evidence  of  their  reality  ?  /  am  awake,  is 
a  principle  which  he  must  have  taken  for  granted, 
even  before  he  could  satisfy  himself  of  the  truth  of 
what  he  thought  the  first  of  all  principles,  Cogito, 
ergo  sum* — To  all  which  we  may  add,  that  if  there 
be  any  persons  in  the  world  who  never  dream  at 
all  *,  ("and  some  such  I  think  there  are^),  and  whose 
belief  ift  the  existence  of  a  material  world  is  not  a 
whit  stronger  than  that  of  those  whose  sleep  is  al 
ways  attended  with  dreaming  ;  this  is  a  proof  from 
experience,  that  the  delusions  of  sleep  do  not  in  the 
least  affect  our  conviction  of  the  authenticity  of  the 
perceptions  we  receive,  and  of  the  faculties  we  ex 
ert,  when  awake. 

The  first  part  of  DES  CARTES'  argument  for  the 
existence  of  bodies,  would  prove  the  reality  of  the 
visionary  ideas  we  perceive  in  dreams  ;  for  they,  as 
well  as  bodies,  present  themselves  to  us,  indepen 
dent  on  our  wilL  But  the  principal  part  of  his  ar 
gument  is  founded  in  the  veracity  of  God,  which 
he  had  before  inferred  from  our  consciousness  of  the 
idea  of  an  infinitely  perfect,  independent,  and  neces 
sarily-existent  being.  Our  senses  inform  us  of  the 

*  "  I  once  knew  a  man,"  says  Mr  LOCKE,  "  who  was 
**  bred  a  scholar,  snd  had  no  bad  memory,  who  told  me, 
"  that  he  had  never  dreamed  in  his  life,  till  he  had  that 
"  fever  he  was  then  newly  recovered  of,  \\Jiich  was  about 
"  the  five  or  si x_ and  twentieth  year  of  his  age.  I  suppose  the 
44  world  affords  more  such  instahces." 

Essay  on  Human  Understanding,  book  2.  ch.  1. 

A  young  gentleman  of  m^  acquaintance  never  dreams 
at  all,  except  when  his  health  is  disordered. 


CHAP.  It.       AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.          177 

existence  of  body  ;  they  give  us  this  information  in 
consequence  of  a  law  established  by  the  divine  will : 
but  God  is  no  deceiver  ;  therefore  is  their  informa 
tion  true.  I  have  formerly  given  my  opinion  of  this 
argument,  and  shewn  that  it  is  a  sophism,  as  the 
author  states  it.  We  must  believe  our  faculties  to 
be  true,  before  we  can  be  convinced,  either  by 
proof,  or  by  intuitive  evidence.  If  we  refuse  to  be 
lieve  in  our  faculties,  till  their  veracity  be  first  as- 
certained  by  reasoning,  we  shall  never  believe  in 
them  at  all  *. 

MALEBRANCHE  f  says,  that  men  are  more  certain 
of  the  existence  of  God,  than  of  the  existence  of  bo 
dy.  He  allows,  that  DES  CARTES  has  proved  the 
existence  of  body  by  the  strongest  arguments  that 
reason  alone  could  furnish  ;  nay,  he  seems  to  ac 
knowledge  those  arguments  to  be  unexceptionable  £  : 
yet  he  does  not  admit,  that  they  amount  to  a  full 
demonstration  of  the  existence  of  matter.  In  phi 
losophy,  says  he,  we  ought  to  maintain  our  liberty 
as  long  as  we--  can,  and  to  believe  nothing  but  what 
evidence  compels  us  to  believe.  To  be  fully  con 
vinced  of  the  existence  of  bodies,  it  is  necessary  that 
we  have  it  demonstrated  to  us,  not  only  that  there 
is  a  God,  and  that  he  is  no  deceiver,  but  also  that 
God  hath  assured  us,  that  he  has  actually  created 
such  bodies  ;  and  this,  says  he,  I  do  not  fiad  proved 
in  the  works  of  M.  DES  CARTES. 

There  are,  according  to  MALEBRANCHE,  but  two 
ways  in  which  God  speaks  to  the  mind,  and  compels 
(or  obliges)  it  to  believe  j  to  wit,  by  evidence,  and 

*  See  the  preceding  section. 

f  Recherche  dc  la  verlte,  torn.  3.  p.  30.  A  Paris,  chez 
Pralard,  1679. 

I  Mais  quoique  M.  DES  CARTES    ait  donne  les  preu- 

ves  le  plus  fortes  que  la  raison   toute  seule  puisse  fournir 

pour  Pexistence    des  corps  j  quoiqu'  il    soit  evident,    que 

Dieu  ft'est  point  trompeur,  et  qu'on  puisse  dire  qu'il  nous 

P  a 


178  AN  ESSAY  CN  TRUTH.  PART  IT. 

by  the  faith.  "  The  faith  obliges  us  to  believe 
"  that  bodies  exist;  but  as  to  the  evidence  of  this 
"  truth,  it  certainly  is  not  complete  :  and  it  is  also 
"  certain,  that  we  are  not  invincibly  determined  to 
"  believe,  that  any  thing  exists,  but  God,  and  o,  r 
41  own  mind.  Jt  is  true,  that  we  have  an  extreme 
"  propensity  to  believe,  that  we  are  surrounded 
4t  with  corporeal  beings  ;  so  far  I  agree  with  M. 
"  BES  CARTES:  but  this  propensity,  natural  as  it 
<(  is,  doth  not  force  our  belief  by  evidence;  it  only 
"  inclines  us  to  believe  by  impression.  Now  we 
"  ought  not  to  be  determined,  in  our  free  judgments, 
*<  by  any  thing  but  light  and  evidence  ;  if  we  suf- 
"  fer  ourselves  to  be  guided  by  the  sensible  impres- 
"-  sicn,  we  shall  be  almost  always  mistaken  *." 

trompeiGitefFectivemenl,sruous  nous  trompions  nous-memes 
faisant  1'usage  que  nous  devons  faire  de  notre  esprit,  et 
des  autres  facultez  dont  il  est  1'auteur  ;  cependant  on  peut 
dire  qvie  Texistence  de  la  raatiere  ne'st  point  encore  par- 
faitement  demontree.  Car,  enfin,  en  matiere  d  philoso 
phic,  nous  ne  devons  croire  quoique  ce  soit,  que  Icrsqiie  /' 
evidence  nous  y  oblige.  Nous  devons  faire  usage  de  notre 

liberte*    autant  que  nous  le  pouvons. Pour  etre  pleine- 

ment  convaincus  qu'il  a  des  corps,  il  faut  qu'on  nous  de- 
montre,  non  seulement  qu'il  y  a  un  Dieu,  et  que  Dieu  n' 
est  point  trompeur,  mais  encore  que  Dieu,  nous  a  assure 
qu'il  en  a  efFectivement  crte  :  ce  que  je  ne  trouve  point 
prouve  dans  les  cuvrages  de  M.  DES  CARTES. 

Tom.  3.  p.  37,  38.   39. 

*  Dieu  ne  parle  a  1'esprit,  et  ne  1'oblige  a  croire  qu'en 
deux  manieres  :  par  Pevidence,  et  par  la  foi."  Je  demeure 
d'accord,  que  la  foi  oblige  a  croire  qu'il  y.  a  des  corps  j  ma- 
js  pour  T  evidence,  il  est  certain,  cu'elle  n'est  point  entiere 
et  que  nous,  ne  sommes  point  invinciblement  portez  a  cro 
ire  qu'il  y  ait  quelqu'  autre  chose  que  Dieu  et  notre  esprit. 
II  est  vray,  que  nous  avons  un  penchant  extreme  ti  croire 
qu'il  y  a  des  corps  qui  nous  environnent.  Je  1'accorde  a 
M.  DES  CARTES  :  mais  ce  penchant,  tout  naturel.  qu'il 
est,  ne  nous  y  force  point  par  evidence  j  il  nous  y  incline 


CHAP.    II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TROTS. 

Our  author,  then  proposes,  in  brief,  the  substance 
of  that  argument  against  the  existence  of  body 
which  BERKELEY  afterwards  took  such  pains  to  il 
lustrate  ;  and  discovers,  upon  the  whole,  that,  as  a 
point  of  philosophy  the  existence  of  matter  is  but 
a  probability,  to  which  we  have  it  in  onr  power  either 
to  assent,  or  not  to  assent,  as  we  please.  Li  a 
word,  it  is  by  the  faith,  and  not  by  evidence,  thut  we 
become  certain  of  this  truth. 

This  is  not  a  proper  place  for  analysing  the  pas- 
cage  above  quoted,  otherwise  it  would  be  easy  to 
show,  that  the  doctrine  (such  as  it  is)  which  the 
author  here  delivers,  is  not  reconcileable  with,  other 
parts  of  his  system.  But  I  only  mean  to  observe, 
that  what  is  here  asserted  of  our  belief  in  the  exis 
tence  of  body  being  not  necessary,  but  such  as  we 
may  with-hold  if  we  please,  is  contrary  to  my  ex 
perience.  That  my  body,  and  this  pen  and  paper, 
and  the  other  corporeal  objects  around  me,  do  real- 
Jy  exist,  is  to  me  as  evident,  as  that  my  soul  exists  ; 
it  is  indeed  so  evident,  that  nothing  is  or  can  be 
more  so ;  and  though  my  life  depended  upon  the 
consequence,  I  could  not,  by  any  effort,  bring  myselt 
to  entertain  a  doubt  of  it,  even  for  a  single  moment. 

I  must  therefore  affirm,  that  the  existence  of  mat 
ter  can  no  more  be  disproved  by  argument,  than  the 
existence  of  myself,  or  than  the  truth  of  a  self-evi 
dent  axiom  in  geometry.  To  argue  against  it,  is  to 
set  reason  in  opposition  to  common  sense  j  which  is 

seulement  par  impression.  Or  nouns  ne  devons  suivre 
dans  nos  jugemens  libres  que  la  lumiere  et  Pevidence  j  et 
si  nous  nous  laissons  conduire  a  Pimpression  sensible,  nous 
nous  tromperons  presque  toujours.  Tom.  3./>.  39. — Lafoi  I 
translate  Thefoith,  because  I  suppose  the  author  to  mean 
the  Christian  or  Catholic  faith.  If  \ve  take  it  to  denote 
faith  or  be/iff  in  general,  I  know  not  how  we  shall  ir.ake 
any  sense  of  the  passage. 


l8o  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  .  PART  II. 

indirectly  to  subvert  the  foundation  of  all  just  rea 
soning,  and  to  call  in  question  the  distinction  between 
truth  and  falsehood.     We  are  told,  however,  that  a 
great  philosopher  has  actually  demonstrated,   that 
matter  does  not  exist.     Demonstrated  !  truly  this  is 
a  piece  of  strange  information.     At  this  rate,  any 
falsehood   may  be   proved  to  be  true,  and  any  truth 
to  be   false.     For  it  is  impossible,   that  any  truth 
should  be  more  evident  to  me  than  this,  that  matter 
does  exist.     Let  us   see,  however,  what  BERKELEY 
has  to   say  in  behalf  of  this  extraordinary  doctrine. 
Jt  is  natural  for  demonstration,  and  for  all  sound  rea 
soning,  to   produce  conviction,  or  at  least  some  de 
gree  of  assent,  in  the  person  who  attends  to  it,  and 
understands    it.     I  read    The    Principles   of  Human 
Knowledge,  together  with    The   Dialogues   between 
Hylas  and  Philonous.     The  arguments  I  confess,  are 
subtle,  and  well  adapted  to  the  purpose  of  puzzling 
and  confounding.     Perhaps  I  will  not  undertake  to 
confute  them.     Perhaps  I  am  busy,  or  indolent,  or 
unacquainted  with  the  principles  of  this  philosophy, 
or  little  versed  in  your  metaphysical  logic.     But  am 
1  convinced,  from  this  pretended  demonstration,  that 
matter  has  no  existence  but  as  an.  idea  in  the  mind  ? 
Not  in"  the  least  ;   uvy  belief  now   is  precisely  the 
same  as  before. — Is  it  unphilosophical,  not  to  be  con 
vinced  by  arguments   which  I   am  not  able  to  con 
fute  ?   Perhaps  it.  rnay,  but  I  cannot  help  it  :  you 
raay,  if  you  please   strike  me  off  the  list  of  philoso 
phers,  as  a  non-conformist ;  you  may  call  me  unplianr, 
unreasonable,  unfashionable,  and  a  man  with  whoir* 
it  is  not  worth  while  to  argue  :  but  till  the  frame  of 
my  nature   be  unhinged,  and  a  new  set  of  faculties 
given  me,  I  cannot  believe  this  strange  doctrine,  be 
cause  it  is  perfectly  incredible.     But  if  I  were  per 
mitted  to  propose   one  clownish  question,  I  would 
fain  ask,  Where  is  the  harm  of  my  continuing  in  my 
old  opinion,  and  believing,  with  the  rest  of  the  world-, 
that  I  am  not  the  only  created  being  in  the  universe, 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

but  that  there  are  many  others,  whose  existence  is  as? 
independent  on  me,  as  mine  is  on  them  ?  Where  is 
the  harm  of  my  believing,  that  if  I  were  to  fall  down 
yonder  precipice,  and  break  my  neck,  I  should  be  no 
more  a  man  of  this  world  ?  My  neck,  Sir,  may  be  an 
idea  to  you,  but  to  me  it  is  a  reality,  and  an  impor 
tant  one  too.  Where  is  the  harm  of  my  believing, 
that  if  in  this  severe  weather,  I  wrere  to  neglect  to 
throw  (what  you  call)  the  idea  of  a,  coat  over  the: 
ideas  of  my  shoulders,  the  idea  of  cold  would  pro 
duce  the  idea  of  such  pain  and  disorder  as  might  pos 
sibly  terminate  in  my  real  death  ?  What  great  of 
fence  shall  I  commit  against  God  or  man,  church  or 
state,  philosophy  or  common  sense,  if  I  continue  to 
believe,  that  material  food  will  nourish  me,  though- 
the  idea  of  it  will  not  ;  that  the  real  sun  will  warm 
and  enlighten  me,  though  the  liveliest  idea  of  him 
will  do  neither  ;  and  that,  if  I  would  obtain  true  peace 
of  mind  and  self  approbation,  I  must  not  only  form* 
ideas  of  compassion,  justice,  and  generosity,  but  al 
so  really  exert  those  virtues  in  external  performance  ?• 
What  harm  is  there  in  all  this  ? — O  !  no  harm  at  all,, 
Sir  ; — but — the  truth, — the  truth, — will  you  shut 
your  eyes  against  the  truth  ? — No  honest  man  ever 
will:  convince  me  that  your  doctrine  is  true,  and  I 
•will  instantly  embrace  it.-r-Havel  not  convinced  thee^ 
thou  obstinate,  unaccountable,  inexorable—?  An 
swer  ray  arguments,  if  thou  canst. — Alas,  Sir,  you 
have  given  me  arguments  in  abundance,  but  you  have 
not  given  me  conviction  ?  and  if  your  arguments  pro 
duce  no  conviction,  they  are  worth  nothing,  to  me. 
They  are  like -counterfeit  bank-bills  ;  some  of  which? 
are  so  dexterously  forged,  that  neither  your  eye  nor 
mine  can  detect  them  ;  yet  a  thousand  of  them  would, 
go  for  nothing  at  the  bank  ;  and  even  the  paper- 
maker  would  allow  me  more  handsomely  for  old  ragse 
You  need  not  give  yourself  the  trouble  to  tell  mer 
that  I  ought  to  be  convinced  :  I  ought  to  be  convinced: 
only  when  I  feel  conviction  j  when  I  feel.no  convic~< 


182  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

tion,  I  ought  not  to  be  convinced.  — It  has  been  ob 
served  of  some  doctrines  and  reasonings,  that  their 
extreme  absurdity  prevents  their  admitting  a  rational 
confutation.  What  !  am  I  to  believe  such  doctrine  ? 
am  1  to  be  convinced  by  such  reasoning  ?  Now,  I 
never  heard  of  any  doctrine  more  scandalously  ab 
surd,  than  this  of  the  non-existence  of  matter.  There 
is  not  a  fiction  in  the  Persian  tales  that  I  could  not 
as  easily  believe  ;  the  silliest  conceit  of  the  most  con 
temptible  superstition  that  ever  disgraced  human  na 
ture,  is  not  more  shocking  to  common  sense,  is  not 
more  repugnant  to  every  principle  of  human  belief. 
And  must  I  admit  this  jargon  for  truth,  because  I 
cannot  confute  the  arguments  of  a  man  who  is  a  more 
subtle  disputant  than  I?  Does  philosophy  require 
this  of  me  ?  Then  it  must  suppose,  that  truth  is  a5 
variable  as  the  fancies,  the  characters,  and  the  in 
tellectual  abilities  of  men,  and  that  there  is  no  such 
thing  in  nature  as  common  sense. 

But  all  this,  1  shall  perhaps  be  told,  is  but  child 
ish  cavil,  and  unphilosophical  declamation.  What  if, 
after  all  this  very  doctrine  be  believed,  and  the  so 
phistry  (as  you  call  it)  of  BERKELEY  be  admitted  as 
sound  reasoning,  and  legitimate  proof?  What  then 
becomes  of  your  common  sense,  and  your  instinctive 
convictions  ? — What  then,  do  you  ask  ?  Then  indeed 
I  acknowledge  the  fact  to  be  very  extraordinary ; 
and  I  cannot  help  being  in  some  pain  about  the  con 
sequences,  which  must  be  important  and  fatal.  If  a 
man,  out  of  vanity,  or  from  a  desire  of  being  in  the  fa 
shion,  or  in  order  to  pass  for  wonderfully  wise,  shall 
say,  that  BERKELEY'S  doctrine  is  true,  while  at  the 
same  time  his  belief  is  precisely  the  same  with  mine 
it  is  well  ;  I  leave  him  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  hy 
pocrisy,  which  will  no  doubt  contribute  mightily  to 
his  improvement  in  candour,  happiness,  and  wisdom. 
If  a  man  professing  this  doctrine  act  like  other  men 
in  the  common  affairs  of  life,  I  will  not  believe  his 
profession  to  be  sincere.  For  this  doctrine,  by  re- 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  185 

moving  body  out   of  the  universe,   makes   a  total 
change  in  the  circumstances  of  men  ;   and  therefore 
if  it  is  not  merely  verbal,  must  produce  a  total  change 
in  their  conduct.     When    a  man  is  only  turned  out 
of  his  house,  or  stripped  of  his  clothes,  or  robbed  of 
his   money,   he  must  change  "his  behaviour,  and  act 
differently  from  other  men,  who  enjoy  these  advanta 
ges.     Persuade  a  man  that  he  is  a  beggar  and  a  va 
gabond,   and   you  shall  instantly  see  him  change  his 
manners.     If  your  arguments  against  the  existence  of 
matter  have  ever  carried  conviction  along  with  them, 
they  must  at  the  same  time    have  produced  a  much 
more  extraordinary  change  of  conduct ;  but  if  they 
have   produced   no  change  of  conduct,  I  insist  on  it, 
they  have  never  carried  conviction  along  with  them, 
•whatever  vehemence  of  protestation  men  may  have 
used  in  avowing  such   conviction.     If  you  say,  that 
though   a  man's   understanding   be  convinced,  there 
are  certain  instincts  in  his  nature  that  will  not  per 
mit  him  to  alter  his  conduct ;  or,  if  he  did,  the  rest 
of  the  world  would  account  him  a  mad-man  ;  by  the 
first   apology,   you  allow  the  belief  of  the  non-exis 
tence   of  body   to  be   inconsistent  with  the  laws  of 
nature  ;  by  the  second,  to  be  inconsistent  with  com 
mon  sense. 

Bat  if  a  man  be  convinced,  that  matter  has  no  ex 
istence,  and  believe  this  strange  tenet  as  steadily,  and 
with  as  little  distrust,  as  I  believe  the  contrary  ;  he 
will,  I  am  afraid,  have  but  little  reason  to  applaud 
himself  oft  this  new  acquisition  in  science  ;  he  will 
soon  find,  it  had  been  better  for  him  to  have  reasoned, 
and  believed,  and  acted,  like  the  rest  of  the  world. 
If  he  fall  down  a  precipice,  or  be  trampled  under 
foot  by  horses,  it  will  avail  him  little,  that  he  once 
had  the  honour  to  be  a  disciple  of  BERKELEY,  and  to 
believe  that  those  dangerous  objects  are  nothing  but 
ideas  in  the  mind.  And  yet,  if  such  a  man  be  seen 
to  avoid  a  precipice,  or  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  a 
coach  and  six  horses  at  full  speed,  he  acts  as  in  con-.. 


184  ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  PART    II. 

sistentlj  \vith  his  belief,  as  if  he  ran  away  from  the 
picture  of  an  angry  man,  even  while  he  believed  it 
to  be  a  picture.  Supposing  his  life  preserved  by 
the  care  of  friends,  or  by  the  strength  of  natural  in 
stinct  urging  him  to  act  contrary  to  his  belief ;  yet 
will  this  belief  cost  Him  dear.  For  if  the  plainest 
evidence,  and  fullest  conviction,  be  certainly  fallaci 
ous,  I  beg  to  be  informed,  what  kind  of  evidence, 
and  what  degree  of  conviction,  may  reasonably  be 
depended  on.  If  nature  be  a  juggler  by  trade,  is  it 
for  us,  poor  purblind  reptiles,  to  attempt  to  pene 
trate  the  mysteries  of  her  art,  and  take  upon  us  to 
decide,  when  it  is  she  presents  a  true,  and  when  a 
false  appearance  !  I  will  not  say,  however,  that  this 
man  runs  a  greater  risk  of  universal  scepticism,  than 
of  universal  credulity.  Either  the  one  or  the  other, 
or  both,  must  be  his  portion  ;  and  either  the  one  or 
the  other  would  be  sufficient  to  imbitter  my  whole 
life,  and  to  disqualify  me  for  every  duty  of  a  ration 
al  creature.  He  who  can  believe  against  common 
sense,  and  against  the  clearest  evidence,  and  against 
the  fullest  conviction,  in  any  one  case,  may  do  the 
same  in  any  other  ;  consequently  he  may  become  the 
dupe  of  every  wrangler  who  is  more  acute  than  he  ; 
and  then,  if  he  is  not  entirely  secluded  from  mankind, 
his  liberty,  and  happiness,  are  gone  for  ever.  Indeed 
a  chearful  temper,  strong  habits  of  virtue,  and  the 
company  of  the  wrise  and  good,  may  still  save  him 
from  perdition,  if  he  have  no  temptations  nor  diffi 
culties  to  encounter.  But  it  is  the  end  of  every  use 
ful  art,  to  teach  us  to  surmount,  difficulties,  not  to 
disqualify  us  for  attempting  them.  Men  have  been 
known  to  live  many  years  in  a  warm  chamber,  after 
they  were  become  too  delicate  to  bear  the  open  air  ; 
but  who  will  say,  that  such  a  habit  of  body  is  de 
sirable  ?  what  physician  will  recommend  to  the 
healthy  such  a  regimen  as  would  produce  it  ? 

But,  that  I  may  no  longer  suppose,  what  I  main 
tain  to  be  impossible,  that  mankind  in  general,  or 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  Otf  TRUTH.  1 85 

even  one  rational  being,  could,  by  force  of  argument, 
be  convinced,  that  this  absurd  doctrine  is  true  ; — 
what  if  all  men  were  in  one  instant  deprived  of  their 
0  understanding  by  Almighty  power,  and  made  to  be- 
lieve,  that  matter  has  no  existence  but  as  an  idea  in 
the  mind,  all  other  earthly  things  remaining  as  they 
are  ? — Doubtless  this  catastrophe  would,  according 
to  our  metaphysicians,  throw  a  wonderful  light  on 
all  the  parts  of  knowledge.  I  pretend  not  even  to 
guess  at  the  number,  extent,  or  quality,  of  astoni 
shing  discoveries  that  would  then  start  forth  into 
view.  But  of  this  I  am  certain,  that  in  less  than  a 
month  after,  there  could  not,  without  another  miracle, 
be  one  human  creature  alive  on  the  face  of  the  earth. 
BERKELEY  foresaw,  and  has  done"  what  he  could 
to  obviate,  some  of  these  objections.  There  are  two 
points  which  he  has  taken  great  pains  «£o  prove.  The 
first  is,  That  his  system  differs  not  from  the  belief 
of  the  rest  of  mankind  ;  the  second,  That  our  con 
duct  cannot  be  in  the  least  affected  by  our  disbelief 
of  the  existence  of  a  material  world. 

i.  As  to  the  first,  it  is  certainly  false.  Mr  HUME 
himself  seems  willing  to  give  it  up.  1  have  known 
many  who  could  not  answer  BERKELEY'S  arguments  ; 
I  never  knew  one  who  believed  his  doctrine.  I  have 
mentioned  it  to  some  who  were  unacquainted  with 
philosophy,  and  therefore  could  not  be  supposed  to 
have  any  bias  in  favour  of  either  system  ;  they  all 
treated  it  as  most  contemptible  jargon,  and  what  no 
man  in  his  senses  ever  did  or  could  believe.  I  have 
carefully  attended  to  the  effects  produced  by  it  upon 
my  own  mind  ;  and  it  appears  to  me  at  this  moment, 
as  when  I  first  heard  it,  incredible  and  incomprehen 
sible.  I  say  incomprehensible  :  for  though,  by  read 
ing  it  over  and  over,  I  have  got  a  set  of  phrases  and 
arguments  by  heart,  which  would  enable  me,  if  I 
were  so  disposed,  to  talk,  and  argue,  and  write,  "  a- 
bout  it  and  about  it  5"  yet,  when  I  lay  systems  and 
syllogisms  aside,  when  1  enter  on  any  part  of  the 


186  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  rr. 

business  of  life,  or  when  I  refer  the  matter  to  the 
unbiassed  decision  of  my  own  mind,  1  plainly  see,  that 
I  had  no  distinct  meaning  to  my  words  when  I  said, 
that  the  material  world  has  no  existence  but  in  thec 
mind  that  perceives  it.  In  a  word,  if  this  author  had 
asserted,  that  I  and  all  mankind  acknowledge  and 
believe  the  Arabian  Nights  Entertaiment  to  be  a 
true  history,  I  could  not  have  had  any  better  reason 
tradicting  this,  "  That  Bj-:RKELtY's  principles  in  re- 
"  gard  to  the  existence  of  matter,  differ  not  from  the 
"  belief  of  the  rest  of  mankind. " 

2.  In  behalf  of  the  second  point  he  argues,  "  That 
"  nothing  gives  us  an  interest  in  the  material  world, 
"  except  the  feelings  pleasant  or  painful  which  ac- 
"  company  our  perceptions  ;  that  these  perceptions 
"  are  the  same,  whether  we  believe  the  material 
"  world  to  exist  or  not  to  exist  ;  consequently,  that 
"  our  pleasant  or  painful  feelings  are  also  the  same  ; 
(<  and  therefore,  that  our  conduct,  which  depends  on 
"  our  feelings  and  perceptions,  must  be  the  same, 
"  whether  we  believe -or  disbelieve  the  existence  of 
"  matter." 

But  if  it  be  certain,  that  by  the  law  of  our  nature 
we  are  unavoidably  determined  to  believe  that  mat 
ter  exists,  and  to  act  upon  this  belief,  (and  nothing, 
I  think,  is  more  certain^),  how  can  it  be  imagined, 
that  a  contrary  belief  Would  produce  no  alteration  in 
our  conduct  and  sentiments  ?  Surely  tVe  laws  of  na 
ture  are  not  such  trifles,  as  that  it  should  be  a  mat 
ter  of  perfect  indifference,  whether  we  act  and  think 
agreeably  to  them  or  not  ?  I  believe  that  matter  ex 
ists  ; — I  must  believe  that  matter  exists  ; — I  must 
continually  act  upon  this  belief;  such  is  the  law  of 
my  constitution.  Suppose  my  constitution  changed 
in  this  respect,  all  other  things  remaining  as  they  . 
are  ; — would  there-  then  be  no  change  in  my  senti 
ments  and  conduct  ?  If  there  would  not,  then  is  this 
law  of  nature,  in  the  first  place,  useless,  because 
inen  could  do  as  well  without  it  4  secondly,  in- 


CHAP.    II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  187 

convenient,  because  its  end  is  to  keep  us  ignorant 
of  the  truth  ;  and,  thirdly,  absurd,  because  insuf 
ficient  for  answering  its  end,  the  Bishop  of  Cloyne, 
and  others,  having,  it  seems,  discovered  the  truth 
in  spite  of  it.  Is  this  according  to  the  usual  econo 
my  of  Nature  ?  Does  this  language  become  her 
servants  and  interpreters  ?  Is  it  possible  to  devise 
any  sentiments  or  maxims  more  subversive  of  truth, 
and  more  repugnant  to  the  spirit  of  true  philoso 
phy  ? 

Further:  All  external. objects  have  some  qualities 
in  common  ;  but  between  an  external  object  and  an 
idea,  or  thought  of  the  mind;  there  is  not,  there  can 
not  possibly  be,  any  resemblance.  A  grain  of  sand, 
and  the  globe  of  the  earth  ;  a  burning  coal,  and  a 
lump  of  ice  ;  a  drop  of  ink,  and  a  sheet  of  white 
paper,  resemble  each  other,  in  being  extended,  solid, 
figured,  coloured,  and  divisible ;  but  a  thought  or 
idea  has  no  extension,  solidity,  figure,  colour,  nor 
divisibility  :  so  that  no  two  external  objects  can  be 
so  unlike,  ?.s  an  external  object  and  (what  philoso 
phers  call^)  the  idea  of  it.  '  Now  we  are  taught  by 
BERKELEY,  that  external  objects,  (that  is,  the  things 
xve  take  for  external  objects^)  are  nothing  but  ideas 
in  our  minds  ;  in  other  words,  that  they  are  in  e- 
very  respect  different  from  what  they  appear  to  be. 
This  candle,  it  seems,  hath  not  one  of  those  quali 
ties  it  appears  to  have :  it  is  not  white,  nor  lumi 
nous,  nor  round,  nor  divisible,  nor  extended  ;  for 
to  an  idea  of  the  mind,  not  one  of  these  qualities 
can  possibly  belong.  How  then  shall  I  know  what  it 
really  is  ?  From  what  it  seems  to  be,  I  can  conclude 
nothing  ;  no  more  than  a  blind  man,  by  handling  a, 
bit  of  black  \vax,  can  judge  of  the  colour  of  saow, 
or  the  visible  appearance  of  the  starry  heavens. 
The  candle  may  be  an  Egyptian  pyramid,  the  king 
of  Prussia,  a  mad  dog,  or  nothing  at  all :  it  may  be 
the  island  of  Madagascar,  Saturn's  ring,  or  one  of 
the  Pleiad es;  for  any  thing  I ,  know,  or  can  ever 

0. 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

know  to  the  contrary,  except  you  allow  me  to  judp-e 
of  its  nature  from  its  appearance  ;  which,  however, 
I  cannot  reasonably  do,  if  its  appearance  and  nature 
are  in  every  respect  so  different  and  unlike  as  not  to 
liave  one  single  quality  in  common.  I  must  there 
fore  believe  it  to  be,  what  it  appears  to  be,  a  real, 
corporeal,  external  object,  and  so  reject  BERKE 
LEY'S  system  ;  or  I  never  can,  with  any  shadow  of 
reason,  believe  any  thing  whatsoever  concerning  it. 
— Will  it  yet  be  said,  that  the  belief  of  this  system 
cannot  in  the  least  affect  our  sentiments  and  conduct  ? 
With  equal  truth  may  it  be  said,  that  Newton's  con 
duct  and  sentiments  would  not  have  been  in  the  least 
affected  by  his  being  metamorphosed  into  an  ideot, 
or  a  pillar  of  sail. 

Some  readers  may  perhaps  be  dissatisfied  with 
this  reasoning,  on  account  of  the  ambiguity  of  the 
words  external  object  and  idea  ,*  which,  however, 
the  assertors  of  the  non-existence  of  matter  have  not 
as  yet  fully  explained.  Others  may  think  that  I 
must  have  misunderstood  the  author  ;  for  that  he 
was  too  acute  a  logician  to  leave  his  system  exposed 
to  objections  so  decisive,  and  so  obvious.  To  gra 
tify  such  readers,  I  will  not  insist  on  these  objec 
tions.  That  I  may  have  misunderstood  the  author's 
doctrine,  is  not  only  possible,  but  highly  probable  ; 
nay,  I  have  reason  to  think,  that  it  was  not  perfect 
ly  understood  even  by  himself.  For  did  not  BER 
KELEY  write  his  Principles  of  Human  Knowledge, 
with  this  express  view,  (which  does  him  great  ho 
nour),  to  banish  scepticism  both  from  science  and 
from  religion  ?  Was  he  not  sanguine  in  his  expecta 
tions  of  success  ?  And  has  not  the  event  proved, 
vhat  he  was  egregiously  mistaken  ?  For  is  it  not  e- 
videnr,  from  the  use  to  which  later  authors  have  ap 
plied  it,  that  his  system  leads  directly  to  atheism 
and  universal  scepticism  ?  And  if  a  machine  disap 
point  its  inventor  so  far  as  to  produce  effects  contrary 
to  those  he  wished,  intended,  and  expected  ;  may 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY   ON    TRUTH. 

we  not,  without  breach  of  charity,  conclude,  that 
he  did  not  perfectly  understand  his  plan  ?  At  any 
rate,  it  appears  from  this  fact,  that  our  author  did 
not  foresee  all  the  objections  to  which  his  theory  is 
liable,  He  did  not  foresee,  that  it  might  be  made 
the  foundation  of  a  sceptical  system  ;  i:  he  had,  we 
know  he  would  have  renounced  it  with  abhorrence. 

This  one  objection  therefore,  (in  which  I  think  I 
cannot  be  mistaken),  will  fully  answer  my  present 
purpose  :  Our  author's  doctrine  is  contrary  to  com 
mon  belief,  and  leads  to  universal  scepticism.  Sup 
pose  it,  then,  universally  and  seriously  adopted  ; 
suppose  all  men  divested  of  all  belief,  and  conse 
quently  of  all  principle :  would  not  the  dissolution 
of  society,  and  the  destruction  of  mankind  necessa- 
rily>ensue  ? 

Still  I  shall  be  told,  that  BERKELEY  was  a  good 
.man,  and  that  his  principles  did  him  no  hurt.  I  al 
low  it  ;  he  was  indeed  a  most  excellent  person ; 
none  can  revere  his  memory  more  than  I.  But  does 
it  appear,  that  he  ever  acted  according  to  his  princi 
ples,  or  that  he  thoroughly  understood  them  ?  Does 
it  appear,  that,  if  he  had  put  them  in  practice,  no 
hurt  would  have  ensued  to  himself  *,  or  to  society  ? 

*  Let  it  not  be  pretended,  that  a  man  may  disbelieve 
his  senses  without  danger  of  inconvenience.  Pyrrho  (as 
we  read  in  Diogenes  Laertius)  professed  to  disbelieve  his 
senses,  and  to  be  in  no  apprehension  from  any  of  the  ob 
jects  that  affected  them.  The  appearance  of  a  precipice 
or  wild  beast  was  nothing  to  Pyrrho  ,  at  least  he  said  so  : 
lie  would  not  avoid  them  j  he  knew  they  were  nothing  at 
all,  or  at  least  that  they  were  not  what  they  seemed  to  be. 
Suppose  him  to  have  been  in  earnest  *?  and  suppose  his 
keepers  to  have  in  earnest  adopted  the  same  principles  : 
would  not  their  limbs  and  lives  have  been  in  as  great  dan 
ger,  as  the  limbs  and  life  of  a  blind  and  deaf  man  wander 
ing  by  himself  in  a  solitary  place,  with  his  hands  tied  be 
hind  his  back  ?  I  would  as  soon  say,  that  our  senses  are 
useless  faculties,  as  that  we  might  disbelieve  thera  without 
danger  of  inconvenience. 


IpO  AN  ESSAT  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

Does  it  appear,  that  he  \vas  a  sceptic,  or  a  friend  to 
scepticism  ?  Does  it  appear,  that  men  may  adopt 
his  principles  without  danger  of  becoming  sceptics  ? 
The  contrary  of  all  this  appears  with  uncontrovertr- 
ble  evidence.  • 

Surely  pride  was  not  made  for  man.  The  most 
exalted  genius  may  find  in  himself  many  affecting 
memorials  of  human  frailty,  and  such  as  often  ren 
der  him  an  object  of  compassion  to  those  who  in  vir 
tue  and  understanding  are  far  inferior.  I  pity  BERKE 
LEY'S  weakness  in  patronising  an  absurd  and  dan 
gerous  theory  ;  I  doubt  not  but  it  may  have  over 
cast  many  of  his  days  with  a  rioom,  which  neither 
the  approbation  of  his  conscience,  nor  the  natural  se 
renity  of  his  temper,  could  entirely  dissipate.  And 
though  I  were  to  believe,  thai  he  was  intoxicated 
with  this  theory,  and  rejoiced  in  it ;  yet  still  I 
should  pity  the  intoxication  a?  a  weakness  :  for  can. 
dour  will  not  permit  me  to  r.ive  it  a  harsher  name  ; 
as  I  see  in  his  other  writings,  and  know  by  the  tes 
timony  of  his  contemporaries,  particularly  Pope  and 
Swift,  that  he  was  a  friend  to  virtue,  and  to  human 
nature, 

We  must -not  suppose  a  false  doctrine  harmless, 
merely  because  it  has  net  been  able  to  corrupt  the 
heart  of  a  good  man.  Nor,  because  a  few  sceptics 
have  not  authority  to  render  science  contemptibly 
nor  power  to  overturn  society,  must  we  suppose, 
that  therefore  scepticism  is  not  dangerous  to  science 
or  mankind.  The  effects  of  a  general  scepticism 
would  be  dreadful  and  fatal.  We  must  therefore, 
notwithstanding  our  reverence  for  the  character  of 
BERKELEY,  be  permitted  to  affirm,  what  we  have 
sufficiently  proved,  that  his  doctrine  is  subversive 
of  man's  most  important  interests,  as  amoral,  intel 
ligent,  and  percipient  being. 

After  all,  though  I  were  to  grant,  that  the  disbe 
lief  of  the  existence  of  matter  could  not  produce  any 
considerable  change  in  our  principles  of  action  and 


CHAP.    II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TUUTH. 

reasoning,  the  reader  will  find  in  the  sequel  *,  that 
the  point  I  have  chiefly  in  view  would  not  be  much 
affected  even  by  that  concession.  I  say  not  this,  as 
being  diffident  or  sceptical  in  regard  to  what  I  have 
advanced  on  the  present  subject.  Doctrines  which 
I  do  not  believe,  I  will  never  recommend  to  others* 
I  am  absolutely  certain,  that  to  me  the  belief  of  BER 
KELEY'S  system  would  be  attended  with  the  most 
fatal  consequences ;  and  that  it  would  be  equally 
dangerous  to  the  rest  of  mankind,  1  cannot  doubt,  so 
Jong  as  I  believe  their  nature  and  mine  to  be  the 
same. 

Though  it  be  absurd  to  attempt  a  proof  of  what 
is  self-evident,  it  is  manly  and  meritorious  to  confute 
the  objections  that  sophistry  may  urge  against  it» 
This,  with  respect  to  the  subject  in  question,  has 
been  done,,  .in  a  decisive  and  masterly,  manner,  by 
the  learned  and  sagacious  Dr  Reid  f  ;  who  proves9 
that  the  reasonings  of  BERKELEY,  and  others,  con 
cerning  primary  and  secondary  qualities  £,  owe  al 

*  Part  2,.  chap,  3. 

t  Inquiry  into  the  Human  Mind  on  the  Principles  of 
Common  Sense. 

t  DES  CARTES,  LOCKE,  and  BERKELEY  suppose,  that, 
what  v/e  call  a  body  is  nothing  but  a  collection  of  qualities  j 
and  these  they  divide  -in*®  primary  and  secondary,  •  Of  the 
former  kind  are  magnitude,  extension,  solidity,  &c.  which 
LOCKE  and  the  CARTESIANS  allow  to  belong  to  bodies  at 
all  times,  whether  perceived  or  not.v  Of-  the  latter  kind 
are  \\iQ-heat  cffire,  tfie  xtf?/?// and  taste  of  a  rose,  &c.  and 
these,  by  the  same  authors,  and  by  BERKELEY  are  said  to 
exist  not  in  the  bodies  themselves,  -but  only  in  the  mind 
that  perceives  them  :  -an  error  they  are  led  into  by  sup 
posing,  that  the  words  heat^  taste\  sme//t  &tc.  signify  noth 
ing  but  a  perception^  whereas. -we  have  formerly  shown ? 
that  they  also  signify  an  external  thing.  BERKELEY,  fol 
lowing  the  hints  which  he  found  in  Diis  CARTES,  MALE- 
BRANCHE  and  LOCKE,  has  applied  the  same  mode  of  rea 
soning  to  prove^  that  primary,  as  well  as  secondary  quail- 
0,3 


AN    ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  PART    II. 

their  strength  to  the  ambiguity  of  words.  I  have 
proved,  that,  though  this  fundamental  error  had 
never  beeu  detected,  the  philosophy  of  BERKELEY  is 
in  its  own  nature  absurd,  because  it  supposes  the 
original  principles  of  common  sense  controvertibk 
and  fallacious  :  a  supposition  repugnant  to  the  geni 
us  of  true  philosophy  ;  and  which  leads  to  universal 
credulity,  or  universal  scepticism  ;  and,  consequent 
ly,  to  the  subversion  of  knowledge  and  virtue,  and 
the  extermination  of  the  human  species, 

It  is  proper,  before  we  proceed  to  the  next  in 
stance,  to  make  a  remark  or  two  on  what  has  beeu 
said. 

1.  Here  we  have  an  instance  of  a  doctrine  advan 
ced  by  some  philosophers,  in  direct  contradiction  to 
the  general  belief  of  all  men  in  all  ages. 

2.  The    reasoning    by    which    it    is    supported, 
though  long  accounted  unanswerable,  did  never  pro 
duce    a   serious    and    steady   conviction.     Common 
sense  still  declared  the  doctrine  to  be  false  ;  we  wera 
sorry  to  find  the  powers  of  human  reason  so  limited, 
as  not  to  afford  a  logical  confutation  of  it  ;  we  were 
convinced  it  merited  confutation,  and  flattered    our 
selves,  that  one  time  or  other  it   would  be  confuted. 

3.  The  real  and    general    belief  of  this    doctrine 
would  be  attended  with  fatal  consequences  to  science, 
and  to  human    nature  :  for  this  is  a  doctrine  accord~ 
ing  to  which  a  man  could  not  act  nor    reason  in  the 
common  affairs  of  life,,  without  incurring  the  charge 
of  insanity  or  folly,   and  involving   himself   in  dis 
tress  and  perdition. 

4.  An  ingenious  man,  from   a  sense  of   the   bad 
tendency  of  this  doctrine,  applies  himself  to  examine 
the  principieb  on,   which    it    is    founded  j  discovers 

ties,  have  no  external  existence  j  and  consequently,  that 
bcdy  (which  consists  of  these  two  classes  of  qualities,  can 
nothing  else)  exists  only  as  an  idea  in  the  mind  that  per 
ceives  t,  and  exists  no  longer  than  yrhile  it  is  perceived, 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH,  I  93 

them  to  be  erroneous  ;  and  proves,  to  the  full  con 
viction  of  all  competent  judges,  that  from  beginning. 
to  end  it  is  all  a  mystery  of  falsehood,  arising  from- 
the  use  of  ambiguous  expressions,  and  from  the  gra 
tuitous  admission  of  principles  which  never  could 
have  been  admitted  if  they  had  been  thoroughly  un 
derstood. 

SECT.     TIT. 

Of  Liberty  and  Necessity. 

r"PHE  second  instance  to  which  I  purpose  to  apply 
•*"  the  principles  of  this  discourse,  by  showing  the 
danger  of  carrying  any  investigation  beyond  the  dic 
tates  of  common  sense,  is  no  other  than  the  celebra 
ted  question  concerning  liberty  and  necessity  ;  a  ques 
tion  en  which  many  things  have  been  said,  and  some 
things,  I  presume,  to  little  purpose.  To  enter  into 
all  the  particulars  of  this  controversy^  is  foreign  to 
my  present  design  ;  and  I  would  not  wish  to  add  to 
a  dispute  already  too  bulky.,  My  intention,  is,  to 
trearthe  doctrine  of  necessity  as  I  treated  that  of  the 
non-existence  of  matter  ;  by  enquiring,  whether  the 
one  be  not,  as  well  as  the  other,  contrary  to  common* 
sense,  and  therefore  absurd, 

1.  That  certain  intentions  and  actions  are  in  them 
selves,  and  previous  to  all  consideration  of  their  con 
sequences,  good,  laudable,,  and  meritorious  5  and  that 
other  actions  and  intentions  are*  bad,   blameable,   and 
worthy  of  punishment,— has  been  felt   and   acknow 
ledged  by  all;  reasonable  creatures  in  all  ages  and  na 
tions.     We  need  not   wonder  at  the  universality  of' 
this  sentiment  :  it  is:as  natural  to  the  human  consti 
tution,  as  the  faculties  of  hearing,   seeing,   and   me 
mory  ;  it  is  as  clear,  unequivocal,  and  affecting,  as 
any  intimation  from  any  sense  external  or  internal.  - 

2.  That  we  cannot  do  some  things,  but  have  it  inl 
cur  power  to  do  others,  is  what  no  man  in  his  senses, 
will  hesitate  to  affirm.    I  can  take  up  my  staff  from 
the  ground,  but  I  cannot  lift  a  stone  of  a  thousand 


AX  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

weight.  On  a  common,  I  may  walk  southward  or 
northward,  eastward  or  westward  ;  but  I  cannot  as 
cend  to  the  clouds,  nor  sink  downward  to  the  centre 
of  the  earth.  Just  now  I  have  power  to  think  of  an 
absent  friend,  of  the  Peak  of  Teneriffe,  of  a  passage 
in  Homer,  or  of  the  death  of  Charles  I.  "When  a 
man  asks  me  a  question,  I  have  it  in  my  power  to 
answer  or  be  silent,  to  answer  softly  or  roughly,  in 
terms  of  respect  or  in  terms  of  contempt.  Frequent 
temptations  to  vice  fall  in  my  way  5  I  may  yield,  or 
I  may  resist :  if  I  resist,  I  applaud  myself,  because  I 
am  conscious  it  was  in  my  power  to  do  otherwise  ; 
if  I  yield,  I  am  filled  with  shame  and  remorse,  for 
having  neglected  to  do  what  I  might  have  done,  and 
ought  to  have  done.  My  liberty  in  these  instances 
I  cannot  prove  by  argument  ;  but  there  is  not  a  truth 
in  geometry  of  which  I  am  more  certain. 

Is  not  this  doctrine  sufficiently  obvious  ?  Must 
I  quote  EpictetuSj  or  any  other  ancient  author,  to 
prove  that  men  were  of  the  same  opinion  in  former 
times  ?  No  idea  occurs  more  frequently  in  my  read, 
ing  and  conversation,  than  that  of  power  or  agency  ; 
and  I  think-- 1  understand  my  own  meaning  as  well 
when  I  speak  of  it,  as  when  I  speak  of  any  thing 
else.  But  this  idea  has  had  the  misfortune  to  come 
under  the  examination  of  Mr  HUME,  who,  according 
to  custom,  has  found  means  so  to  darken  and  disfigure 
it,  that,  till  we  have  cleared  it  of  his  misrepresenta*. 
tions,  we  cannot  proceed  any  further  in  the  present 
subject.  And  we  are  the  more  inclined  to  digress  on 
this  occasion,  that  he  has  made  his  theory  of  power 
th"  ground  of  some  atheistical  inferences,  which  we 
should  not  scruple  at  any  time  to  step  out  of  our 
way  to  ov-  rturn. — Perhaps  these  frequent  digrts- 
sions  are  offer- si ve  to  the  reader  :  they  are  equally 
so  to  the  writer.  To  remove  rubbish  is  neither  an 
elegant  nor  a  pleasant  work,  but  it.'s  ofr^n  necessary. 
It  is  peculiarly  necessary  in  the  phijoso'  hy  of  human 
Mature.  The  road  to  moral  truth  has  been  left  in 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  195 

such  a  plight  by  some  modern  projectors,  that  a  man 
of  honesty  and  plain  sense  must  either,  with  great 
labour,  and  loss  of  time,  delve  his  way  through,  or 
be  swallowed  up  in  a  quagmire.  The  metaphysician 
ulvances  more  easily.  His  levity,  perhaps,  enables 
him,  like  Camilla  in  Virgil,  to  skim  along  the  sur 
face  without  sinking  ;  or  perhaps,  the  extreme  sub 
tlety  of  his  genius  can,  like  Satan  in  Paradise  Lost, 
penetrate  this  chaos,  without  being  much  incumber- 
ed  or  retarded  in  his  progress.  But  men  of  ordi 
nary  talents  have  net  those  advantages,  and  must 
therefore  be  allowed  to  flounce  along,  though  with  no 
very  graceful  motion,  the  best  way  they  can. 

All  ideas,  according   to  Mr   HUME'S   fundamental 
hypothesis,  are  copied  from   and  represent   iu!];res- 
sions  :    But  we  have  never  any  impression  that   con 
tains  any  power  or   efficacy  :    We   never,   therefore, 
have  any  idea  of  power  *.      In  proof  of  the   minor 
proposition    of   this    syllogism,   he    remarks,    That 
"  when  we  think  we  perceive   our  mind  acting  on 
"  matter,  or  one  piece  of  matter  acting  upon  another, 
"  we  do  in  fact  perceive   only  two  objects    or  events 
"  contiguous  and  successive,  the  second  of  which   is 
"  always  found  in  experience   to   follow    the   first  ; 
"  but  that  we    never    perceive,  either   by    external 
"  sense,  or  by  consciousness,  that  power,  energy,  or 
"  efficacy,  which  connects  the  one   event   with   the 
"  other.     By  observing  that  the  two  events  do  al- 
4<  ways  accompany   each  other,  the  imagination  ac- 
"  quires  a  habit  of  going  readily  from  the  first  to  the 
"  second,  and  from  the  second  to  the  first  ;  and  hence 
"  we  are  led  to  conceive  a  kind  of  necessary  con- 
"  nexion  between  them.    But  in  fact  there  is  neither 
"  necessity  nor  power  in  the  objects  we  consider,  but 
"  only  in  the  mind  that  considers  them  ;  and  even  in 
"  the  mind,  this  power  of  necessity  is  nothing  but  a 
*•'  determination  of  the  fancy,  acquired  by  habit,   to 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.   p.   282. 


196  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

"  pass  from  the  idea  of  an  object  to  that  of  its  usual 
"  attendant  *." —  So  that  what  we  call  the  efficacy 
of  a  cause  to  produ.:  ;;  an  effect,  is  neither  in  the  cause 
nor  in  the  effect,  bi,  only  in  the  imagination,  which 
has  contracted  a  habit  of  passing  from  the  object  cal 
led  the  cause,  to  the  object  called  the  effect,  and  thus 
associating  them  together.  Has  the  fire  a  power  to 
melt  lead  ?  No  j  but  the  fancy  is  determined  by  habit 
to  pass  from  the  idea  of  fire  to  that  of  melted  lead, 
on  account  of  our  having  always  perceived  them  con 
tiguous  and  successive — and  this  is  the  whole  matter. 
Have  I  a  power  to  move  rry  arm  ?  No  ;  the  volition 
that  precedes  the  motion  c :  oiy  arm  has  no  connexion 
with  that  motion  ;  but  -^ie  motion  having  been  al 
ways  observed  to  follow  the  volition,  comes  to  be 
associated  with  it  in  the  fancy  ;  and  what  we  call 
the  power,  or  necessary  connexion,  has  nothing  to  do 
either  with  the  volition  or  with  the  motion,  but  is 
merely  a  determination  of  my  fancy,  or  your  fancy, 
or  any  body's  fancy,  to  associate  the  idea  or  im 
pression  of  my  volition  with  the  impression  or  idea 
of  the  motion  of  my  arm — I  am  sorry  1  cannot  ex 
press  myself  more  clearly  ;  but  I  should  not  do  jus 
tice  to  my  author,  if  I  did  not  imitate  his  obscurity 
on  the  present  occasion  :  plain  words  will  never  do 
when  one  has  an  unintelligible  doctrine  to  support. 

What  shall  we  say  to  this  collection  of  strange 
phrases  ?  or  what  name  shall  we  give  it  ?  Shall  we 
call  it  a  most  ingenuous  discovery,  illustrated  by  a 
most  ingenuous  argument  ?  This  would  be  compli 
menting  the  author  at  a  very  great  expsnce  ;  for  this 
would  imply,  not  only  that  Mr  Hume  is  the  wisest 
of  mortal  men,  but  also  that  he  is  the  only  individual 
of  that  species  of  animals  who  is  not  a  fool.  Certain 
it  is,  that  all  men  have  in  all  ages  talked,  and  argued, 
and  acted,  from  a  persuasion  that  they  had  a  very 
distinct  notion  of  power.  If  our  author  can  prove, 
that  they  had  no  such  notion,  he  can  also  prove,  that 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  272 — 300, 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  197 

all  human  discourse  is  nonsense,  all  human  actions  ab 
surdity,  and  all  human  compositions  fhis  own  not 
cxcepted)  words  without  meaning.  The  boldness 
of  this  theory,  will,  however,  pass  with  many,  for  a 
proof  of  its  being  ingenuous.  Be  it  so,  Gentlemen, 
I  dispute  not  about  epithets  ;  if  you  will  have  it, 
that  genius  consisteth  in  the  art  of  putting  words  to 
gether  so  as  to  form  absurd  propositions.  I  have 
nothing  more  to  say.  Others  will  admire  this  doc 
trine,  because  the  words  by  which  the  author  means 
to  illustrate  and  prove  it,  if  printed  on  a  good  paper 
and  with  an  elegant  type,  would  of  themselves  make 
a  pretty  sizeable  volume.  It  were  pity  to  deprive 
these  people  of  the  pleasure  of  admiring  ;  otherwise 
I  might  tell  them,  that  nothing  is  more  easy  than 
this  method  of  composition  ;  for  that  I  would  under 
take,  at  a  very  short  warning,  (if  it  could  be  done 
innocently,  and  without  prejudice  to  my  health),  to 
write  as  many  pages,  with  equal  appearance  of  rea 
son  and  argument,  and  with  equal  advantage  to  phi 
losophy  and  mankind,  in  vindication  of  any  given  ab 
surdity:  provided  only,  that  (like  the  absurdity  in 
question)  it  were  expressed  in  words  of  which  one 
at  least  is  ambiguous. 

In  truth,  I  am  so  little  disposed  to  admire  this  ex 
traordinary  paradox,  that  nothing  could  make  me  be 
lieve  its  author  to  have  been  in  earnest,  if  I  had  not 
found  him  drawing  inferences  from  it  too  serious  to 
be  jested  with  by  any  person  who  is  not  absolutely 
distracted.  It  is  one  of  Mr  HUME'S  maxims,  That 
we  can  never  have  reason  to  believe,  that  any  object, 
or  quality  of  an  object,  exists,  of  which  we  cannot 
form  an  idea  *.  But,  according  to  this  astonishing 
theory  of  power,  and  causation,  we  can  form  no  idea 
of  power,  nor  of  any  being  endowed  with  any  power, 
MUCH  LESS  of  one  endowed  with  infinite  power  f. 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  302. 
f  Some  readers  will  smile,  perhaps,  at  the  phraseology 
of  this  sentence  j  but  I  quote  the  author's  own  words.     See 
Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  432. 


198  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II, 

The  inference  is what  I  do  not  chuse  to  commii 

to  paper.  But  our  elegant  author  is  not  so  super 
stitious.  He  often  puts  his  readers  in  mind,  that 
this  inference,  or  something  very  like  it,  is  deducible 

from  his  doctrine  *  : for  which,  no  doubt,  every 

friead  to  truth,  virtue,  and  human  nature  is  infmuely 
obliged  to  him  ! 

But  what  do  you  say  in  opposition  to  my  theory  r 
You  affect  to  treat  it  with  a  contempt  which  hardly 
becomes  you,  and  which  my  philosophy  has  nofc  met 
with  from  your  betters  !  pray  let  us  hear  your  ar 
guments And  do  you,  Sir,  really  think  it  incum 
bent  on  me  to  prove  by  argument,  that  1,  and  all  o- 
ther  men,  have  a  notion  of  power  ;  and  that  the  effi 
cacy  of  a  cause  (of  fire,  for  instance,  to  melt  lead)  is 
in  the  cause,  and  not  in  my  mind  ?  Would  you  think 
it  incumbent  on  me  to  confute  you  with  arguments, 
if  you  were  pleased  to  affirm,  that  all  men  have  tails 
and  cloven  feet ;  and  that  it  was  I  who  produced  the 
earthquake  that  destroyed  Lisbon,  the  plague  that 
depopulates  Constantinople,  the  heat  that  scorches 
the  wilds  of  Africa,  and  the  cold  that  freezes  the 
Hyperborean  ocean  ?  Truly,  Sir,  I  have  not  the  face 
to  undertake  a  direct  confutation  of  what  I  do  not 
understand  ;  and  I  am  so  far  from  comprehending  this 
part  of  your  system,  that  1  will  venture  to  pronounce 
it  perfectly  unintelligible.  I  know  there  are  some 
who  say  they  understand  it  ;  but  I  also  know,  that 
there  are  some  who  speak,  and  read,  and  write  too, 
ivith  very  little  expence  of  thought. 

These  are  all  but  evasions,  you  exclaim  ;  and  in 
sist  on  rny  coming  to  the  point.  Never  fear,  Sir  ;  I 
am  too  deeply  interested  in  some  of  the  consequences 
of  this  theory  of  yours,  to  put  you  off  with  evasions. 
To  come  therefore  to  the  point,  I  shall  first  state 
your  doctrine  in  your  own  words,  that  there  may  be 
no  risk  of  misrepresentation  ;  and  then  if  I  should 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  p.  ,284,.  29 1,  306,  431. 


CflAP.    II.  AN    ESSAY   ON    TRUTH.  199 

not  be  able  directly  to  prove  it  false,  (for  the  reason 
already  given),  I  shall  demonstrate,  indirectly  at 
least,  or  by  the  apagogical  method,  that  it  is  not, 
and  cannot  possibly  be  true. 

"As  the  necessity,"  says  Mr  HUME,  "which 
"  makes  two  times  two  equal  to  four,  or  three  angles 
"  of  a  triangle  equal  to  two  right  ones,  lies  only  in 
"  the  act  of  the  understanding,  by  which  we  consider 
"  and  compare  these  ideas*  ,  in  like  manner,  the  ne- 
<(  cessity  or  power  which  unites  causes  and  effects, lies 
"  in  the  determination  of  the  mind  to  pass  from  the 
"  one  to  the  other.  The  efficacy,  or  energy,  of  causes 
"  is  neither  placed  in  the  causes  themselves,  nor  in 
"  the  Deity,  nor  in  the  concurrence  of  these  two 
"  principles  ;  but  belongs  entirely  to  the  soul,  which 
"  considers  the  union  of  two  or  more  objects  in  all 
"  past  instances.  It  is  here  that  the  real  power  of 
"  causes  is  placed  along  with  their  connexion  and 
"  necessity  f." 

To  find  that  his  principles  lead  to  atheism,  wrould 
stagger  an  ordinary  philosopher,  and  make  him  sus 
pect  his  fundamental  hypothesis,  and  all  his  subse 
quent  reasonings.  But  the  author  now  quoted  is  not 
staggered  by  considerations  of  this  kind.  On  the 
contrary,  he  is  so  intoxicated  with  his  discovery, 
that,  however  sceptical  in  other  points,  he  seems  will 
ing  to  admit  this  as  one  certain  conclusion  J. 

*  What !  is  it  my  understanding  that  makes  two  and 
two  equal  to  four  !  Was  it  not  so  before  I  was  born,  and 
would  it  not  be  so  though  all  intelligence  were  to  cease 
throughout  the  universe  !  — But  it  is  idle  to  spend  time  in 
confuting  what  every  child  who  has  learned  the  very  first 
tlements  of  science,  knows  to  be  absurd. 

f  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  1.  p.  291. 

}  Speaking  of  it  in  another  place,  he  says,  "  A  conclu- 
"  sion  which  is  somewhat  extraordinary,  but  which  seems 
**  founded  on  sufficient  evidence.  Nor  will  its  evidence 
"  be  weakened  by  any  general  diffidence  of  the  understand" 


2CG  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

If  a  man  can  reconcile  himself  to  atheism,  which  is 
the  greatest  of  all  absurdities,  I  fear,  I  shall  hardly 
put  him  out  of  conceit  with  his  doctrine,  when  I  show 
him  that  other  less  enormous  absurdities  are  implied 
in  it.  We  may  make  the  trial  however.  Gentle 
men  are  sometimes  pleased  to  entertain  unaccount 
able  prejudices  against  their  Maker  ;  who  yet,  in  o- 
ther  matters,  where  neither  fashion  nor  hypothesis  in 
terfere,  condescend  to  acknowledge,  that  the  good  old 
distinction  between  truth  and  falsehood  is  not  alto 
gether  without  foundation. 

On  the  supposition  that  we  have  no  idea  of  power 
or  energy,  and  that  the  preceding  theory  of  causation 
is  just,  our  author  gives  the  following  definition  of  a 
cause  ;  which  seems  to  be  fairly  enough  deduced  from 
his  theory,  and  which  he  says  is  the  best  that  he  can 
give.  "  A  cause  is  an  object  precedent  and  conti- 
"  guous  to  another,  and  so  united  with  it,  that  the 
"  idea  of  the  one  determines  the  mind  to  form  the 
"  idea  of  the  other,  and  the  impression  of  the  one  to 
"  form  a  more  lively  idea  of  the  other*."  There 
are  now  in  my  view  two  contiguous  houses  one  of 
which  was  built  last  summer,  and  the  other  two 

"  ing,  or  sceptical  suspicion,  concerning  every  conclusion 
**  which  is  new  and  extraordinary.  No  conclusion  can  be 
"  more  agreeable  to  scepticism  than  such  as  make  discover- 
<;  ies  concerning  the  weakness  and  narrow  limits  of  human 
"  reason  and  capacity." 

Plume's  Essays,  vol.  2.  p.  87.  edit.  1767. 

I  know  not  what  discoveries  this  conclusion  may  lead 
others  to  make  concerning  our  author's  reason  and  capa 
city  :  but  I  have  some  ground  to  think,  that  in  him  it  has 
not  wrought  any  extraordinary  self-abasement  ;  otherwise 
he  would  not  have  asserted,  with  so  much  confidence, 
what  he  acknowledges  to  be  a  most  violent  paradox,  and 
what  is  indeed  contrary  to  the  experience  and  conviction 
of  every  person  of  common  sense.  See  Treatise  of  Human 
Nature,  vol.  l./>.  291,  299. 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  i.  p.  298. 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  2OI 

years  ago.  By  seeing  them  constantly  together  for 
several  months,  I  find,  that  the  idea  of  the  one  deter 
mines  my  mind  to  form  the  idea  of  the  other,  and  the 
impression  of  the  one  to  form  a  more  lively  idea  of 
the  other.  So  that,  according  to  our  author's  defini 
tion,  the  one  house  is  the  cause,  and  the  other  the 
effect  ! — Again,  day  and  night  have  always  been  con 
tiguous  and  successive  ;  the  imagination  naturally 
runs  from  the  idea  or  impression  of  the  one  to  the 
idea  of  the  other  :  consequently,  according  to  the  same 
profound  theory  and  definition,  either  day  is  the  cause 
of  night,  or  night  the  cause  of  day,  just  as  we  con 
sider  the  one  or  the  other  to  have  been  originallj 
prior  in  time  :  that  is,  in  other  words,  light  is  either 
the  cause  or  the  effect  of  darkness  ;  and  its  being  the 
one  or  the  other  depends  entirely  on  my  imagination  ! 
Let  those  admire  this  discovery  who  understand  it. 

Causation  *  implies  more  than  priority  and  con 
tiguity  of  the  cause  to  the  effect.  This  relation 
cannot  be  conceived  at  all,  without  a  supposition  of 
power  or  energy  in  the  cause  f.  Let  the  reader  re 
collect  two  things  that  stand  related  as  causs  and  ef 
fect  ;  let  him  contemplate  them  with  a  view  to  this 
relation  ;  then  let  him  conceive  the  cause  divested 
of  all  power  ;  and  he  must  at  the  same  instant  con 
ceive,  that  it  is  a  cause  no  longer  :  for  a  cause  di 
vested  of  power,  is  divested  of  that  by  which  it  is  a 
cause.  If  a  man,  after  examining  his  notions  of 
causation  in  this  manner,  is  conscious  that  he  has  an 
idea  of  power,  then  I  say  he  has  that  idea.  If  all 
men,  in  all  ages,  have  used  the  word  power,  or 
something  synonymous  to  it,  and  if  all  men  know 

R  2 

*   Causation  in  Mr  HUME'S  style,  denotes  the  relation  of 
cause  and  effect.     In  English  authors,  the  word  rarely  oc 
curs,  and  never,  I  think,  in  this  sense.     It  properly  signi 
fies,  The  act  or  power  of  causing. 

f  Non  sic  causa  intelligi  debet,  ut  quod  cuique   antece- 
at  id  ei  causa  sit,  sed  quod  cuique  efficicnter  antecedat. 

Cicero  De  Fato>  cap.  15. 


102  AN  ESSAY  NO  TRUTH.  PART   II. 

what  they  mean  when  they  speak  of  power,  I  main 
tain,  that  all  men  have  a  notion,  conception,  or  idea 
of  power,  in  whatever  way  they  came  by  it  :  and  I 
also  maintain,  that  no  true  philosopher  ever  denied 
the  existence  or  reality  of  any  thing,  merely  because 
he  could  not  give  an  account  of  its  origin,  or  because 
the  opinion  commonly  received  concerning  its  origin 
<iid  not  happen  to  quadrate  with  his  system. 

When,  therefore,  Mr  HUME  says,  that  the  efficacy 
or  energy  of  causes  is  not  placed  in  the  causes  them 
selves,  he  says  neither  less  nor  more  than  this,  that 
what  is  essential  to  a  cause  is  not  in  a  cause  ;  of,  in 
other  words, — that  a  cause  is  not  a  cause. — Are 
there  any  persons  who,  upon  the  authority  of  this 
theorist,  have  rashly  adopted  atheistical  principles  ? 
I  know  there  are  such.  Ye  blinded  followers  of  a 
blind  guide,  ye  dupes  of  unmeaning  words  and  in 
comprehensible  arguments,  behold  on  what  a  cham 
pion  ye  have  placed  your  confidence  !  All  the  com 
fort  I  can  give  you  is,  that/if  it  be  possible  for  the 
same  thing  at  the  same  time  to  be  and  not  to  be,  you 
may  possibly  be  in  the  right. 

It  follows  from  what  has  been  said,  that  we  can 
not  admit  this  theory  of  power  and  causation,  with 
out  admitting,  at  the  same  time,  the  grossest  and 
most  impious  absurdities.  Is  this  a  sufficient  con 
futation  of  it  ?  I  think  it  is.  If  any  person  think 
otherwise,  I  take  a  shorter  method,  and  utterly  de 
ny  all  the  premises  from  which  this  strange  conclu 
sion  is  supposed  to  result.  I  deny  the  doctrine  of 
impressions  and  ideas,  as  the  author  has  explained 
it  ;  nay,  I  have  already  affirmed,  and  proved,  it  to  be 
not  only  false,  but  unintelligible.  And  I  maintain, 
that  though  it  could  be  shown,  that  all  simple  ideas 
are  derived  from  impressions,  or  intimations  of  sense, 
it  is  true,  notwithstanding,  that  all  men  have  an  idea 
of  power.  Thev  ger  it  by  experience,  that  is,  by 
mtimatixms  of  sense,  both  external  and  internal. 
Their  mind  acting  upon  their  body  gives  them  this 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  203 

notion  or  idea  ;  their  body  acting  on  other  bodies, 
and  acted  on  by  other  bodies,  gives  them  the  same 
idea  ;  which  is  also  suggested  by  all  the  effects  and 
changes  they  see  produced  in  the  universe.  So  tho 
roughly  are  we  acquainted  with  it,  that  we  can  in  ca 
ses  innumerable,  determine,  with  the  utmost  accura 
cy  and  certainty,  .  the  degree  of  power  necessary  to 
produce  a  given  effect. 

I  repeat  therefore,  notwithstanding  all  our  author 
has  said,  or  can  say,  to  the  contrary,  that  some  things 
are  in  our  power,  and  others  are  not ;  and  that  we 
perfectly  understand  our  own  meaning  when  we  say 
so. — That  the  reader  may  not  lose  any  chain  in  our 
reasoning,  he  will  please  to  look  back  to  the  second 
and  third  paragraphs  of  this  section.  - 

3.  By  attending  to  my  own  internal  feelings,  and 
to  the  evidence  given  by  other  men  of  theirs,  I  am 
sensible,  that  I  .deserve  reward  or  punishment  for 
those  actions  only  which  are  in  my  own  power.  I 
am  no  more  accountable  for  the  evil  which  I  can 
neither  prevent  nor  remedy,  than  for  the  destruction 
of  Troy,  or  the  plagues  of  Egypt ;  and  for  the  good 
which  happens  by  my  means,  but  against  my  will, 
I  no  more  deserve  reward  or  praise,  than  if  I  were 
a  piece  of  inanimate  matter. 

This  is  the  doctrine  of  common  sense  ;  and  this 
doctrine  has  in  all  ages  been  supported  by  some  of 
the  most  powerful  principles  of  our  nature  ;  by 
principles  which,  in  the  common  affairs  of  life,  no 
man  dares  suppose  to  be  equivocal  or  fallacious.  A 
man  may  as  well  tell  me  that  I  am  blind,  or  deaf,  or 
that. I  feel  no  heat  when  I  approach  the  fire,  as  that 
I  have  not  a  natural  sentiment  disposing  me  to  blame 
intentional  injury,  and  to  praise  intentional  benefi 
cence  ;  and  which  makes  me  feel  and  be  conscious, 
that  the  evil  I  am  compelled  to  do  is-  not  criminal, 
and  that  the  good  I  perform  against  my  will  is  not 
meritorious.  That  other  men  are- conscious  of  the 
ame  sentiment,  I  know  with  as  much  certainty  as  J 
R3 


204  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

can  know  any  thing  of  what  passes  in  the  mind  of 
other  men  ;  for  I  have  daily  and  hourly  opportuni 
ties  of  making  observations  in  regard  to  this  very 
point.  The  greatest  part  of  conversion  turns  upon 
the  morality  of  human  actions ;  and  I  never  yet 
heard  any  person  seriously  blamed  or  applauded,  by 
a  reasonable  creature,  for  an  action  in  the  perfor 
mance  of  which  he  was  not  considered  as  a  free  a- 
gent*.  The  most  rigid  Predestinarians  suppose 
freedom  of  will  to  be  in  one  way  or  other  consistent 
with  eternal  an'd  unconditional  decrees  :  if  they  can 
not  explain  in  what  way, — they  call  it  a  mystery  ; 
It  surpasses  their  understanding  ; — but  it  must  be  so> 
for  otherwise  the  morality  of  actions  is  altogether 
inconceivable  f.  Do  the  interests  of  science,  or  of 

*  Si  omnia  fato  fiunt,  omnia  fiunt  causa  antecedente-  5 
ct,  si  appetitus,  ilia  etiam  quse  appetitum  sequuntur  :  ergo-, 
ctiam  assensiones.  At  si  causa  appetitus  non  est  sita  in 
nobis,  ne  ipse  qnidem  appetitus  est  in  nostra  protestate; 
Quod  si  ita  est,  ne  ilia  quidem  quse  appetitu  efficiuntur 
sunt  sita  in  nobis.  Non  sunt  igitur,  neque  assensiones 
neque  actiones,  in  nostra  potestate  :  ex  quo  efficitur,  ut  nee 
laudationes justce  sint,  nee  vituperationes ,  nee  honores,  nee  suf<r 
plicia.  Quod  cum  vitiosum  sit,  probabiliter  concludi 
putant,  non  omnia  fato  fieri  quaecumque  fiant, 

Cicero^  De  Fafo,  cap.  17. 

f  The  reader,  I  hope,  does  not  think  me  such  a  novice 
in  reasoning,  as  to  urge  the  judgment  of  the  council  of 
Trent  in  behalf  of  any  doctrine,  philosophical  or  religious* 
Yet  every  fact  in  logic  and  morals  is  worth  our  notice, 
If  we  would  establish  those  sciences  on  their  only  firm 
foundation,  the  universal  consent  and  practice  of  man 
kind:  It  deserves^  therefore,  to  be  remarked,  that,  at  the 
Reformation,  this  consciousness-of  free  will  was  acknowledged 
both  by  the  Lutherans,  and  by  the  church  of  Rome,  to  be 
a  principle  of  common  sense,  which  was  to  be*  ascertained 
net  by  reasoning,  but  by  experimental  proof.  So  says 
x  most  judicious  and  elegant  historian,  whose  words  are.  re- 


CHAP.    It.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTtf.  2C"5 

virtue,  suffer  by  this  representation  of  the  matter  ? 
I  think  not.  But  some  philosophers,  not  satisfied 
with  this  view  of  it,  are  for  bringing  the  sentiment 
of  moral  liberty  to  the  test  of  reason.  They  want 
to  prove  by  argument,  either  that  I  have,  or  that  I 
have  not,  such  a  feeling  :  or,  if  I  shall  be  found  to 
have  it,  they  want  to  know  whether  it  be  fallacious 
or  not.  In  other  words,  they  want  to  prove  or  to  dis 
prove,  what  I  know  by  instinct  to  be  unquestionably 
certain  ;  or  they  want  to  inquire,  whether  it  be  rea 
sonable  for  me  to  act  and  think  according  to  a  prin 
ciple,  which,  by  the  law  of  my  nature,  I  cannot  con 
tradict,  either  in  though  or  action.  Would  not  the 
same  spirit  of  inquiry  lead  a  geometrician  to  attempt  a 
proof  or  confutation  of  his  axioms  ;  a  natural  philoso 
pher  todoubt  whether  things  be  what  his  senses  repre 
sent  them;  an  ordinary  man  toargue  concerning  the  pro 
priety  of  perceiving  colours  by  the  eyes,  and  odours 
by  the  nostrils  ?  Would  not  the  same  spirit  of  doubt 
and  disputation,  applied  to  more  familiar  instances, 
transform  a  philosopher  into  a  madman,  and  a  per 
son  of  plain  sense  into  an  idiot? 

markably  apposite  to  the  present  subject,  and  to  trie  man 
ner  in  which  we  treat  it.  Speaking  of  some  articles  said 
to  be  maintained  by  the  Lutherans,  in  opposition  to  free 
will,  the  historian  informs  us,  that,  in  the  judgment  of 
many  of  that  celebrated  council,  the  opinion  implied  in 
these  articles,  "  E  empia,  e  biasfema  contra  Dio. — Ch' 
"  era  una  pazzia  contra  il  senso comune,  esperimentando  og- 
"  ni  huomo  la  propria  liberta,  eke  non  merita  contestation, 
46  ma,  comme  Anstotele  dice,  o  castigo,  o  prova  esperimen- 
"tale.  Che,  i  medesimi  discepoli  di  Luthero  s'erano  ac- 
"  corti  della  piazzia  j  e,  moderando  1'assordita,  dissero  poi, 
"•  esservi  liberta  nell'huomo  in  quello,  che  tocca  le  attioni 
"  esterne  polkiche  ed  economiche,  e  quanto  ad  ogni  gius- 
"  titia  civile  ^  le  quali  e  sciocco  chi  non  conosce  vem'r  dal 
1  conseglio  ed  ellettione ;  restringendosi  a  negar  la  liberta 
'*  quanta  alia  sola  giustitia  divina*"  Istoria  del  Cosci/s 
Trid.  di  P.  Sarpi.  lib,  2. 


206  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART    II. 

But  let  us  not  be  too  rigid.  If  a  philosopher  must 
needs  have  his  rattles  and  playthings,  let  him  have 
them  :  only,  for  his  own  sake,  and  for  the  sake  of  the 
neighbours,  I  would  advise,  that  edge-tools,  and  o- 
ther  dangerous  instrumentsof  amusement,  bekeptout 
of  his  reach.  If  a  Cartesian  will  not,  on  any  account,  , 
believe  his  own  existence,  except  I  grant  him  his 
Cogito,  ergo  sum,  ,far  be  it  from  me  to  deprive  the 
poor  man  of  that  consolation.  The  reasoning  indeed 
is  bad,  but  the  principle  is  good  ;  and  a  gocd  principle 
is  so  good  a  thing,  that  rather  than  oblige  a  man  to 
renounce  it,  I  would  dispense  with  the  strict  obser 
vance  of  a  logical  precept.  .  If  a  star-gazer  cannot 
see  the  inhabitants  of  the  moon  with  one  perspective, 
let  him  tie  a  score  of  them  together,  with  all  my 
heart.  If  a  virtuoso  is  inclined  to  look  at  the  sun 
through  a  microscope,  .  and  at  a  rotten  cheese 
through  a  telescope,  to  apply  ear-trumpets  to  his 
eyes,  and  equip  his  two  ears  with  as  many  pairs  of 
spectacles,  he  has  my  full  permission  j  .and  much 
good  may  it  do  him.  These  amusements  are  idle, 
but  they  are  innocent.  The  Cartesian,  if  the  truth 
were  known,  would  be  found  neither  the  better  nor 
the  worse  for  his  enthymeme*  The  star-gazer  has 
not  atchieved  a  single  glimpse -of  his  lunar  friends, 
but  sees  more  confusedly  than  before  :  however,  he 
may  console  himself  with  this  reflection,  that  one 
may  pacs  through  life  with  the  character  of  a  very 
honest  and  tolerably  happy  man,  though  he  should 
never  have  it  in  his  power  to  extend  the  sphere  of 
his  acquaintance  beyond  this  sublunary  globe.  The 
virtuoso  takes  a  wrong,  and  indeed  a  very  preposter 
ous  method,  for  improving  his  sight  and  hearing  ; 
but  if  he  is  careful  to  confine  these  frolics  to  his  pri 
vate  apartment,  and  never  boast  m  public  of  his  au 
ditory,  or  optical  apparatus, 1-?  may  live  comfortably 
and  respectably  enough,  though  he  should  never  see 
the  spots  in  the  sun,  nor  the  bristles  on  a  mite's 
back. 


CHAP.  II.       AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.          207 

I  would  however,  earnestly  exhort  my  friend  the 
metaphysician,  to  believe  himself  a  free  agent  upon 
the  bare  authority  of  his  feelings,  and  not  to  imagine 
that  Nature  is  such  a  bungler  in  her  trade,  as  first  to 
intend  to  impose  upon  him,  and  then  inadvertently 
give  him  sagacity  to  see  through  the  imposture.  In 
deed,  if  it  were  a  matter  of  indifference,  whether  we 
believe  our  moral  feelings  or  disbelieve  them,  I 
should  not  object  to  the  use  of  a  little  unbelief  now 
and  then,  by  way  of  experiment  or  cordial,  provided 
it  were  a  thing  that  a  reasonable  man  could  take  any 
pleasure  in.  But  I  am  convinced,  that  habitual 
dram-drinking  is  not  more  pernicious  to  our- animal 
nature,  then  habitual  scepticism  to  our  rational. 
And  when  once  this  scepticism  comes  to  affect  our 
moral  sentiments,  or  active  principles,  ail  is  over 
with  us  :  we  are  in  the  condition  of  a  man  intoxicat 
ed  ;  fit  only  for  raving,  dozing,  and  doing  mischief. 

But,  alas  !  the  metaphysician  is  too  headstrong  to 
follow  my  advice.  It  would  be  a  fine  thing,  indeed, 
says  he,  if  gentlemen  were  to  yield  to  the  dictates  of 
nature.  Is  there  a  single  dictate  of  nature  to  which 
people  of  fashion  now-a-days  pay  any  regard  ?  No, 
no  ;  the  world  is  grown  wiser.  As  to  this  sentiment 
of  moral  liberty,  I  very  much  question  its  tide  to  be 
ranked  with  the  dictates  of  nature.  It  seems  to  be  a 
piece  of  vile  sophistication,  a  paltry  prejudice,  hatch 
ed  by  the  nurse,  and  fostered  by  the  priest.  I  am 
determined  to  take  it  roundly  to  task,  and  examine 
its  pretensions  with  the  eye  of  a  philosopher  and 

freethinker. Very  well,  Sir,  you  may  take  your 

own  way  ;  it  requires  no  skill  in  magic  to  be  able  to 
foretell  the  consequence.  A  traveller  no  sooner  quits 
the  right  road,  on  supposition  of  its  being  wrong, 
than  he  gets  into  one  that  is  really  so,  If  you  set 
out  in  your  inquiry,  with  suspecting  the  principles 
of  common  sense  to  be  erroneous,  you  have  little 
chance  of  falling  in  with;  any  other  principles,  that 
are  not  erroneous* 


208  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

The   result  of  the  metaphysical  inquiry  is  as  fol 
lows  :  "  Every  human   action  must    proceed   from 
"  some  motive  as  its   cause.       The  motive  or  cause 
"  must  be  sufficient  to  produce  the  action  or    effect ; 
"  otherwise  it  is  no  motive  :  and,  if  sufficient  to  pro- 
"  duce  it,  must  necessarily  produce  it  ;  for  every  ef- 
**  feet  proceeds  necessarily  from  its  causej  as  heat 
"necessarily  proceeds  from  fire.  Now,  the  immediate 
"  causes  of  action  are  volitions, or  energies  of  the  will: 
"    these  arise  necessarily  from  passions  or  appetites, 
'*  which   proceed  necessarily  from  judgments  or  o- 
(t  pinions  j  which  are  the  necessary  effect  of  external 
"  things,  or  of  ideas,   operating,  according  to  the  ne- 
"  cessary  laws  of  nature,  upon  our  senses,   intellect, 
**  or  fancy  :  and  these  ideas,  or  things,  present  them- 
"  selves  to  our  powers  of  perception,  as  necessarily 
"  as  light  presents  itself  when  we  turn  our  open  eyes 
"  to  the  sun.     In  a  word,  every  human  action  is  the 
"  effect  of  a  series  of  causes,  each  of  which  does  ne- 
"  cessarily  produce  its  own  proper  effect :  so  that  if 
"  the  first  operate,   all  the  rest  must  follow.     It  is 
"  confessed,  that  an  action  may  proceed  immediately 
"  from  volition,  and  may  therefore  properly  be  call- 
"  ed  voluntary  :  but  theprimum  mobile  or  first  cause, 
"  even  of  a  voluntary   action,   is  something  as  inde- 
"  pendent  on  our  will,  as  the  production  of  the  great* 
"  grandfather  is  independent  on  the  grandson.       Be- 
"  tween  physical  and  moral  necessity  there  is  no  dif- 
*'  ference  ;   the  phenomena  of  the  moral  world  being 
"  no  less  necessary  than  those  of  the  material.     And, 
u  to  conclude,  if  we  are  conscious  of  a  feeling  or  sen- 
"  timent  of  moral  liberty,  it  must  be  3  deceitful  one  ; 
*'  for  no  past  action  of  our  lives  could  have  been  pre- 
t(  vented,   and  no  future   action  can  possibly  be  con- 
"  tingent.     Therefore  man  is   not  a  free,  but  a  ne- 
"  cessary  agent." 

This  is  just  such  a  conclusion  as  I  should  have 
expected  ;  for  thus  it  always  has  been,  and  will  be, 
when  the  dictates  of  common  sense  are  questioned 


CHAP.  II.  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  209 

and  disputed.  The  existence  of  body,  the  existence 
of  the  soul,  the  reality  of  our  idea  of  power,  the  dif 
ference  between  moral  and  intellectual  virtue,  the 
certainty  of  the  inference  from  an  effect  to  the  cause,, 
and  many  otfcer  such  truths,  dictates  of  common  sense, 
have  been  called  in  question,  and  argued  upon.  And 
what  is  the  result  ?  Why  truly  it  has  been  found, 
that  there  is  no  body,  that  there  is.no  soul,  that  we 
have  no  idea  of  power,  that  moral  and  intellectual 
virtue  are  not  different,  and  that  a  cause  is  not  ne 
cessary  to  the  production  of  that  which  hath  a  be 
ginning.  And  now  the  liberty  of  human  actions  is 
questioned  and  debated,  what  could  we  expect,  but 
that  it  would  share  the  same  fate  !  But  passing  this 
for  the  present  *,  which,  hoWever,  seems  to  merit 
attention,  we  shall  here  only  enquire,  whether  this 
doctrine  of  necessity  be  not  in  some  important  points 
extremely  similar  to  that  of  the  non-existence  of 
matter. 

i.  Of  this  doctrine  we  observe,  in  the  first  place, 
that,  if  any  regard  is  to  be  had  to  the  meaning  of 
words,  and  if  human  actions  may  reasonably  be  taken 
for  the  signs  of  human  sentiments,  all  mankind  have, 
in  all  ages,  been  of  a  different  opinion.  The  number 
of  professed  philosophers  who  have  maintained  that 
all  things  happen  through  unavoidable  necessity,  is 
but  small ;  nor  are  we  to  imagine  that  all  the  ancient 
Fatalists  were  of  this  number.  The  Stoics  were  Fa- 

*  Some  readers  may  possibly,  on  this  occasion,  call  to 
mind  a  saying  of  an  old  Greek  author,  who,  though  now 
obsolete,  was  in  his  day,  and  for  several  ages  after,  accoun 
ted  a  man  of  considerable  penetration.  I  neither  men 
tion  his  name,  nor  translate  his  words,  for  fear  of  offend 
ing  (pardon  a  fond  author's  vanity)  my  polite  readers, 
AN©  \QN  THN  AFAITHN  TH2  AAH0EIA5  OYK 
EAEHANTO — AIA  TOYTO  IIEMYEI  AYTOI2  *O 
0EOS  ENEPFEIAN  IIAANH2  EI2  TO  III2TEY2AI 
AYTOY2  Til  TEYAEL 


210  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART   II. 

talists  by  profession  -9  but  they  still  endeavoured    as 
well  as  they  could,  to  reconcile  fate  with  moral  free 
dom  *  ;  and  the  first  sentence  of  the    Enchiridon  of 
Epictetus  contains  a  declaration,  that  "  opinion,  pur- 
"  suit,  desire,  and  aversion,  and,  in  one  word,  what- 
"  ever  are  our  own  actions,  are  in  our  own   power." 
We  see  in  Cicero's  fragment  De  Fato,  and  in  the  be 
ginning  of  the  sixth  book  of  Aulus  Gellius,  by  what 
subterfuges   and    quibbling     distinctions    the    Stoic 
Chrysippus  reconciled  the  seemingly  opposite  princi 
ples  of  fate  and  free-will.     I  am  not  surprised,  that 
what  he  says  on  this  subject  is  unsatisfactory  :  for 
many  Christians  have  puzzled  themselves  to  no  pur 
pose  in  the  same  argument.     But  though  the  manner 
in  which  the  divine  ptescience  is  exerted  be  mysteri 
ous  and  inexplicable,   it  does    not   follow,   that   the 
freedom  of  our  will  is  equally  so.     Of  this  we  may 
be,  and  we  are,  competent  judges.     It  is  sufficiently 
intimated  to  every  man  by  his  own  experience  ;  and 
every  man  is  satisfied  with   this  intimation,  and   by 
his  conduct  declares,  that  he  trusts  to  it   as   certain 
and  authentic.     Nothing  can  be  a  clearer  proof,  that 
the  sentiment  of  moral  liberty  is   one  of  the   most 
powerful  in  human  nature,  than  its   having  been  so 
long  able  to  maintain  its  ground,  and  often  in  oppo 
sition  to  other  popular  opinions  apparently  repugnant. 
The  notion  of  fate  has  prevailed  much  in  the  world, 
and  yet  could  never  subvert  this  sentiment  even  in 

the  vulgar If  it   be  asked,   where   the   vulgar   o- 

pinions  of  ancient  times  are  to  be  found  ?   I  answer, 

•  *  "  By  Fate  the  Stoics  seem  to  have  understood  a  series 
"  of  events  appointed  by  the  immutable  counsels  of  God  ; 
**  or,  that  law  of  his  providence  by  which  he  governs  the 
"  world.  It  is  evident  by  their  writings,  that  they  meant 
"  it  in  no  sense  which  interferes  with  the  liberty  of  human 
u  actions." 

See  Mrs  Carter's  admirable  Introduction  to  Her  very 
elegant  translation  of  the  works  of  Epictetus,  §  17. 


'p. 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  2,11 

that  in  the  writings  of  the  most  popular  poets  we 
have  a  chance  to  find  them  more  genuine  than  in  sy 
stems  of  philosophy  --  To  advance  paradoxes,  and 
consequently  to  disguise  facts,  is  often  the  most  ef 
fectual  recommendation  of  a  philosopher  :  but  a  poet 
must  conform  himself  to  the  general  principles  and 
manners  of  mankind  ;  otherwise  he  can  never  become 
a  general  favourite, 

Now  the  system  of  Homer  and  Virgil  concerning 
fate  and  free-will,  is  perfectly  explicit.  "  Homer 
"  assigns  three  causes,"  I  quote  the  word^o/  Pope, 
"  of  all  the  good  and  evil  that  happens  in  this  world, 
"  which  he  takes  a  particular  care  to  distinguish! 
"  First,  the  will  of  God,  superior  to  all.  Secondly, 
"  Destiny  or  fate,  meaning  the  laws  and  order  of  na- 
4*  ture,  affecting  the  constitutions  of  men,  and  dispos- 
<*  ing  them  to  good  or  evil,  prosperity  or  misfortune  ; 
**  which  the  Supreme  Being,  if  it  be  his  pleasure, 
**  may  over-rule,  (as  Jupiter  is  inclined  to  do  in  the 
c*  case  of  Sarpedon  *)  ;  but  which  he  generally  suf- 
"  fers  to  take  effect.  Thirdly,  Our  own  free  will, 
"  which  either  by  prudence  overcomes  those  natural 
"  influences  and  passions,  or  by  folly  suffers  us  to  fall 
"  under  them  f."  In  regard  to  some  of  the  decrees 
of  fate,  Homer  informs  us,  that  they  were  conditional,, 
or  such  as  could  not  take  effect,  except  certain  ac 
tions  were  performed  by  men.  Thus  Achilles  had 
it  in  his  power  to  continue  at  Troy,  or  to  return  home 
before  the  end  of  the  war.  If  he  chose  to  stay,  iris  life 
would  be  short  and  glorious  ;  if  to  return,  he  was  to 
enjoy  peace  and  leisure  to  a  good  old  age  £.  He  pre 
fers  the  former,  though  he  well  knew  what  was  to 

'  *  Iliad,  xvi.  433. 

f  Iliad,  i.  5.  xix.  90.     Odyss.  i.  7.  39.     See  Pope's  notes 
on  hese  a  sages. 


Ilisd,  IK.  315. 


212  ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  TART    II. 

follow  :  and  I  know  not  whether  there  be  any  other 
circumstance  in  the  character  of  this  hero,  except 
his  love  to  his  friend  and  to  his  father,  which  so 
powerfully  recommends  him  to  our  regard.  This 
gloomy  resolution  invests  him  with  a  mournful  digni 
ty,  the  effects  of  which  a  reader  of  sensibility  often 
feels  at  his  heart,  in  a  sentiment  made  up  of  admira 
tion,  pity,  and  horror.  But  this  by  the  by. Ac 
cording  to  Virgil,  the  completion,  even  of  the  abso 
lute  decrees  of  fate,  may  be  retarded  by  the  agency 
of  beings  inferior  to  Jupiter  *  :  a  certain  term  is 

fixed 

My  fate%  long  since  by  Thetis  were   disclos'd 
And  each  alternate,  life  or  fame  proposed. 
Here  if  I  stay  before  the  Trojan  town, 
Short  is  my  date,  but  deathless  my  renown) 
If  I  return,    I  quit  immortal  praise 
For  years  on  years,  and  long  extended  days.—- Pope* 

On  voit  (says  M.  Dacier,  in  Her  note  on  this  passage) 
partout  dans  Homere  des  marques  qu'il  a  voit  connu  cette 
double  destinee  des  hommeSj,  si  necessaire  pour  accorder  le 
libre  arbitre  avec  la  predestination.  En  voicy  un  tesmoig- 
nage  bien  formel  et  bicn  expres.  II  y  a  ducx  chemins 
pour  tons  les  hommes  :  s'ils  prennent  celuy-la,  il  leur  arri- 
vera  telle  chose  -?  s'ils  preimcrit  celui-cy,  leur  sort  sera 
different. 

Sophocles,  in  like  manner,  represents  the  decree  oi 
Destiny  concerning  Ajax,  as  conditional.  The  anger  oi 
Minerva  against  that  hero  was  to  last  only  one  day  :  if  his 
friends  kept  him  within  doors  during  that  space,  all  would 
be  well -?  if  they  suffered  him  to  go  abroad  unattended, 
his  death  was  inevitable.  .  Ajax  Mastig.  772.794.818, 
£,/  pw  U'W  fttvu  (says  the  scholiast),  (rwSwe roc/'  \i  le  ^aT?, 
/«  TOVTO  fe  TO  lirlov  r«  pcipiw  o>i?^o?  coc  xaj 
^c;,  A/^8ai/ac  x.x^ac  fep^tK  ^avaro'to  rexcc-ae. 

Sophocles,  cpud  H.  Stcfih:  i5S8.  /».  48, 
Non  dabitur  regnis  (esto)  piohibere  Latinis, 
Atque  immota  tnanet  fatis  Lavinia  corijux  5 
At  trahere,  atque  moras  tantis  licet  addere  rebus. 

'8  JEneid,  vii.  313, 


CHAP.  II.       AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.          213 

fixed  to  every  man,  beyond  which  his  life  cannot  last  ; 
but  before  this  period  arrives,  he  may  die,  by  acci 
dental  misfortunej  or  deserved  punishment*  :  to  vir 
tue  and  vice  necessity  reaches  not  at  allf . 

la  all  the  histories  1  have  read  of  ancient  or  mo 
dern,  savage  or  civilized  nations,  I  find  the  conduct 
of  mankind  has  ever  been  such  as  I  should  expect 
from  creatures  possessed  of  moral  freedom,  and  con 
scious  of  it.  Several  forms  of  false  religion,  and 
some  erroneous  commentaries  on  the  true,  have  im 
posed  tenets  inconsistent  with  this  freedom  ;  but  men 
have  still  acted,  notwithstanding,  as  if  they  believed 
themselves  to  be  free.  CPreeds,  expressed  in  general 
terms,  may  easily  be  imposed  on  the  ignorant,  and 
the  selfish ;  by  the  former  they  are  misunderstood, 
by  the  latter  disregarded  :  but  to  overpower  a  na 
tural  instinct  is  a  difficult  task  ;  and  a  doctrine  which 
is  easily  swallowed  when  proposed  in  general  terms, 
may  prove  wholly  disgustful  when  applied  to  a  par 
ticular  case. 

*  Nam  quia  nee  fato,  merita  nee  rnorte  peribat, 
Sed  misera  ante  diem,  subitoque  accensa  furore, 
Nondum  ille'Havum  Proserpina  vcrtice  crinem 
Abstulerat.  • JLneid.  iv.  69o> 

t  Stat  sua  caique  dies  ;  breve  et  irreparabile  tempus 
Omnibus  est  vitct  j  sed  faraam  extendere  factis, 
Hoc  virtutis  opus.  JLneid.  x.  467, 

I  agree  with  Severius  (not.  in  TEneid.  x.J  that  the  phi 
losophical  maxims  to  be  found  in  poets  are  not  always  con 
sistent.  The  reason  is  plain  :  Poets  imitate  the  sentiments 
of  people  of  different  characters,  placed  in  different  circum 
stances,  and  actuated  by  different  passions  j  and  nobody 
expects,  that  the  language  or  thoughts,  suitable  to  a  cer 
tain  character,  placed  in  certaif?  circumstances,  and  ac 
tuated  by  certain  passions,  should  be  consistent  with  tliose 
of  a  different  character  whose  circumstances  and  passions 
are  different.  But  I  cannot  agree  with  tH'at  annotator,  in 
supposing  the  passage  quoted  from  the  fourth  book,  incon- 


314  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  1'ART  II. 

"  The  belief  of  a  destiny,"  says  Mr  Macaulay, 
in  his  history  of  St  Kilda  *,  ".is  one  of  the  strong. 
"  est  articles  of  this  people's  creed  ;  and  it  will  pos- 
"  sibly  be  found  upon  examination,  that  the  common 
**  people,  in  all  ages,  and  in  most  countries,  give  into 
"  the  same  notion.  At  St  Kilda,  fate  and  providence 
"  are  much  the  same  thing.  After  having  explained 
"  t+jess  terms,  1  asked  some  of  the  people  there, 
*'  Whether  it  was  in  their  power  to  do  good  and 
"  evil  ?  The  answer  made  by  those  who  were  unac- 
**  quainted  with  ythe  systematical  doctrines  of  divi- 
"  nity  was,  That  the  question  was  a  very  childish 
"  one  ;  as  every  man  alive  must  be  conscious,  that 
"  he  himself  is  a  free  agent." — If  it  be  true,  as  I  be 
lieve  it  is,  that  the  common  "people  in  most  countries 
are  inclined  to  acknowledge  a  .destiny  or  fate  ;  and  if 
.it  be  also  true  that  they  are;  conscious  of  their  own 
free  agency  notwithstanding  ;  this  alone  would  con 
vince  me,  though  I  had  never  consulted  my  own  ex-' 
perience,  that  the  sentiment  of  moral  liberty  is  one 
of  the.  strongest  of  human  nature.  For  how  many 
of  their  vices  might  they  not  excuse,  if  they  could 
persuade  themselves,  or  others,  that  these  proceed 

Distent  with  what  is  quoted  from  the  10th  j  and  that  the 
former  is  according  to  the  Epicurean,  and  the  latter  ac 
cording  to  the  Stoical,  philosophy.  In  the  latter  passage, 
it  is  said,  that  a  certain  day  or  time  is  appointed  by  fate 
for  the  utmost  limit  of  every  man's  life  :  in  the  former,  the 
very  same  thing  is  implied  ;  only  it  is  said  farther,  that 
Dido  died  before  her  time  j  and  there  is  nothing  in  the 
10th  bock  that  insinuates  the  impossibility  of  this.  The 
sentiments  contained  in  these  three  quotations  are  confer-, 
mable  to  Homer's  theology,  and  to  one  another  j  and  it 
deserves  our  notice,  that  the  first  comes  from  the  mouth 
oF  Juno,  the  second  from  the  poet  or  his  muse,  and  the 
third  from  Jupiter  himself  j  whence  I  infer,  that  they  were 
agreeable  to  the  poet's  creed,  or  at  least  to  the  popular 
«reed  of  his  age* 
*  P.  243 . 


CHAP.  II.       AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.          215 

from  causes  as  independent  on  their  will,  as  those 
from  which  storms,  earthquakes,  and  eclipses,  arise 
and  the  temperature  of  soils  and  seasons,  and  the 
sound  and  unsound  constitutions  of  the  human  body  ! 
Such  a  persuasion,  however,  we  find  not  that  they 
have  at  any  time  entertained  or  attempted  ;  from 
which  I  think  there  is  good  reason  to  conclude,  that 
it  is  not  in  their  power. 

There  is  no  principle  in  man,  religion  excepted, 
that  has  produced  so  great  revolutions,  and  makes 
such  a  figure  in  the  history  of  the  world,  as  the  love 
of  political  liberty  :  of  which  indeed  all  men  do t not 
form  the  same  notion  :  some  placing  it  in  the  power 
of  doing  what  they  please,  others  in  the  power  of 
doing  what  is  lawful  ;  some  in  being  governed  by 
laws  of  their  own  making,  and  others  in  being  go 
verned  'by  equitable  laws,  and  tried  by  equitable 
judges  ; — but  of  which  it  is  universally  agreed,  that 
it  leaves  in  our  power  many  of  our  most  important 
actions.  And  yet,  say  Mr  Hf  ME  and  the  Fatalists., 
all  things  happen  through  irresistable  necessity,  and 
there  is  not  in  the  human  mind  any  idea  of  any  power. 
Strange  !  that  so  many,  especially  among  the  best, 
the  bravest,  and  the  wisest  of  men,  should  have  been 
so  passionately  enamoured  of  an  inconceivable  non 
entity,  as  to  abandon  for  its  sake,  their  ease,  their 
health,  their  fortunes,  and  their  lives  !  At  this  rate 
we.  are  wonderfully  mistaken,  when  we  speak  of 
Don  Quixote  as  a  madman,  and  of  Leonidas,  £rutus, 
Wallace,  Hampden,- Paoli,  as  wise,  and  good,  and 
great  !  The  case  it  seems  is  just  the  reverse  ;  these 
heroes  deserve  no  other  name  than  that  of  raving  bed 
lamites  ;  and  the  illustrious  knight  of  La  Mancha,  to 
whom  the  object  of  his  valour  was  at  least  a  conceieu- 
alle  pljantom,  was  a  person  of  excellent  understand 
ing  and  most  perfect  knowledge  of  the  world  ! 

Do  not  all  mankind  distinguish  between  mere 
harm  and  injury  ?  Is  there  one  rational  being  unac 
quainted  with  this  distinction  ?  If  a  roan  were  to  act 


2*6  AN  E:SAY  ON  TROTH.  PART  W. . 

as  if  he  did  not  comprehend  it,  would  not  the  world 
pronounce  him  a  fool  ?  And  jet  this  distinction  is 
perfectly  incomprehensible,  except  we  suppose  some 
beings  to  act  necessarily,  and  others  from  free  choice. 
A  man  gives  me  a  blow,  and  instantly  I  feel  resent 
ment  ;  but  a  bystander  informs  me,  that  the  man  is 
afflicted  with  the  epilepsy,  which  deprives  him  of  the 
power  of  managing  his  limbs  ;  that  the  blow  was  not 
only  without  design,  but  contrary  to  his  intention,  and 
that  he  could  not  possibly  have  prevented  it.  My 
resentment  is  gone,  though  I  still  feel  pain  from  the 
blow.  Can  there  h€  any  mistake  in  this  experience  ? 
Can  I  think  that  I  feel  resentment,  when  in  reality 
I  do  not  feel  it  ?  that  I  feel  no  resentment,  when  I 
am  conscious  of  the  contrary  ?  And  if  1  feel  re 
sentment  in  the  one  case,  and  not  in  the  other,  it  is 
certain  there  seems  to  me  to  be  some  dissimilitude 
between  them.  'But  it  is  only  in  respect  of  the  in 
tention  of  him  who  gave  the  blow  that  there  can 
be  arny  dissimilitude1;  for  all  that  i  learn  from  the 
information  by  which  my  resentment  was  extinguish 
ed  is,  that  what  I  supposed  to  proceed  from  an  evil 
intention, Odid  really  proceed  from  no  evil  intention, 
but  from  the  necessary  effect  of  a  material  cause,  in 
which  the  will  had  no  concern.  What  shall  we  say 
then?  that  the  distinction  between  injury  and  mere 
harm,  acknowledged  by  all  mankind,  does  imply, 
that  all  mankind  suppose  the  actions  of  moral  beings 
to  be  £ree  •*  or  shall  we  say,  that  resentment,  though 
it  arises  uniformly  in  all  men  on  certain  occasions, 
does»yet  proceed  from  no  cause  ;  the  actions,  which 
do  give  rise  to  it,  being  in  every  respect  the  same 
with  those,  which  do  not  give  rise  to  it  ? 

Further,  all  men  expect,  with  full  assurance,  that 
fire  will  burn  to-morrow  ;  but  all  men  do  not  with 
full  assurance  expect,  that  a  thief  will  steal  to-mor 
row,  or  a  miser  refuse  jn  alms  to  a  beggar,  or  a  de- 
buuchee  commit  an  act  of  intemperance,  even  though 
opportunities  offer.  If  I  had  found  on  blowing  up 


CHAP.  If.  AST  ESSAY  Otf  TRUTH.  2  £7 

my  fire  this  morning,  that  the  flame  was  cold,  an'd 
converted  water  into  ice,  I  should  have  been  much 
more  astonished  than  if  I  had  detected  a  man  reputed 
honest  in  the  commission  of  an  act  of  theft.  The 
former  I  would  call  a  prodigy,  a  contradiction  to  the 
known  laws  of  natnre :  of  the  latter  I  shonid  say, 
that  I  am  sorry  for  it,  and  could  never  have  expected 
it  ;  but  I  should  not  suppose  any  prodigy  in  the  case. 
All  general  rules,  that  regard  the  influence  of  hurmtii 
characters  on  human  actions,  admit  of  exceptions  5 
but  the  general  laws  of  matter  admit  of  none.  Ice 
was  cold,  and  fire  hot,  ever  since  the  creation  ;  hst 
ice,  and  cold  fire,  are,  according  to  the1  present  con 
stitution  of  the  world,  impossible  :  but  that  a  man 
should  steal  to-day,  who  never  stole  before,  is  no  im 
possibility  at  all.  The  .coldness  of  the  flame  I  should 
doubtless  think  owing  to  some  cause,  and  the  dis 
honesty  o-f  the  man  to  some  strange  revolution  in  his 
sentiments  and  principles  ;  but  I  never  could  bring 
myself  to  think  the  man  as  passive,  in  regard  to 
this  revolution,  as  the  fire  must  be  supposed  to  be 

.  in  regard  to  the  cause  by  which  its  nature  is  changed. 
The  man  has  done  what  he  ought  not  to  have  done, 

.what  he  might  have  prevented,  and  what  he  deserves 
punishment  for  not  preventing  ; — this  is  the  lan 
guage  of  all  rational  beings  j — but  the  fire  is  wholly 
unconscious  and  inert.  Who  will  say  that  there  is 
the  same  necessity  in  both  cases  ! 

Fatalists  are  fond  of  inferring  moral  necessity 
from  physical,  in  the  way  of  analogy.  But  some  of 
their  arguments  on  this  topic  are  most  ridiculously 
absurd.  "  There  is,"  says  Voltaire's  Ignorant 
Philosopher,  "  nothing  without  a  cause.  An  effect 
"  without  a  cause  are  words  without  meaning.  Ev- 
"  ery  time  I  have  a  will,,  this  can  only  be  in  conse- 
"quence  of  my  judgment  good  or  bad;  this  judgment  is 
"necessary;  therefore  sois  my  will  „" — All  this  hath 
been  said  by  others  :  but  what  follows  is,  I  believe, 
peculiar  to  this  Ignorant  Phifosopler.  "  In  effect^3 


2l8  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART    21. 

continues  he,  "  it  would  l?e  very  singular,  that  all 
"  nature,  all  the  planets,  should  obey  eternal  laws, 
**  and  that  there  should  be  a  little  animal,  five  feet 
**'  high,  who,  in  contempt  of  these,  laws,  could  act  as 
*'  he  pleased,  solely  according  to  his  caprice."  Sin 
gular  !  aye  singular  indeed.  So  very  singular,  that 
yours,  Sir,  if  I  mistake  not,  is  the  first  human  brain 
that  ever  conceived  such  a  notion.  If  man  be  free, 
nobody  ever  dreamed  that  he  made  himself  so  in 
contempt  of  the  laws  of  nature ;  it  is  in  consequence 
of  a  law  of  nature  that  he  is  a  free  agent.  But 
passing  this,  let  us  attend  to  the  reasoning. 
The  planets  are  not  free  agents  ; therefore  it- 
would  be  very  singular,  that  man  should  be  one. 
Not  a  whit  more  singular,  than  that  this  same  ani 
mal  of  five  feet  should  perceive,  and  think,  and  read, 
and  write  and  speak  ;  which  no  astronomer  of  my 
acquaintance  has  ever  supposed  to  belong  jto  the  pia- 
ne^s,  notwithstanding  their  brilliant  appearance,  and 
stupendous  magnitude*.  We  do  too  much  honour 

*  Mr  Voltaire  has  often  laboured,  with  more  zeal  than 
success,  to  prove,  amongst  other  strange  doctrines,  that 
Shakespeare  and  Milton  were  no  great  poets.  What  if  1 
should  here  help  him  to  an  argument  as  decisive  on  that 
point  as  any  he  has  yet  invented,  and  framed  exactly  ac 
cording  to  the  rules  of  his  own  logic,  as  exemplified  in  the 
passage  now  before  us  ?  "  The  EngL'sh  say,  that  Shake - 
"  speare  and  Milton  were  great  poets.  Now  it  is  well 
"  known,  that  neither  Plinliniinon  in  Wales,  nor  Mealfour- 
"  vouny  in  Scotland,  neither  Lebanon  in  Syria,  nor  Atlas 
"  in  Mauritanio,  ever  wrote  one  good  verse  in  their  days ; 
"  and  yet  each  of  these  mountains  exceeds  in  corporeal 
"  magnitude  ten  thousand  Miltons  and  as  many  Shake-  ' 
**  speares.  But  it  would  be  very  singular,  that  masses  of 
"  so  great  distinction  should  never  have  been  able  to  put 
"  pen  to  paper  with  any  success,  and  yet  that  no  fewer 
"  than  two  pieces  of  English  flesh  and  blood,  scarce  six 
"  feet  long,  should  in  contempt  of  nature  and  all  her  la\vs, 
"  have  penned  poems  "that  are  entitled  to  general  admira- 
"  tion !» 


CHAP.  If.  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  219 

to  such  reasoning,  when  we  reply   to   it  in    the  bold 
but  sublime  words  of  a  great  genius  : 

Know'st  thou  th*  importance  of  a  soul   immortal  ? 
Behold  this  midnight  glory,  worlds  on  worlds  ? 
Amazing  pomp  !   redouble  this  amaze  ; 
Ten  thousand  add  ;  and  twice  ten  thousand  more  ; 
Then  weigh  the  whole  ;  ONE  SOUL  out  weights  them 
And  calls,  th*  astonishing  magnificence    •  [all, 

Of  unintelligent  creation  poor.    Complaint ,  Night  7. 

Mr  HUME,  in  an  essay  on  this  subject,  maintains, 
that  the  appearances  in  the  moral  and  material  world 
are  equally  uniform,  and  equally  necessary  ;  nay,  and 
acknowledged  to  be  so,  both  by  philosophers  and  by 
the  vulgar.  In  proof  of  this,  he  prudently  confines 
himself  to  general  topics,  on  which  he  declaims  with 
some  plausibility.  Had  he  descended  to  particular 
instances,  as  we  have  clone,  the  fallacy  of  his  reason 
ing  would  have  appeared  at  once.  Human  nature 
has  been  nearly  the  same  in  all  ages.  True.  For 
all  men  possess  nearly  the  same  faculties,  which  are 
employed  about  nearly  the  same  objects,  and  destin 
ed  to  operate  within  the  same  narrow  sphere.  And 
if  a  man  have  power  to  chuse  one  of  two  things,  to 
act  or  not  to  act,  he  has  all  the  liberty  we  contend 
for.  How  is  it  possible,  then,  that  human  nature, 
taken  in  the  gross,  should  not  be  found  nearly  the 
same  in  all  ages  !  But  if  we  come  to  particulars,  we 
shall  not  perhaps  find  two  human  minds  exactly  a- 
like.  In  two  of  the  most  congenial  characters  on 
earth  the  same  causes  will  not  produce  the  same 
effects  ;  nay,  the  same  causes-  will  not  always  pro 
duce  the  same  effects  even  in  the  same  character. 

Some  Fatalists  deny,  that  our  internal  feelings  are 
in  favour  of  moral  liberty.  "  It  is  true,"  says  a 
worthy  and  ingenuous,  tho'  'fanciful,  author,  "  that 
"  a  man  by  internal  feeling  may  prove  his  own  free 
"  will,  if  by  free  will  be  meant  the  power  of  doing 
"  what  a  man  wills,  or  desires  ;  or  of  resisting-  the 
4<  motives  of  sensuality,  ambition^  &.c.  that  is  free 


220  A2f  ESSAT  ON  TRUTH.  PART    II. 

"  will  in   the  popular  and  practical  sense.     Every 
"  person  may  eaviy  recollect  instances,  where  he  has 
"  done  these  several  things.     But  these  are  intirely 
"  foreign   to   the   present   question.      To  prove  that 
"  a  man   has  free-will  in  the  sense  opposite  to  me- 
"  chanisrn,  he  ought  to  feel,  that  he  can  do  different 
**  things  wJiile  the  motives  remain  precisely  the  same, 
"  And  here  I  apprehend  the  internal  feelings  are  in- 
"  tirely   against  free-will,  where  the  motives  arc  of 
"  a   sufficient  magnitude   to  be  evident  :  where  they 
'*  are  not,  nothing  can  be  proved  *.""• — Questions  of 
this  kind   would   be  more  easily  solved,  if  author's 
would   explain   their  doctrine  by  examples.      When 
this  is  not  done,  we  cannot  always  be  sure  that  we 
understand  their  meaning,  especially  in  abstract  sub 
jects,  where  language,  after  all  our  care,  is  often  e- 
quivocal   and   inadequate.     If  I  rightly  understand 
this  author,  and  am  allowed  to  examine  his  principles 
by  my  o%n  experience,  I  must  conclude,  that  he  very 
much   mistakes   the  fact.     Let  us  take  an  example. 
A   man   is   tempted   to  the  commission  of  a  crime  : 
his  motive   to  commit,  is  the  love  of  money,  or  the 
gratification  of  appetite  :   his  motive  to  abstain,  is  a 
regard   to   duty,  or   to  reputation.     Suppose  him  to 
.weigh  these  motives  in  his  mind,  for  an  hour,  a  day, 
or  a  week  ;  and  suppose,  that  during  this  space,  no 
additional  consideration  occurs  to  him  on  either  side: 
which,  I  think,  may  be  supposed,  because  I  know  it 
is  possible,  and  1  believe  often  happens.     While  his 
mind  is  in  this  state,  the  motives  remain  precisely  the 
same  :  and  yet  it  is  to  me  inconceivable,  that  he  should 
at  any  time,   during  this  space,  feel  himself  under  a 
necessity   of  committing,  or  under  a  necessity  of  not 
committing  the  crime.      He  is  indeed  under  a  neces 
sity   either   to  do,   or  not  to  do  :  but  e^ery  man,  in 
such  a  case,  feels  that  he  has  it  in  his  power  to  chuse 
the  one  or  the  other.     At  least,  in  all  my  experience 

*  Hartley's  Observations  on  man,  vol.  1.  p.    507, 


CHAP.    II.  Att    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  22T 

I  have  never  been  conscious,  nor  had  any  reason  to 
believe,  that  other  men  were  conscious,  of  any  such 
necessity  as  the  author  here  speaks  of. 

Again  :  Suppose  two  men  in  the  circumstances 
above-mentioned,  to  yield  to  the  temptation,  and  to 
be  differently  affected  by  a  review  of  their  conduct ; 
the  one  repining  at  fortune,  or  fate,  or  providence, 
for  having  placed  him  in  too  tempting  a  situation, 
and  solicited  him  by  motives  too  powerful  to  be  re 
sisted  ;  the  other  blaming  and  upbraiding  himself 
for  yielding  to  the  bad  motive,  and  resisting  the 
good: — I  would  ask,  .'•  hich  of  these  two  kinds  of 
remorse  or  regret  is  the  most  rational  ?  7"he  first, 
according  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Fatalists  ;  the  last, 
according  to  the  universal  opinion  of  mankind.  No 
divine,  no  moralist,  no  man  of  sense,  ever  supposes 
true  penitence  to  begin,  till  the  criminal  become  con 
scious,  that  he  has  done,  or  neglected,  something 
which  he  ought  not  to  have  done  or  neglected  :  a 
sentiment  which  would  be  not  only  absurd,  but  im 
possible,  if  all  criminals  and  guilty  persons  believed, 
from  internal  feeling,  that  what  is  done  could  not 
have  been  preren'ed.  Whenever  you  cas  satisfy  a 
man  of  this,  he  may  continue  to  bewail  himself  or 
repine  at  fortune  ;  but  his  repentance  is  at  an  end. 
It  is  always  a  part,  and  too  often  the  whole,  of  the 
language  of  remorse :  "'  I  wish  the  deed  had  never 
4*  been  done:  wretch  that  I  was,  not  to  resist  the  tefnp- 
"  tation  !"  Docs  this  imply,  that  the  penitent  sup 
poses  himself  to  have  been  under  a  necessity  of  com 
mitting  the  action,  and  that  his  conduct  could  not 
possibly  have  been  different  from  what  it  is  ?  To  me 
it  seems  to  imply  just  the  contrary.  And  am  not  I 
a  competent  judge  of  this  matter  ?  Have  not  I  been 
in  these  circumstances  ?  Has  not  this  been  often  the 
language  of  my  soul  ?  And  will  any  man  pretend  to 
say,  that  I  do  not  know  my  own  thoughts,  or  that 
he  knows  them  better  than  I  ?  -  All  men,  inde  df 
have  but  too  frequent  esiperience  of  at  least  this  part 


222  AK   ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART    II, 

of  repentance  ;  then  why  multiply  words,  when  by 
facts  it  is  so  easy  to  determine  the  controversy  ? 

Other  Fatalists  acknowledge,  that  the  free  agency 
of  man  is  universally  felt  and  believed  :  That  tho' 
man  in  truth  is  a  necessary  agent,  having  all  his  ac 
tions  determined  by  fixed  and  immutable  laws  ;  yet, 
this  being  concealed  from  him,  he  acts  with  the  con 
viction  of  being  a  free  agent  *. — Concealed  from 
him  !  Who  conceals  it  ?  Does  the  author  of  nature 
conceal  it, — and  do  these  writers  discover  it  !  What 
deference  is  not  due  to  the  judgment  of  a  metaphy 
sician,  whose  sagacity  is  so  irresistably  (I^liad  al 
most  said  omnipotently)  penetrating  !  But,  gentle 
men,  as  ye  are  powerful,  ye  should  have  been  mer 
ciful.  It  was  not  kind  to  rob  poor  mortals  of  this 
•crumb  of  comfort  which  had  been  provided  for  them 
in  tiieir  ignorance  ;  nor  generous  to  publish  so  open 
ly  the  secrets  of  Heaven,  and  thus  baffle  the  designs 
of  Providence  by  a  few  strokes  of  your  pen  ! — In 
truth,  rner.aphysic  is  a  perplexing  affair  to  the  pas 
sions,  as  well  as  to  the  judgment.  Some  times  it  is 
so  absurd^  that  not  to  be  merry  is  impossible  ;  and 
sometimes  so  impious,  that  not  to  be  angry  were  un 
pardonable  :  but  often  it  partakes  so  much  of  both 
Dualities,  that  one  knows  not  with  what  temper  of 
mind  to  consider  it : 

o 

"  To  laugh,  were  want  of  goodness,  and  of  grace  j 
'*'"  And  to  be  grave,  exceeds  all  power  of  face." 

But  why  insist  so  long  on  the  universal  acknow 
ledgment  of  man's  free  agency  ?  To  me  it  is  as  evi 
dent,  that  all  men  believe  themselves  free,  as  that 

*  In  the  former  edition  of  this  Essay,  a  particular  book 
was  here  specified  and  quoted.  But  I  have  lately  heard, 
that  in  a  second,  edition  of  that  book,  which,  however,  I 
have  not  yet  seen,  the  author  has  made  sorce  alterations, 
by  which  he  gets  clear  of  the  absurdity  exposed  in  thf? 
passage. 


CILvI*.    II.  AK  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  223 

all  men  think.  I  cannot  see  the  heart  ;  I  judge  of 
the  sentiments  of  others  from  their  outward  beha 
viour  ;  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  as  far  as 
history  and  experience  can  carry  me,  I  find  the  con 
duct  of  human  beings  similar  in  this  respect  to  my 
own  :  and  of  my  own  free  agency  I  have  never  yet 
been  able  to  entertain  the  least  doubt.  "  Here  then 
«*  we  have  an  instance  of  a  doctrine  advanced  by 
"  some  philosophers,  in  direct  contradiction  to  the 
'*  general  belief  of  all  men  in  all  ages."  This  is  a 
repetition  of  the  first  remark  formerly  made  oa  the 
non-existence  of  matter. 

2.  The  second  was  to  this  purpose  :  "  The  rea- 
"  soning  by  which  this  doctrine  is  supported,  tho* 
'*  long  accounted  unanswerable,  did  never  produce  a 
**  serious  and  steady  conviction  ;  common  sense  still 
"  declared  it  to  be  false  ;  we  were  sorry  to  find  the 
*'  powers  of  human  reason  so  limited  as  not  to  af- 
"  ford  a  logical  confutation  of  it  ;  we  were  convin- 
**  ced  it  merited  confutation,  and  nattered  ourselves 
"  that  one  time  or  other  it  would  be  confuted." 

I  shall  here  take  it  for  granted,  that  the  scheme  of 
necessity  has  not  as  yet  been  fully  confuted  ;  and  on 
this  supposition  (which  the  Fatalists  can  hardly  fail 
to  acknowledge  a  fair  one)  I  would  ask,  whether  die 
remark  just  now  quoted  be  applicable  to  the  reason 
ings  urged  in  behalf  of  that  scheme  ?  My  experience 
tells  me,  it  is.  After  giving  the  advocates  for  ne 
cessity  a  fair  hearing,  my  belief  is  exactly  the  same 
as  before.  I  am  puzzled  perhaps,  but  not  convin 
ced,  no  not  in  the  least  degree.  In  reading  some 
late  essays  on  this  subject,  I  find  many  things  allow 
ed  to  pass  without  scruple,  which  I  cannot  admit : 
and  when  I  have  got  to  the  end,  and  ask  myself, 
whether  I  am  a  free  or  a  necessary  agent,  nature  re 
curs  upon  me  so  irresistibly,  that  the  investigation  I 
have  just  finished  seems  (as  Shakespea  e  says)  "  like 
"  the  fierce  vexation  of  a  dream,"  which,  while  it 
lasted,  had  some  resemblance  of  reality,  but  now, 
T 


224  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

when  it  is  gone,  appears  to  have  been  altogether  a 
delusion.  This  is  prejudice,  you  say  ;  be  it  so. 
Before  the  confutation  of  BEKKELEY'S  system, 
would  it  have  been  called  prejudice  not  to  be  convin 
ced  by  his  arguments?  I  know  not  but  it  might  ; 
but  I  am  sure,  that  of  such  prejudice  no  honest  man, 
nor  lover  of  truth,  needs  be  ashamed.  I  confess, 
that  when  I  enter  upon  the  controversy  in  question, 
I  am  not  wholly  indifferent ;  I  am  a  little  biassed  in 
favour  of  common  sense,  and  I  cannot  help  it :  yet 
if  the  reasoning  were  conclusive,  I  am  confident  it 
would  breed  in  my  mind  some  suspicion,  that  my 
sentiment  of  moral  liberty  is  ambiguous.  As  I  ex 
perience  nothing  of  this  kind,  my  conviction  remain 
ing  the  same  as  before,  what  must  I  infer?  Surely 
1  must  infer,  and  I  sin  against  my  own  understand 
ing  if  I  do  not  infer,  that  though  the  reasoning  be 
subtle,  the  doctrine  is  .absurd. 

But  what  if  a  man  be  really  convinced  by  that 
reasoning,  that  he  is  a  necessary  agent  ? — Then  I 
expect  he  will  think  and  act  according  to  his 
conviction.  If  he  continue  to  act  and  think  as 
he  did  before,  and  as  I  and  the  rest  of  the 
world  do  now,  he  must  parden  me  if  I  should  sus 
pect  his  conviction  to  be  insincere.  For  let  it  be  ob 
served,  that  the  Fatalists  are  net  satisfied  with  call 
ing  their  doctrine  probable  ;  they  affirm,  that  it  is 
certain,  and  rests  on  evidence  not  inferior  to  demon 
stration.  If,  therefore,  it  convince  at  all,  it  must 
convince  thoroughly.  Between  rejecting  it  as  utter 
ly  false,  and  receiving  it  as  undeniably  true,  there  is 
medium  to  a  considerate  person.  And  let  it  be 
observed  further,  that  the  changes  which  the  real 
belief  of  fatality  must  produce  in  the  conduct  and 
sentiments  of  men,  are  not  slight  and  imperceptible  ; 
but,  as  will  appear  after v.  avds,  important  and  strik 
ing.  If  you  say,  that  the  instincts  of  ycur  nature, 
the  customs  of  the  world,  and  the  force  of  human 
laws,  oblige  you  to  act  like  free  agents,  you  acknov  - 


CHAP.  II.  AN   ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  225 

ledge  fatality  to  be  contrary  to  nature   and  common 
sense  ;  which  is  the  point  I  want  to  prove. 

Clay  is  not  more  obsequious  to  the  potter,  than 
words  to  the  skilful  disputant.  They  may  be  made 
to  assume  almost  any  form,  to  enforce  almost  any 
doctrine.  So  true  it  is,  that  much  may  be  said  on 
either  side  of  most  questions,  that  we  have  known 
dealers  in  controversy,  who  were  always  of  the  same 
mind  with  the  author  whom  they  read  last.  V/e  have 
seen  theories  of  morality  deduced  from  pride,  from 
sympathy,  from  self-love,  from  benevolence ;  and 
all  so  plausible,  as  would  surprise  one  who  is  unac 
quainted  with  the  ambiguities  of  language.  Of  these 
the  advocates  for  simple  truth  are  less  careful  to  a- 
vaii  themselves,  than  their  paradoxical  antagonists. 
The  arguments  of  the  former,  being  more  obvious, 
stand  less  in  need  of  illustration ;  those  of  the  lat 
ter  require  all  the  embellishments  of  eloquence  and 
refinement  to  recommend  them.'  Robbers  seldom  go- 
abroad  without  arms  ;  they  examine  every  corner 
and  countenance  with  a  penetrating  eye,  which  habi 
tual  distrust  and  circumspection  have  rendered  in 
tensely  sagacious  :  the  honest  man  walks  carelessly 
about  his  business,  intending  no  harm,  and  suspect 
ing  none.  It  cannot  be  denied,  that  philosophers 
do  often,  in  the  use  of  words,  impose  on  themselves 
as  well  as  on  others  ;  an  ambiguous  word  slipping  in 
by  accident  will  often  perplex  a  whole  subject,  to 
the  equal  surprise  of  both  parties  ;  and  perhaps,  in 
a  long  course  of  years,  the  cause  of  this  perplexity 
shall  not  be  discovered.  This  was  never  more  re 
markably  the  case,  than  in  the  controversy  about 
the  existence  of  matter  }  and  this  no  doubt  is  one 
great  hinderance  to  the  utter  confutation  of  the  doc 
trine  of  necessity.  Fatalists  indeed,  make  a  stir,  and 
seem  much  in  earnest  about  settling  the  significa 
tion  of  the  words  :  but  '*  words  beget  words,"  as 
Bacon  well  observeth  j  and  it  cannot  be  expected, 
T  2 


226  AN  ESSAY  ON   TRUTH.  PART  II. 

that  they  who  are  interested  in  supporting  a  system 
will  be  scrupulously  impartial  in  their  definitions. 

With  a  few  of  these,  a  theorist  commonly  begins 
his  system.  This  has  the  appearance  of  fairness 
and  perspicuity.  We  hold  it  for  a  maxim,  that  a 
man  may  use  words  in  any  sense  he  pleases,  provid 
ed  he  explain  the  sense  in  which  he  uses  them  ;  and 
we  think  it  captious,  to  find  fault  with  words.  We 
therefore  are  easily  prevailed  on  to  admit  his  defini 
tions,  which  are  generally  plausible,  and  not  appa 
rently  repugnant  to  the  analogy  of  language.  But 
the  understanding  of  the  author  when  he  writes,  and 
that  of  the  student  when  he  reads  them,  are  in  very 
different  circumstances.  The  former  knows  his  sys 
tem  already,  and  adapts  his  definitions  to  it :  the  lat 
ter  is  ignorant  of  the  system,  and  therefore  can  have 
no  notion  of  the  tendency  of  the  definitions.  Besides, 
every  system  is  in  some  degree  obscure  to  one  who 
is  but  beginning  to  study  it  ;  and  this  obscurity 
serves  to  disguise  whatever  in  the  preliminary  illus 
trations  is  forced  or  inexplicit.  Thus  the  mind  of 
the  most  candid  and  most  attentive  reader  is  prepar 
ed  for  the  reception  of  error,  long  before  he  has  any 
suspicion  of  the  author's  real  design.  And  then,  the 
more  he  is  accustomed  to  use  words  in  a  certain  sig 
nification,  the  more  he  is  disposed  to  think  it  natur 
al  ;  so  that  the  further  he  advances  in  the  system, 
lie  is  still  more  and  more  reconciled  to  it.  Need  we 
wonder  then  at  the  variety  of  moral  systems?  need  we 
wonder  to  see  a  man's  judgment  so  easily,  and  often  so 
egregiously,  misled,  by  abstract  reasoning  ?  need  we 
wonder  at  the  success  of  any  theorist,  who  has  a  tolei- 
able  command  of  language,  and  a  moderate  share  of 
cunning,  provided  his  system  be  well-timed,  and  adap 
ted  to  the  manners  and  principles  of  his  age  ?  Neither 
need  we  wonder  to  see  the  grossest  and  most  detestable 
absurdities  recommended  by  singular  plausibility  of 
argument,  and  such  as  may  for  a  time  impose  even 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY   ON    TRUTH.  227 

on  the  intelligent  and  segacious  ;  till  at  last,  when 
the  author's  design  becomes  manifest,  common  sense 
begins  to  operate,  and  men  have  recourse  to  their  in 
stinctive  and  intuitive  sentiments,  as  the  most  effec 
tual  security  against  the  assaults  of  the  logician. 

Further,  previous  to  all  influence  from  habit  and 
education,  the  intellectual  abilities  of  different  men 
are  verj  different  in  respect  of  reasoning,  as  well  as 
of  common  sense.  Some  men,  sagacious  enough  in 
perceiving  truth,  are  but  ill  qualified  to  reason  a- 
bout  it ;  while  others,  not  superior  in  common  sense, 
or  intuitive  sagacity,  are  much  more  dextrous  in  de 
vising  and  confuting  arguments.  If  you  propose  a 
sophism  to  the  latter,  you  are  at  once  contradicted 
and  confuted  :  the  former,  though  they  cannot  con 
fute  you,  are  perhaps  equally  sensible  of  your  false 
doctrine,  and  unfair  reasoning  ;  they  know,  that 
what  you  say  is  not  true,  though  they  cannot  tell  in 
what  respect  it  is  false.  Perhaps  all  that  is  wanting 
to  enable  them  to  confute,  as  well  as  contradict,  is 
only  a  little  practice  in  speaking  and  wrangling  :  but 
surely  this  affects  not  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  pro 
positions.  What  is  false  is  as  really  so  to  the  per 
son  who  perceives  its  falsity,  without  being  able  to 
prove  it,  as  to  him  who  both  perceives  and  proves  ; 
and  it  is  equally  false,  before  I  learn  logic,  and  after. 
— Is  it  not  therefore  highly  unreasonable  to  expect 
conviction  from  every  antagonist  who  cannot  confute 
you,  and  to  ascribe  to  prejudice  what  i&  owing  to- 
the  irresistible  impulse  of  unerring  nature  ? 

I  have  conversed  with  many  people  of  sense  on  the 
subject  of  this  controversy  concerning  liberty  and  ne 
cessity.  To  the  greater  part,  the  arguments  of 
Clarke  and  others,  in  vindication  of  liberty,  seemed 
quite  satisfying  ;  others  owned  themselves  puzzled 
with  the  subtleties  of  those  who  took  the  opposite 
side  of  the  question ;  some  reposed  with  full  assur 
ance  on  that  consciousness  of  liberty  -which  every, 


228  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

man  feels  in  his  own  breast  :  in  a  word,  as  far  as  my 
experience  goes,  I  have  found  all  the  impartial,  the 
most  sagacious,  and  most  virtuous,  part  of  man 
kind,  enemies  to  fatality  in  their  hearts  ;  willing  to 
consider  the  arguments  for  it  as  rather  specious 
than  solid  ;  and  disposed  to  receive,  with  joy  and 
thankfulness,  a  thorough  vindication  of  human  li 
berty,  and  a  logical  confutation  of  the  opposite  doc 
trine. 

3.  It  has  been  said,  That  philosophers  are  an 
swerable,  not  for  the  consequences,  but  only  for  the 
truth  of  their  tenets  ;  and  that,  if  a  doctrine  be  true, 
its  being  attended  with  disagreeable  consequences  will 
not  render  it  false.  We  readily  acquiesce  in  this  re 
mark  ;  but  we  imagine  it  cannot  be  meant  of  any 
truth  but  what  is  certain  and  incontrovertible,  No 
genuine  truth  did  ever  of  itself  produce  effects  in 
consistent  with  real  utility  *.  But  many  principles 
pass  for  truth,  which  are  far  from  deserving  that 
honourable  appellation.  Some  give  it  to  all  doc 
trines  which  have  been  defended  with  subtlety,  and 
which,  whether  seriously  believed  or  not,  have  never 
been  logically  confuted.  But  to  affirm,  that  all 
mch  doctrines  are  certainly  true,  would  argue 
the  most  contemptible  ignorance  of  human  lan 
guage,  and  human  nature.  It  is  therefore  absurd 
to  say,  that  the  bad  consequences  of  admitting 
such  doctrines  ought  not  to  be  urged  as  arguments 
against  them  —  Now,  there  are  many  persons  in  the 
world,  of  most  respectable  understanding,  who  would 
be  extremely  averse  to  acknowledge,  that  the  doc 
trine  of  necessity  has  ever  been  demonstrated  beyond 
all  possibility  of  doubt.  I  may  therefore  be  per 
mitted  to  consider  it  as  a  controvertible  tenet,  and  to 
expose  the  absurdities  and  dangerous  consequences 
\vith  which  the  belief  of  it  may,  and  must  be  at 
tended. 


Marc.  Anton!  n. 


CHAP.  II.        AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

Mr  HUME  endeavours  to  raise  a  prejudice  against 
this  method  of  refutation.  He  probably  foresaw,  that 
the  tendency  of  his  principles  would  be  urged  as  an  ar 
gument  against  them  ;  and  being  somewhat  apprehen 
sive  of  the  consequences,  as  well  he  might,  he  insinu 
ates,  that  all  such  reasoning  is  no  better  than  pe;  son^l 
invective.  "  There  is  no  method  of  reasoning,"  says 
he,  "  more  common,  and  yet  none  more  biameable, 
*'  than  in  philosophical  debates  to  endeavour  the  re- 
"  filiation  of  any  hypothesis,  by  a  pretence  of  its 
"  dangerous  consequences  to  religion  and  morality. 
"  When  any  opinion  leads  into  absurdities,  it  is  cer- 
"  tainly  false  ;  but  it  is  not  certain  that  an  opinion 
"  is  false,  because  it  is  of  dangerous  consequence. 
"  Such  topics  therefore  ought  entirely  to  be  forborne, 
"  as  serving  nothing  to  the  discovery  of  truth,  but 
"  only  to  make  the  person  of  an  antagonist  odious  *." 
If  your  philosophy  be  such,  that  its  consequences 
cannot  be  unfolded  without  rendering  your  person 
odious,  pray,  Mr  HUME,  who  is  to  blame  ?  you,  who 
contrive  and  publish  it ;  or  I,  who  criticise  it  ?  There 
is  a  kind  of  philosophy  so  salutary  in  its  effects,  as 
to  endear  the  person  of  the  author  to  every  good 
man  :  why  is  not  yours  of  this  kind  ?  If  it  is  not,  as 
you  yourself  seem  to  apprehend,  do  you  think,  that 
I  ought  to  applaud  your  principles,  or  suffer  them  to 
pass  unexamined,  even  though  I  am  certain  of  their 
pernicious  tendency  ?  or  that,  out  of  respect  to  your 
person,  I  ought  not  to  put  others  on  their  guard  a- 
gainst  them  ?  Surely  you  cannot  be  so  blinded  by 
self-admiration,  as  to  think  it  the  duty  of  a-«y  man 
to  sacrifice  the  interest  of  mankind  to  your  interest, 
or  rather  to  your  reputation  as  a  metaphysical  writer. 
If  you  do  think  so,  I  must  take  the  liberty  to  differ 
from  your  judgment  in  this,  as  in  many  other  mat 
ters. 

*  Essay  on  Liberty  and  Necessity,  part  2, 


23°  AN  ESSAY  OX  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

Nor  can  1  agree  to  what  our  author  says  of  this 
method  of  reasoning,  that  it  tends  nothing  to  the  dis 
covery  of  truth.  Does  not  every  thing  tend  to  the 
discovery  of  truth,  that  disposes  men  to  think  for 
themselves,  and  to  consider  opinions  with  attention, 
before  they  adopt  them  ?  And  have  not  many  well- 
meaning  persons  rashly  adopted  a  plausible  opinion 
en  the  supposition  of  its  being  harmless,  who,  if  they 
had  been  aware  of  its  bad  tendency,  would  have  pro 
ceeded  with  more  caution,  and  made  a  better  use  of 
their  understanding  ? 

This  is  truly  a  notable  expedient  for  determining 
controversy  in  favour  of  licentious  theories.  An 
author  publishes  a  book,  in  which  are  many  doctrines 
fatal  to  human  happiness,  and  subversive  of  human 
society.  If,  from  a  regard  to  truth,  and  to  mankind, 
we  endeavour  to  expose  them  in  their  proper  colours, 
and,  by  displaying  their  dangerous  and  absurd  conse 
quences,  to  deter  men  from  rashly  adopting  them 
without  examination  ;  our  adversary  immediately 
exclaims,  "  This  is  not  fair  reasoning  ;  this  is  per-- 
"  sonal  invective."  Were  the  sentiments  of  the 
public  to  be  regulated  by  this  exclamation,  licentious 
writers  might  do  what  mischief  they  pleased,  and 
no  man  durst  appear  in  opposition,  without  being* 
hooted  at  for  his  want  of  breeding. — It  is  happy  for 
us  all,  that  the  law  is  not  to  be  browbeaten  by  in 
sinuations  of  this  kind  ;  otherwise  we  should  hear 
some  folks  exclaim  against  it  every  day,  as  one  of  the 
most  ungenteel  things  in  the  world.  And  truly  they 
would  have  reason :  for  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  an 
indictment  at  the  Old  Bailey  has  much  the  air  of  a  per 
sonal  invective  ;  and  banishment,  or  burning  in  the 
hand,  amounts  nearly  to  a  personal  assault  ;  nay,  both 
have  often  this  express  end,  to  make  the  person  cf 
the  criminal  odious :  and  yet  in  his  judgment  perhaps, 
there  was  no  great  harm  in  picking  a  pocket  of  a 
handkei chief,  value  thirteen-pence,  provided  it  was 
done  with  a  good  grace,  Let  not  the  majesty  of 


UHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  23! 

science  be  offended  by  this  allusion  ;  1  mean  not  to 
argue  from  it,  for  it  is  not  quite  similar  to  the  case 
in  hand.  That  those  men  act  the  part  of  good  citi 
zens,  who  endeavour  to  overturn  the  plainest  prin 
ciples  of  human  knowledge,  and  to  subvert  the  foun 
dations  of  all  religion,  I  am  far  from  thinking  ;  but  I 
should  be  exfremely  sorry  to  see  any  other  weapons 
employed  against  them  than  those  of  reason  and  ri 
dicule,  chastised  by  decency  and  truth.  Other  wea 
pons  this  cause  requires  not  j  nay,  in  this  cause,  all 
other  weapons  would  do  more  harm  than  good.  And 
let  it  still  be  remembered,  that  the  object  of  our 
strictures  is  not  men,  but  books  ;  and  that  these 
incur  our  censure,  not  because  they  bear  certain 
names,  but  because  they  contain  certain-  prin 
ciples. 

These  remarks  relate  rather  to  the  doctrines  of 
scepticism  in  general,  than  to  this  of  necessity  in 
particular  ;  which  I  am  not  ignorant  that  many  men,, 
respectable  both  for  their  talents  and  principles,  have 
asserted.  I  presume,  however,  they  would  have 
been  more  cautious  if  they  had  attended  to  the  conse 
quences  that  may  be  drawn  from  it. — To  which  I  now 
return. 

Some  of  the  Fatalists  are  willing  to  reconcile  their 
system  with  our  natural  notions  of  moral  good   and 
evil  ;   but  all  they  have  been  able  to  do  is,  to  remove 
the  difficulty  a   step   or   two  further   off.     But  the 
most  considerable  of  that  party  are  not  solicitous  to 
render  these  points  consistent.      If  they  can  only  es~ 
tablish  necessity,  they  leave  natural  religion  to   shift 
for  itself.     Mr  HUME  in  particular  affirms,   that  on 
his  principles  it  is  impossible  for   natural    reason    to 
vindicate  the  character   of  the   Deity  *.     Had   this- 
author  been  possessed  of  one  grain  of  that    modesty 
which  he  recommends  in  the  conclusion  of  his  essay  ;.. 
had  he  thought  it  worth  his  while  to  sacrifice  a  little 
pittance  of  ignominious  applause  to  the  happiness  of 
*  Essay  on  Liberty  and  Necessity,  sub.  Jin. 


232  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

human  kind  ;  he  would  have  shuddered  at  the  thought 
of  inculcating  a  doctrine  which  he  knew  to  be  irre- 
concileable  with  this  great  first  principle  of  religion  ; 
and  of  which,  therefore,  he  must  have  known,  that  it 
tended  to  overturn  the  only  durable  foundation  of 
human  society  and  human  happiness. 

The  advocates  for  liberty,  on  the  other  hand,  have 
universally  espoused  the  cause  of  virtue,  and  zeal 
ously  asserted  the  infinite  wisdom  and  purity  of  the 
divine  nature.  Now,  I  confess,  that  this  very  con 
sideration  is,  according  to  my  notion  of  things,  a 
strong  argument  in  favour  of  the  last  mentioned  doc 
trine.  Here  are  two  opinions  ;  the  one  inconsistent 
with  the  first  principles  of  natural  religion,  as  some 
of  those  who  maintain  it  acknowledge,  a-s  well  as  with 
the  experience,  the  belief,  and  the  practice,  of  the  ge 
nerality  of  rational  beings  ;  the  other  perfectly  con 
sistent  with  religion,  conscience,  and  common  sense* 
If  the  reader  believe,  ivith  me,  that  the  Deity  is  in 
finitely  good  and  wise,  he  cannot  balance  a  moment 
between  them  ;  nor  hesitate  to  affirm,  that  the  uni 
versal  belief  of  the  former  would  produce  much  mis 
chief  and  misery  to  mankind.  If  he  be  prepossessed 
in  favour  of  fatality,  he  ought,  however,  before  he 
acquiesce  in  it  as  true,  to  be  well  assured,  that  the 
evidences  of  natural  religion,  particularly  of  the  di 
vine  existence  and  attributes,  are  weaker  than  the 
proofs  that  have  been  urged  in  behalf  of  necessity. 
But  will  any  one  say,  that  this  doctrine  admits  of  a 
proof,  as  unexceptionable  as  that  by  which  we  evince 
the  being  and  attributes  of  God  ?  I  appeal  to  his 
own  heart,  I  appeal  to  the  experience  and  conscious 
ness  of  mankind  ; are  you  as  thoroughly  con 
vinced,  that  no  past  action  of  your  life  could  possibly 
have  been  prevented,  and  that  no  future  action  can 
possibly  be  contingent,  as  that  God  is  infinitely  wise, 

powerful,  and   good  ? Examine   the   evidence   of 

"both  propositions,,  examine  with  candour  the  instinc 
tive  suggestions  of  your  own  mind  j — and  then  tell 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  235 

me,  whether  you  find  atheism  or  man's  moral  liberty 
hardest  to  be  believed. 

Perhaps  I  shall  be   told,  that  the   belief  of  moral 
liberty  is  attended  with   equal  difficulties  ;   for  that, 
to  reconcile  the  contingency  of  human    actions  with 
the  prescience  of  God,  is  as  impossible,   as  to  recon 
cile  necessity  with   his    goodness    and  wisdom.      O- 
thers  have  answered  this  objection  at  length  ;  I  make 
therefore  only  two  brief  remarks  upon  it.      i.  As  it 
implies  not  any  reflection  on  the  divine  power,  to  say- 
that  it  cannot  perform  impossibilities  ;  so  neither,  I 
presume,  does  it  imply  any  reflection  on  his  know 
ledge,  to  say,  that  he  cannot  foresee  as  certain,  what 
is  really  not  certain,  but   only  contingent.     Yet  he 
sees  all  possible  effects   of  all  possible    causes  j  and 
our  freedom  to  chuse  good  or  evil  can  no  more  be 
conceived  to  interfere  with  the  final  purposes  of  his 
providence,  than  our  power  of  moving  our  limbs  is 
inconsistent  with  our  inability  to  remove  mountains. 
2.  No  man  will  take  it  upon  him  to  say,  that  he  dis 
tinctly  understands  the  manner  in   which  the  Deity- 
acts,  perceives,  and  knows  :  but  the  incomprehensi- 
bleness  of  his  nature  will  never  induce  men  to  doubt 
his  existence  and  attributes,  unless  there  be  men  who 
fancy  themselves  infallible,  and  of  infinite  capacity. 
Shall  I  then  conclude,   because   1  cannot  fully  com 
prehend  the  manner  in  which  the   divine  prescience 
operates,  that  therefore  the   Deity  is  not  infinitely 
perfect  ?   or  that,    therefore,  I  cannot    be  certain    of 
the  truth  of  a  sentiment  which  is  warranted  by  my 
constant  experience,  and  by    that   of  all  mankind  ? 
Shall  I  say,  that  because  my  knowledge  is  not    infi- 
nite,  therefore  I  hr.ve  no  knowledge  ?  Because  I  know 
not  when  I  shall  die,  does  it  follow,  that  1  cannot  be 
certain  of  my  being  now  alive  ?   Because  God  has 
not  told  me  every  thing-,  shall  1    refuse  to  believe 
what  he  has  told  me  ?   To   draw   such  a   conclusion 
from  such  premises  is  in  my  judgment,   as  contrary 
to  reason,  as  to  say,  that,  because   I  am  ignorant  of 


AN    ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  PART    Jl, 

the  cause  of  magnetical  attraction,  therefore  1  ought 
not  to  believe   that   the  needle   points  to   the  north. 
- — That  I  am  a  free  agent,  I  know  and  believe  ;  that 
God  foresees  whatever  can  be  foreseen,  as  he  can  do 
whatever  can  be  done,  I  also  know  and  believe :  nor 
have  the  Fatalists  ever  proved,  nor  can   they  ever 
prove,  that  the  one  belief  is  inconsistent  with  the  other* 
The    asserters    of   human   liberty  have  always 
maintained,   that  to   believe   all  actions    and  inte'n- 
lions  necessary,  is  the    same  thing  as  to  believe  that 
man    is    not    an    accountable    being,    or,    in    other 
words,  no   moral   agent.     And   indeed  this  notion  is 
natural  to  every  person  who  has  the  courage  to  trust 
his  own  experience,  without  seeking  to  puzzle  plain 
matter  of  fact  with  verbal  distinctions  and  metaphy 
sical  refinement.     But,  it  is  said,  the  sense  of  moral 
beauty  and  turpitude  still  remains  with  us,  even  af 
ter  we  are  convinced  that  all  actions   and  intentions 
are  necessary  ;  that  this    sense  maketh    us  moral  a- 
gents  ;  and  therefore,  that  our  moral  agency  is  per 
fectly  consistent  with  our  necessary   agency.     But 
this  is  nothing   to  the  purpose  ;  it   is   putting  us  off 
with  mere  words.     For    what  is  moral  agency,  and 
what  is  implied  in  it  ?  This  at  least  must  be  implied 
:;i  it,  that  we  ought  to  do    some   things,   and  not  to 
do  ot>-ers.     But  if  every  intention  and  action  of  my 
life  is  fixed  by  eternal  laws,  which  I  can   neither  e- 
lude  nor  alter,  it  is  as   absurd   to   say   to  me,    You 
ought  to  be  honest  to-morrow,  as  to  say,  You  ought 
to  stop  the  motion  of  the  planets    to-morrow.      Un 
less  some  events   depend    upon    my   determination, 
aught,  and  ought  not,  have  no  meaning  when  appli 
ed  to  me.      Moral  agency  further  implies,   that  we 
are  accountable  for  our  conduct  ;  and  that  if  we  do 
what  we  ought  not  to  do,    we  deserve   blame    and 
punishment.     My  conscience  tells  me,  that  I  am  ac 
countable  for  those  actions  only  that  are  in  my  own 
power  ;  and  neither  blames  nor  approves,  in  myself 
or  in  others,  that  conduct  which  is  the  effect,  not  of 


CHAF.  II.        AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.         2J5 

choice,  but  of  necessity.  Convince  me,  that  all  my 
actions  are  equally  necessary,  and  you  silence  my 
conscience  for  ever,  or  at  least  prove  it  to  be  a  falla 
cious  and  impertinent  monitor:  you  will  then  convince 
me,  that  all  circumspection  is  unnecessary,  and  all 
remorse  absurd.  And  is  it  a  matter  of  little  mo 
ment,  whether  I  believe  my  moral  feelings  authentic 
and  true,  or  equivocal  and  fallacious  ?  Can  any  prin 
ciple  be  of  more  fatal  consequence  to  me,  or  to  socie 
ty,  than  to  believe,  that  the  dictates  of  conscience  are 
false,  unreasonable,  or  insignificant  ?  Yet  this  is  one 
certain  effect  of  my  becoming  a  Fatalist,  or  even 
sceptical  in  regard  to  moral  liberty. 

I  observe,  that  when  a  man's  understanding  begins 
to  be  so  far  perverted  by  debauchery,  as  to  make 
him  imagine  his  crimes  unavoidable,  from  that  mo 
ment  he  begins  to  think  them  innocent,  and  deems  it 
a  sufficient  apology,  that  in  respect  of  them  he  is  no 
longer  a  free  but  a  necessary  agent.  The  drunkard 
pleads  his  constitution,  the  blasphemer  urges  the  in 
vincible  force  of  habit,  and  the  sensualist  would  have 
us  believe,  that  his  appetites  are  too  strong  to  be 
resisted.  Suppose  all  men  so  far  perverted  as  to 
argue  in  the  same  manner  with  regard  to  crimes  of 
every  kind  ; — then  it  is  certain,  that  all  men  would 
be  equally  disposed  to  think  all  crimes  innocent. 
And  what  would  be  the  consequence  ?  Licentiousness, 
misery,  and  desolation,  irremediable  and  universal. 
If  God  intended  that  men  should  be  happy,  and  that 
the  human  race  should  continue  for  many  genera 
tions,  he  certainly  intended  also  that  men  should  be 
lieve  themselves  free,  moral,  and  accountable  crea 
tures. 

Supposing  it  possible  for  a  man  to  act  upon  the 
belief  of  his  being  a  necessary  agent,  let  us  see  how 
he  would  behave  in  some  of  the  common  affairs  of 
life.  He  does  me  an  injury.  I  go  to  him  and  re 
monstrate.  You  will  excuse  me,  says  he  ;  I  was  put 
upon  it  b/  one  on  whom  I  am  dependent,  and  who 


236  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

threatened  me  with  beggary  and  perdition  if  I  refus 
ed  to  comply.  I  acknowledge  this  to  be  a  consider 
able  alleviation  of  the  poor  man's  guilt.  Next  day 
he  repeats  the  injury  ;  and,  on  my  renewing  my  re 
monstrances,  Truly,  says  he,  I  was  offered  sixpence  to 
do  it  ;  or  I  did  it  to  please  my  humour  :  but  I  know 
you  will  pardon  me,  when  I  tell  you,  that  as  all  mo 
tives  are  the  necessary  causes  of  the  actions  that  pro 
ceed  from  them,  it  follows,  that  all  motives  produc 
tive  of  the  same  action  are  irresistible,  and  therefore, 
in  respect  of  the  agent,  equally  strong  :  I  am  there 
fore  as  innocent  now  as  I  was  formerly  ;  for  the  e- 
vent  has  proved,  that  the  motive  arising  from  the  of 
fer  of  sixpence,  or  from  the  impulse  of  whim,  was 
as  effectual  in  producing  the  action  w7hich  you  call 
an  injury,  as  the  motive  arising  from  the  fear  of 
ruin.  Notwithstanding  this  fine  speech,  I  should  be 
afraid,  that  these  principles,  if  persisted  in,  and  act 
ed  upon,  wTould  soon  bring  the  poor  Fatalist  to  Ty 
burn  or  Bedlam. 

Will  you  promise  to  assist  me  to-morrow  with 
your  labour,  advice,  or  interest  ?  No,  says  the  prac 
tical  Fatalist ;  I  can  promise  nothing  :  for  my  con 
duct  to-morrow  will  certainly  be  determined  by  the 
motive  that  then  happens  to  predominate.  Let  your 
promise,  say  I,  be  your  motive.  How  can  you  be 
so  ignorant,  he  replies,  as  to  imagine  that  our  motives 
to  action  are  in  our  own  power  !  O  sad,  O  sad  !  you 
must  study  metaphysic,  indeed  you  must.  Why, 
Sir,  our  motives  to  action  are  obtruded  upon  us  by 
Irresistible  necessity.  Perhaps  they  arise  immedi 
ately  from  some  passion,  judgment,  fancy,  or,  if  you 
please,  volition  ;  but  this-  volition,  fancy,  judgment-, 
or  passion — what  is  it  ?  an  effect  without  a  cause  ? 
No,  no  ;  it  is  necessarily  excited  by  some  idea,  ob 
ject,  or  nation,  which  presents  itself  independently 
on  me,  and  in  consequence  of  some  extrinsic  cause, 
the  operation  cf  which  I  can  neither  foresee  nor  pre- 


CHAP.   II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  237 

vent Where  is  the  man  who  would  chuse  this  fa 
talist  for  his  friend,  companion,  or  fellow-citizen  ? 
who  will  say,  that  society  could  at  all  subsist,  if  the 
generality  of  mankind  were  to  think,  and  speak,  and 
act  upon  such  principles  ? 

But,  says  the  Fatalist,  is  it  not  easy  to  imagine 
cases  in  which  the  men  who  helieves  themselves  free, 
would  act  the  part  of  fools  or  knaves  ?  Nothing  in 
deed  is  more  easy.  Bat  let  it  be  observed,  that  the 
folly  or  knavery  of  such  mer,,  arises,  not  from  their 
persuasion  of  their  own  free  agency,  for  many  mil 
lions  of  this  persuasion  have  passed  through  life 
with  a  fair  character,  but  from  other  causes.  I  can 
not  conceive  any  greater  discouragement  from  kna 
very  and  folly,  than  the  consideration  that  man  is  an 
accountable  being  ;  and  I  know  not  how  we  can  sup 
pose  him  accountable,  unless  we  suppose  him  free. 
The  obvious  tendency  of  our  principles  is  therefore 
to  deter  men  from  knavery  and  folly  ;  whereas  it  is 
impossible  for  a  Fatalist  to  act  -upon  his  own  princi 
ples  for  one  day,  without  rendering  himself  ridicu 
lous  or  detestable. 

The  reader,  if  disposed  to  pursue  these  hints,  ard 
attend,  in  imagination,  to  the  behaviour  of  the  prac 
tical  fatalist  in  the  more  interesting  scenes  of  pii:,iic 
and  private  life,  may  entertain  himself  with  a  series 
of  adventures,  more  ludicrous,  or  at  least  more  irra 
tional,  than  any  of  those  for  which  the  knight  of  La 
Mancha  is  celebrated.  I  presume  1  have  said  e- 
nough  to  satisfy  every  impartial  mind,  "  That  the 
"  real  and  general  belief  of  necessity  would  be  at- 
"  tended  with  fatal  consequences  to  science,  and  to 
"  human  nature  ;" — which  is  a  repetition  of  the  third 
remark  we  formerly  made  on  the  doctrine  of  the  non- 
existence  of  body  *. 

And  now  we  have  proved,  that  if  there  was  any 
reason  for  rejecting  Berkeley's  doctrine  as  absurd, 

U_2 

*  See  the  end  of  the  preceding  section. 


238  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH*  FART  II. 

and  contrary  to  common  sense,  before  his  arguments 
were  shewn  to  arise  from  the  abuse  of  words,  there 
is  at  present  the  same  reason  for  rejecting  the  doc 
trine  of  necessity,  even  on  the  supposition  that  it 
hath  not  as  jet  been  logically  confuted.  Both  doc 
trines  are  repugnant  to  the  general  belief  of  mankind : 
both,  notwithstanding  all  the  efforts  of  the  subtlest 
sophistry,  are  still  incredible  :  both  are  so  contrary 
to  nature,  and  to  the  condition  of  human  beings,  that 
they  cannot  be  carried  into  practice  ;  and  so  contra 
ry  to  true  philosophy,  that  they  cannot  be  admitted 
into  science,  without  bringing  scepticism  along  with 
them,  and  rendering  questionable  the  plainest  princi 
ples  of  moral  truth,  and  the  very  distinction  between 
truth  and  falsehood.  In  a  word,  we  have  proved, 
that  common  sense,  as  it  teacheth  us  to  believe  and 
be  assured  of  the  existence  of  matter,  doth  also  teach 
us  to  believe  and  be  assured,  that  man  is  a  free  a- 
gent. 

It  would  lead  us  too  far  from  our  present  purpose, 
to  enter  upon  a  logical  examination  of  the  argument 
for  necessity.  Our  design  is  only  to  explain  by  what 
marks  one  may  distinguish  the  principles  of  common 
sense,  that  is,  intuitive,  or  self-evident  notions,  from 
those  deceitful  and  inveterate  opinions  that  have  some 
times  assumed  the  same  appearance.  If  1  have  satisfied 
the  reader,  that  the  free  agency  of  men  is  a  self-evi 
dent  fact,  I  have  also  satisfied  him,  that  all  reasoning 
on  the  side  of  necessity,  tho'  accounted  unanswera 
ble,  is,  in  its  very  nature,  and  previously  to  all  con 
futation,  absurd  and  irrational,  and  contrary  to  the 
practice  and  principles  of  all  true  philosophers. 

Let  not  the  friends  of  liberty  be  discouraged  by 
the  perplexing  arguments  of  thi  Fatalist  *.  Argu- 

*  There  is  no  subject  on  which  doubts  and  difficulties 
may  not  be  started  by  ingenious  and  disputatious  men  :  and 
therefore,  from  the  number  of  their  objections,  and  the 
length  of  the  controversy  to  which  they  give  occasion,  v,  e 


CHAP.    II.  AN   ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

ments  in  opposition  to  self-evident  truth,  must,  if 
plausible,  be  perplexing.  Think  what  method  of 
argumentation  a  man  must  pursue,  who  sets  himself 
to  confute  any  axiom  in  geometry,  or  to  argue  against 
the  existence  of  a  sentiment,  acknowledged  and  felt 
by  all  mankind.  Indeed  I  cannot  see  how  such  a 
person  should  ever  impose  upon  people  of  sense,  ex 
cept  by  availing  himself  of  expressions,  which  either 
are  in  themselves  ambiguous,  or  become  so  by  his 
manner  of  applying  them.  If  the  ambiguity  be  dis- 
cernable,  the  argument  can  have  no  force  ;  if  there 
be  no  suspicion  of  ambiguity,  the  dispute  may  be 
continued  from  generation  to  generation,  without 
working  any  change  in  the  sentiments  of  either  party. 
When  fact  is  disregarded,  when  intuition  goes  for  no 
thing,  when  no  standard  of  truth  is  acknowledged, 
and  every  unanswered  argument  is  deemed  unan 
swerable,  true  reasoning  is  at  an  end  j  and  the  dis 
putant,  having  long  ago  lost  sight  of  common  sense, 
is  so  far  from  regaining  the  path  of  truth,  that,  like 
Thomson's  peasant  bewildered  in  the  snow,  he  con 
tinues  "  to  wander  on  still  more  and  more  astray." 
l£  any  person  will  give  himself  the  trouble  to  exa 
mine  the  whole  controversy  concerning  liberty  and 
necessity,  he  will  find,  that  the  arguments  on  both 
sides  come  at  last  to  appear  unanswerable  : — there  is 
no  common  principle  acknowledged  by  both  parties, 
to  which  an  appeal  can  be  made,  and  each  party 
'charges  the  other  with  begging  the  question.  Is  it 
not  then  better  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  simple  feel- 

cannot,  in  any  case,  conclude,  that  the  original  evidence  is 
weak,  or  even  that  it  is  not  obvious  and  striking.  Were 
we  to  presume,  that  every  principle  is  dubious  against  which 
specious  objections  may  be  contrived,  \ve  should  be  quickly 
led  into  universal  scepticism.  The  two  ways  in  which  the 
ingenuity  of  speculative  men  has  been  most  commonly- em 
ployed,  are  dogmatical  assertions  of  doubtful  opinions,  awd 
subtle  cavils  against  certain  truths. 

Gerard's  Diss^rl-aitcns^  ii.  ,4, 


240  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART    II. 

ing  of  the  understanding  ?  I  feel  that  it  is  in  my 
power  to  will  or  not  to  will  :  all  you  can  say  about 
the  influence  of  motives  will  never  convince  me  of 
the  contrary  ;  or  if  I  should  say  that  I  am  convinced 
by  your  arguments,  my  conduct  must  continually 
bely  my  profession.  One  thing  is  undeniable  :  your 
words  are  obscure,  my  feeling  is  not  ; — this  is  uni 
versally  attended  to,  acknowledged,  and  acted  upon  ; 
those  to  the  majority  of  mankind  would  be  unintel 
ligible,  nay,  perhaps  they  are  in  a  great  measure  so 
even  to  yourselves. 

CHAP.     III. 

Recapitulation   and  Inference. 

nPHE  substance  of  the  preceding  illustrations,  when 
•*•    applied  to  the  principal  purpose  of  this  discourse, 
is  as  followeth  : 

Although  it  be  certain,  that  all  just  reasoning  does 
ultimately  terminate  in  the  principles  of  common 
sense  ;  that  is,  in  principles  which  must  be  admitted 
as  certain,  or  as  probable,  upon  their  own  authority, 
without  evidence,  or  at  least  without  proof ;  even  as 
all  mathematical  reasoning  does  ultimately  terminate 
in  self-evident  axioms  :  yet  philosophers,  especially 
those  who  have  applied  themselves  to  the  investiga 
tion  of  the  laws  of  human  nature,  have  not  always 
been  careful  to  confine  the  reasoning  faculty  within 
its  proper  sphere,  but  have  vainly  imagined,  that 
even  the  principles  of  common  sense  are  subject  to 
the  cognisance  of  reason,  and  may  be  either  confirmed 
or  confuted  by  argument.  They  have  accordingly, 
in  many  instances,  carried  their  investigations  higher 
than  the  ultimate  and  self-supported  principles  of 
common  sense  ;  and  by  so  doing  have  introduced 
many  errors,  and  much  false  reasoning,  into  the  moral 
sciences.  To  remedy  this,  it  was  proposed,  as  a 
matter  deserving  serious  attention,  to  ascertain  the 
separate  provinces  of  reason  and  common  sense.  And 


CHAP.  III.  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

because,  in  many  cases,  it  may  be  difficult  to  dis 
tinguish  a  principle  of  common  sense  from  an  ac 
quired  prejudice  ;  and,  consequently,  to  know  at  what 
point  reasoning  ought  to  stop,  and  the  authority  of 
common  sense  to  be  admitted  as  decisive  ;  it  was. 
therefore  judged  expedient  to  inquire,  "  Whether 
•'  such  reasonings  as  have  been  prosecuted  beyond 
"  ultimate  principles,  be  not  marked  with  some  pe- 
"  culiar  characters,  by  which  they  may  be  distin- 
"  guished  from  legitimate  investigation."  To  illus 
trate  this  point,  the  doctrines  of  the  non-existence  of 
matter,  and  the  necessity  of  human  actions,  were 
pitched  upon  as  examples  ;  in  which,  at  least  in  the 
former  of  which,  common  sense,  in  the  opinion  of  all 
competent  judges,  is  confessedly  violated  ; — the  na 
tural  effects  produced  upon  the  mind  by  the  reason 
ings  that  have  been  urged  in  favour  of  these  doctrinesr 
were  considered  ; — and  the  consequences,  resulting 
from  the  admission  of  such  reasonings,  were  taken 
notice  of,  and  explained.  And  it  was  found,  that  the 
reasonings  that  have  been  urged  in  favour  of  these 
doctrines  are  really  marked  with  some  peculiar  cha 
racters,  which  it  is  presumed,  can  belong  to  no  legi 
timate  argumentation  whatsoever.  Of  these  reason 
ings  it  was  observed,  and  proved,  "  That  the  doc* 
"  trines  they  are  intended  to  establish  are  contradic- 
"  tory  to  the  general  belief  df  all  men  in  all  ages  > 

" That,  though  enforced  and  supported  with  sin- 

"  gular  subtlety,  and  though  admitted  by  some  pro- 
"  fessed  philosophers,  they  do  not  produce  that  con- 
"  viction  which  sound  reasoning  never  fails  to  pro- 
"  duce  in  the  intelligent  mind  ; — and,-  lastly,  That 
"  really  to  believe,  and  to  act  from  a  real  belief  of 
"  such  doctri.ies  and  reasonings,  must  be  attended 
"  with  fatal  consequences  to  science,,  to  virtue,  to- 
"  human  society,  and  to  all  the  important  interests  of 
"  mankind." 

I  do  not  suppose,  that  all  the  errors   which  have 
arisen  from  not  attending  to  the  foundation  of  truth^. 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  II. 

and  essential  rules  of  reasoning,  as  here  explained, 
are  equally  dangerous.  Some  of  them  perhaps  may 
be  innocent;  to  such  the  last  of  these  characters  can 
not  belong.  If  wholly  innocent,  it  is  of  little  conse 
quence,  whether  we  know  them  to  be  errors  or  not. 
When  a  new  tenet  is  advanced  in  moral  science,  there 
will  be  a  strong  presumption  against  it,  if  contrary 
to  universal  opinion  :  for  as  every  man  may  find  the 
evidence  of  moral  science  in  his  own  breast,  it  is  not 
to  be  supposed,  that  the  generality  of  mankind  would, 
for  any  length  of  time,  persist  in  an  error,  which 
their  own  daily  experience,  if  attended  to  without 
prejudice,  could  not  fail  to  rectify.  Let,  therefore, 
the  evidence  of  the  new  tenet  be  carefully  examined, 
and  attended  to.  If  it  produce  a  full  and  clear  con 
viction  in  the  intelligent  mind,  and  at  the  same  time 
serve  to  explain  the  causes  of  the  universality  and 
long  continuance  of  the  old  erroneous  opinion,  the 
new  one  ought  certainly  to  be  received  as  true.  But 
if  the  assent  produced  by  the  ne*v  doctrine  be  vague, 
indefinite  and  unsatisfying  ;  if  nature  and  common 
sense  reclaim  against  it  ;  if  it  recommend  modes  of 
thought  that  are  inconceivable,  or  modes  of  action 
that  are  impracticable  :  it  is  not,  it  cannot  be  true, 
however  plausible  its  evidences  may  appear. 

Some  will  think,  perhaps,  that  a  straighter  and 
shorter  course  might  have  brought  me  sooner,  and 
with  equal  security,  to  this  conclusion.  I  acknowledge 
I  have  taken  a  pretty  wide  circuitv  This  was  ow 
ing  in  part  to  my  love  of  perspicuity,  which  in  these 
subjects  hath  not  always  been  studied  so  much  as  it 
ought  to  have  been  ;  and  partly,  and  chiefly,  to  my 
desire  of  confuting,  on  this  occasion,  (as  I  wish  to 
have  done  with  metaphysical  controversy  for  ever), 
as  many  of  the  most  pernicious  tenets  of  modern 
scepticism  as  could  be  brought  within  my  present 
plan.  But  the  reader  will  perceive,  that  I  have  en 
deavoured  to  conduct  all  my  digressions  in  such  a 


CHAP.  III.        AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.          243 

manner,  as  that  they  might  serve  for  illustrations  of 
the  principal  subject. 

To  teach  men  to  distinguish  by  intuition  a  dictate 
of  common  sense  from  an  acquired  prejudice,  is  a 
work  which  nature  only  can  accomplish.  We  shall 
ever  be  more  or  less  sagacious  in  this  respect,  accord 
ing  as  Heaven  has  endowed  us  with  greater  or  less 
strength  of  mind,  vivacity  of  perception,  and  solidity 
of  judgment.  The  method  here  recommended  is 
more  laborious,  and  much  less  expeditious.  Yet 
this  method,  if  I  am  not  greatly  mistaken,  may  be  of 
considerable  use,  to  enable  us  to  form  a  proper  esti* 
mate  of  those  reasonings,  which,  by  violating  com 
mon  sense,  tend  to  subvert  every  principle  of  rational 
belief,  to  sap  the  foundations  of  truth  and  science, 
and  to  leave  the  mind  exposed. to  all  the  horrors  of 
scepticism.  To  be  puzzled  by  such  reasonings,  is 
neither  a  crime  nor  a  dishonour  ;  though  in  many, 
cases  it  may  be  both  dishonourable  and  criminal  ta 
suffer  ourselves  to  be  deluded  by  them.  For  is  not 
this  to  prefer  the  equivocal  voice  of  a  vain,  selfish, 
and  ensnaring  wrangler,  to  the  clear,  the  benevolent, 
the  infallible  dictates  of  nature  ?  Is  not  this»  to  bely- 
©ur  sentiments,  to  violate  our  constitution,  to  sin 
against  our  own  soul  ?  Is  not  this  "  to  forsakes 
"  the  fountains  of  living  water,  and  to  hew  out 
"  unto  ourselves  broken  cisterns  that  can  hold  no 
«  water?" 

PART     III. 

OBJECTIONS    ANSWERED. 

rT^HEY  who  consider  virtue  as  a  subject  of  mere 
•*•  curiosity,  and  think  that  the  principles  of  morals* 
and  properties  of  conic  sections  ought  to  be  explain T 
ed  with  the  same  degree  of  apathy  and  indifference, 
will  find  abundant  matter  for  censure  in  the  preced 
ing  observations.  As  the  author  is  not  very  ambi 
tious  of  the  good  opinion  of  such  theorists,  he  will 


244  A'N  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III. 

not  give  himself  much  trouble  in  multiplying  apolo 
gies  for  what, .to  them,,  may  have  the  appearance  of 
keenness  or  severity  in  the  animadversions-  he  has 
hitherto  made,  or  may  hereafter  make,  on  the  prin 
ciples  of  certain  noted  philosophers.  He  considers 
happiness  as  the  end  and  aim  of  our  being  ;  and  he 
thinks  philosophy  valuable  only  so  far  as  it  may  be 
conducive  to  this  end.  Ilurrinn,  happiness  seemeth 
to  him  wholly  unattainable,  except  by  the  means 
that  virtue  and  religion  provide.  Ha  is  therefore 
persuaded,  that  while  employed  in  pleading  the- 
cause  of  virtue,  and  of  true  science,  its  best  auxi 
liary,  he  supports,  in  some  measure,  the  character 
of  a  friend  to  human  kind  ;  and  he  wor.ld  think  his 
right  to  that  glorious  appellation  extremely  question 
able,  if  the  warmth  of  his  zeal  dkl  not  bear  some 
proportion  to  the  importance  of  his  cause.  How 
ever  suspicious  he  may  be  of  his  ability  to  vindi 
cate  the  rights  of  his  fellow-creatures,  he  is  not  sus 
picious  of  his  inclination.  He  feels,  that,  on  such 
a  subject,  he  must  speak  from  the  heart,  01  not 
speak  at  all. — For  the  genius  and  manner  of  his  dis 
course  he  has  no  other  apology  to  offer  :  and  by  e- 
very  person  of  spirit,  candour,  and  benevolence,  he 
is  sure  that  this  apology  will  be  deemed  sufficient. 

As  to  the  principles  and  matter  of  it,  he  is  less 
confident.  These,  though  neither  visionary  nor  un 
important,  may  possibly  be  misunderstood.  He 
therefore  begs  leave  to  urge  a  few  things,  for  the 
further  vindication  and  illustration  of  them.  To  his 
own  mind  they  are  fully  satisfactory  ;  he  hopes  to 
render  them  equally  so  to  every  candid  -reader. 
Happy  !  if  he  should  be  as  successful  in  establish 
ing  conviction,  as  others  have  been  in  subverting 
it., 


CHAP.  I*  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  245 

CHAP.     I. 

Further  remarks  on  the  consistency  of  tlese  pnnci~ 
pies  with  tie  interests  of  Science ,  and  the  Rights 
of  mankind. 

TT  may  possibly  be  objected  to  this  discourse, 
•*•  That  "  it  tends  to  discourage  freedom  of  inquiry, 
"  and  to  promote  implicit  faith." 

But  nothing  is  more  contrary  to  my  design  ;  as 
those  who  attend,  without  prejudice,  to  the  full  **m- 
port  of  what  I  have  advanced  on  the  subject  of  evi 
dence,  will  undoubtedly  pe  rceive.  Let  me  be  per 
mitted  to  repeat,  that  the  truths  in  which  mun  is 
most  concerned  do  not  lie  exceedingly  deep  ;  nor  are 
we  to  estimate  either  their  importance,  or  thc>r  cer- 
tanity,  by  the  length  of  the  line  of  cur  investiga 
tion..  The  evidences  of  the  philosophy  of  human 
nature  are  found  in  our  own  breast  ;  we  need  not 
roam  abroad  in  quest  of  them  ;  the  unlearned  are 
judges  of  them  as  \vell  as  tre  learned.  Ambiguities 
have  arisen,  when  the  feelings  of  the  heart  and  un 
derstanding  were  expressed  in  words  ;  but  the  ffj- 
ings  themselves  were  not  ambiguous.  Let  a  man 
attentively  examine  himself,  with  a  sincere  purpose 
of  discovering  the  truth,  and  without  any  bias  in 
favour  of  particular  theories,  and  he  will  seldom  be 
at  a  Joss  in  regard  to  those  truths,  at  least,  that  are 
most  essential  to  his  happiness  and  duty.  If  men 
must  needs  amuse  themselves  with  metaphysical  in 
vestigation,  let  them  apply  if,  where  it  can  do  no 
harm,  to  the  distinctions  and  logomachies  of  onto 
logy.  In  the  science  of  human  nature  it  cannot  pos 
sibly  do  good,  but  must  of  necessity  do  infinite  mis 
chief.  What  avail  the  obscure  deductions  of  verbal 
argument,  in  illustrating  what  we  sufficiently  know  by 
experience?  or  in  shewing  that  to  be  fictitious  and 
false,  whose  energy  we  must  feel  and  acknowledge 
every  moment  ?  When  therefore  I  find  a  pretended 


246  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III, 

principle  of  human  nature  evinced  by  a  dark  and 
intricate  investigation,  I  am  tempted  to  suspect,  not 
without  reason,  that  its  evidence  is  no  where  to  be 
found  but  in  the  arguments  of  the  theorist  j  and 
these,  when  disguised  by  quaint  distinctions,  and 
ambiguous  language,  it  is  sometimes  hard  to  con 
fute,  even  when  the  heart  recoils  from  the  doctrine 
with  contempt  or  detestation.  If  the  doctrine  be 
true,  it  must  also  be  agreeable  to  experience :  to  ex 
perience,  therefore,  let  the  appeal  be  made  ;  let  the 
circumstances  be  pointed  out,  in  which  the  contro 
verted  sentiment  arises,  or  is  supposed  to  arise. 
This  is  to  act  the  philosopher,  not  the  metaphysi 
cian  ;  the  interpreter  of  nature,  not  the  builder  of 
systems.  But  let  us  consider  the  objection  more 
particularly* 

What  then  do  you  mean  by  that  implicit  faith,  to 
which  you  suppose  these  principles  too  favourable  ? 
Do  you  mean. an  acquiescence  in  the  dictates  of  our 
own  understanding,  or  in  those  of  others  ?  If  the 
former,  I  must  tell  you,  that  such  implicit  faith 
is  the  only  kind  of  belief  which  true  philosophy  re 
commends.  I  have  already  remarked,  that,  while 
man  continues  in  his  present  state,  our  own  intellec 
tual  feelings  are,  and  must  be,  the  standard  of  truth 
to  us.  All  evidence  productive  of  belief,  is  resolv 
able  into  the  evidence  of  consciousness  j  and  comes 
at  last  to  this  point,  I  believe  because  I  believe,  or 
because  the  law  of  my  nature  determines  rne  to  b<?* 
Jieve.  This  belief  may  be  called  implicit  ;  but  it  is 
the  only  rational  belief  of  which  we  are  capable  :  and 
to  say,  that  our  minds  ought  not  to  submit  to  it,  is 
as  absurd  as  to  say,  that  our  bodies  ought  not  to  be 
nourished  with  food.  Revelation  itself  must  be  at 
tended  with  evidence  to  satisfy  consciousness  or 
common  sense  ;  otherwise  it  can  never  be  rationally 
believed.  By  the  evidence  of  the  gospel,  the  ra 
tional  Christian  is  persuaded  that  it  comes  from  God. 
He  acquiesces  in  it  as  truth;  not  because  it  is  recoir- 


T.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  247 

mended  by  others,  but  because  it  satisfies  his  owa 
understanding. 

But  if,  by  implicit  faith,  you  mean,  what  I  think 
is  commonly  meant  by  that  term,  an  unwarrantable 
or  unquestioned  acquiescence  in  the  sentiments  of 
other  men,  I  deny  that  any  part  of  this  discourse 
hath  a  tendency  to  promote  it.  I  never  said,  that 
doctrines  are  to  be  taken  for  granted  without  exami 
nation  ;  though  I  affirmed,  that,  in  regard  to  moral 
doctrines,  a  long  and  intricate  examination  is  neither 
necessary  nor  expedient.  With  moral  truth,  it  is  the 
business  of  every  man  to  be  acquainted  ;  and  there 
fore  the  Deity  has  made  it  level  to  every  capacity. 

Far  be  it  from  a  lover  of  truth  to  discourage  free 
dom  of  iniquiry  !  Man  is  possessed  of  reasoning 
powers  ;  by  means  of  which  he  may  bring  that  with 
in  the  sphere  of  common  sense,  which  was  original 
ly  beyond  it.  Of  these  powers  he  may,  and  ought 
to  avail  himself;  for  many  important  truths  are  not 
-self-evident,  and  our  faculties  were  not  designed  for 
a  state  of  inactivity.  But  neither  were  they  design 
ed  to  be  employed  in  fruitless  or  dangerous  investi 
gation.  Our  knowledge  and  capacity  are  limited  ;  it 
is  fit  and  necessary  they  should  be  so  :  we  need  not 
wandei  into  forbidden  paths,  or  attempt  to  penetrate 
inaccessible  regions,  in  quest  of  employment  ;  the 
cultivation  of  useful  and  practical  science,  the  j  >>~ 
provement  of  arts,  and  the  indispensable  duties  of 
life,  will  furnish  ample  scope  to  all  the  exertions  of 
human  genius.  Surely  that  man  is  my  friend,  who 
dissuades  me  from  attempting  what  I  cannot  perform, 
ncr  even  attempt  without  danger.  And  is  not  he  a 
friend  to  science  and  mankind,  who  endeavours  to 
discourage  fallacious  and  unprofitable  speculation, 
and  to  propose  a  criterion  by  which  it  may  be  known 
3nd  avoided  ? 

But  if  reasoning  ought  not  to  be  carried  beyond  2 
certain  boundary,  and  if  it  is  the  authority  of  com 
mon  cense  that  nxeth  this  boundary,  and  if  it  be  pos- 


ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  IU. 

sible  to  mistake  a  prejudice  for  a  principle  of  com 
mon  sense,  how  (it  may  be  saicQ  are  prejudices  to 
be  detected  ?  At  this  rate,  a  man  has  nothing  to 
do,  but  to  call  his  prejudice  a  dictate  of  common 
sense,  and  then  it  is  established  in  perfect  security, 
beyond  the  reach  of  argument.  Does  not  this  fur 
nish  a  pretence  for  limiting  the  freedom  of  inquiry  ? 
—-Having  already  said  a  great  deal  in  answer  to  the 
first  part  of  this  question,  I  need  not  now  say  much 
in  answer  to  the  last.  I  shall  only  ask,  on  the  o- 
ther  hand,  what  method  of  reasoning  is  the  proper- 
est  for  overcoming  the  prejudices  of  an  obstinate 
man  ?  Are  we  to  wrangle  with  him  in  infinitum, 
without  ever  arriving  at  any  fixed  principle  ?  That 
surely  is  not  the  way  to  illustrate  truth,  or  rectify 
error.  Do  we  mean  to  ascertain  the  importance  of 
our  arguments  by  their  number,  and  to  pronounce 
that  the  better  -cause  whose  champion  gives  the  last 
word?  This,  I  fear,  would  not  mend  the  matter. 
Suppose  our  antagonist  should  deny  a  self-evident 
truth,  or  refuse  his  assent  to  an  intuitive  probabili 
ty  ;  must  we  not  refer  him  to  the  common  sense  of 
mankind  ?  If  we  do  not,  we  must  either  hold  our 
peace,  or  have  recourse  to  sophistry  :  for  when  a 
principle  comes  to  be  intuitively  true  or  false,  all  le 
gitimate  reasoning  is  at  an  end,  and  ail  further 
reasoning  impertinent.  To  the  common  sense  of 
mankind  we  must  therefore  refer  him  sooner  or 
latter  ;  and  if  he  continue  obstinate,  we  must  leave 
him.  Is  it  not  then  of  consequence  to  truth,  and 
may  it  not  serve  to  prevent  many  a  sophistical  ar 
gument,  and  unprofitable  logomachy,  that  we  have 
it  continually  in  view,  that  common  sense  is  the 
standard  of  truth  ?  a  maxim,  which  men  are  not  al 
ways  disposed  to  admit  in  its  full  latitude,  and 
which,  in  the  heat  and  hurry  of  dispute,  they  are 
upt  to  overlook  altogether.  Some  men  will  always 
be  found,  who  think  the  most  absurd  prejudices 
founded  in  common  sense.  Reasonable  men  never 
scruple  to  submit  their  prejudices  or  principles  to 


CHAP.  I.  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  249 

examination  :  but  if  that  examination  turn  to  no  ac 
count,  or  if  it  turn  to  a  bad  account  ;  if  it  only  puz 
zle  where  it  ought  to  convince,  and  darken  what  it 
-ought  to  illustrate  ;  if  it  recommend  impracticable 
modes  of  action,  or  inconceivable  modes  of  thought  ; 
— I  must  confess  I  cannot  perceive  the  use  of  it. 
This  is  the  only  kind  of  reasoning  that  I  mean  to  dis 
courage.  It  is  this  kind  of  reasoning  that  has  pro 
ved  so  fatal  to  the  abstract  sciences.  In  it  all  our 
sceptical  systems  are  founded  ;  of  it  they  consist  j- 
and  by  it  they  are  supported*  Till  the  abstract 
sciences  be  cleared  of  this  kind  of  reasoning,  they 
deserve  not  the  name  of  philosophy  :  they  may  a- 
rnuse  a  weak  and  turbulent  mind,  and  render  it  still 
weaker  and  more  turbulent  ;  but  they  cannot  con 
vey  any  real  instruction  :  they  may  undermine  the 
foundations  of  virtue  and  science  -9  but  they  cannot 
illustrate  a  single  truth,  nor  establish  one  principle 
of  importance,  nor  improve  the  mind  of  man  in  any 
respect  whatsoever. 

By  some  it  may  be  thought  an  objection  ;o  the 
principles  of  this  essay,  "  That  they  seem  to  recom- 
"  mend  a  method  of  confutation  which  is  not  strict- 
*'  ly  according  to  log'ic,  and  do  actually  contradict 
*'  some  of  the  established  laws  of  that  science." 

It  will  readily  be  acknowledged,  that  many  of  the 
maxims  of  the  school-logic  are  founded  in  truth  and 
nature,  and  have  so  long  obtained  universal  approba 
tion,  that  they  are  now  become  proverbial  in  philo 
sophy.  Many  of  its  rules  and  distinctions  are  ex 
tremely  useful,  not  so  much  for  strengthening  the 
jadgment,as  for  enabling  the  disputant  quickly  to  com 
prehend,  and  perspicuously  to  express,  in  what  the 
force  or  fallacy  of  an  argument  consists.  The  ground 
work  of  this  science,  the  Logic  of  Aristotle,  if 
we  may  judge  of  the  whole  by  the  part  now  ex 
tant,  is  one  of  the  most  successful  and  most  extraor 
dinary  effects  of  philosophic  genius  that  ever  appear 
ed  in  the  world.  And  yet,  if  we  consider  this  sci- 

X2 


ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  PART    111. 

ence,  with  regard  to  its  design  and  consequences,  we 
shall  perhaps  see  reason  to  think,  that  a  strict  ob- 
bervance  of  its  laws  is  not  always  necessary  to  the 
discovery  of  truth. 

It  was  originally  intended  as  a  help  to  discourse  a- 
mong  a  talkative  and   sprightly  people.     The   con 
stitution  of  Athens    made    public  speaking   of  great 
importance,  and  almost  a  certain  road  to  preferment 
or  distinction.     This  was  also    in  some  measure  the 
case  at  Rome  j  but  the  Romans  were  more  reserved, 
and  did  uot,  till  about  the   time  of   Cicero,   think  of 
i educing  conversation   or    public    breaking  to    rule. 
The  vivacity  of  the  Athenians,  euccuraged  by  their 
democratical  spirit,  made   them  fond  of  disputes    and 
declamations,  which  were  often   carried  on    without 
any  view  to  discover    truth,   but  merely    to  gratify 
humour,  give  employment  to  the  tongue,  and  amuse 
a  vacant  hour.     Some  of  the    dialogues  of  Plato  are 
to  be  considered  in  this  light,    rather  as  exercises  iu 
declamation,  than  serious  disquisitions  in  philosophy. 
It  is  true,  this  is  not  the  only  merit  even  of  such  of 
them  as  seem  the  least  considerable.     If  we  are  of 
ten  dissatisfied    with  his    doctrine  ;  if  we  have  little 
curiosity  to  learn  the  characters  and  manners  of  that 
age.  whereof  he   has  given  so   natural  a  representa 
tion  j  we  must  yet  acknowledge,    that  as  models  for 
elegance  and  simplicity  of  composition,    the  most  in. 
considerable  of  Plato's  dialogues  are  very   useful  and 
ingenious.      His  speakers   often  compliment  each  o- 
ther  on  the  beauty  of  their  style    even  when  there  is 
nothing  very  striking  in  the   sentiment  *.      If  there 
fore,  we    would  form   a  just    estimate   of  Plato,  we 
must  regard  him  not  only  as    a  philosopher,  but  also 
as  a  rhetorician  ;   for    it  is  evident  he  was  ambitious 
to  excel  in  both   characters.      But    it  appears,  not  to 
have  been  his  opinion,  that  the  practice  of  extempo 
rary  speaking  and  disputing,  so  frequent  in   his  time 

*  See  the  Symposium.   Platonis   opera,  vol.  3.  p.  198. 
Bdit.  Saxran. 


CHAP.  I.        AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.          251 

had  any  direct  tendency  to  promote  the  investigation 
of  truth,  or  the  acquisition  of  wisdom.  The  Lace 
demonians,  the  most  reserved  and  most  silent  people 
in  Greece,  and  who  made  the  least  pretensions  to  a 
literary  character,  were,  in  his  judgment,  a  nation 
not  only  of  the  wisest  men,  but  of  the  greatest  phi 
losophers.  Their  words  were  few,  their  address 
not  without  rusticity  ;  but  the  meanest  of  them 
was  able,  by  a  single  expression,  dextrously  aimed, 
and  seasonably  introduced,  to  make  the  stranger 
with  whom  he  conversed  appear  no  wiser  than  a 
child*. 

The  Athenians,  accustomed  to  reduce  every  thing. 
to  art,  and  among  whom  the  spirit  of  science  was 
more  prevalent  than  in  any  other  nation  ancient  or 
modern,  had  contrived  a  kind  of  technical  logic  long 
before  the  days  of  Aristotle.  Their  sophists  taught 
it  in  conjunction  with  rhetorics  and  philosophy. 
But  Aristotle  brought  it  to  perfection,  and  seems  to 
have  been  the  first  who  professedly  disjoined  it  from, 
the  other  arts  and  sciences.  On  his  logic  was  found 
ed  that  of  the  school-men.  But  they,  like  other 
commentators,  often  misunderstood  the  text,  and  often 
perverted  it  to  the  purpose  of  a  favourite  system. 
They  differed  from  one  another  in  their  notions  of 
Aristotle's  doctrine,  ranged  themselves  into  sects 
and  parties  ;  and,  instead  of  explaining  the  princi 
ples  of  their  master,  made  it  their  sole  business  to 
comment  upon  one  another.  Now  and  then  men  of 
learning  arose,  who  endeavoured  to  revive  the  true 

*  E/  r/V  fcOlxo/  Aax.il  OL  i  uorf  coy   TU    $OLVKOTKTO  vvyyi- 
r?a9a/,  r<x.  f/.\v  TTOKKQL  tv  TO?C  xoyoi$    ivfrxrii  avrcy 

TIVOL    $OLtyOjU.iVOV,    fGTilTOL    GZTGV     OLV     TV^Cl      TUV 


<pamt/0cu  roy  nfqttttU&JffttkQl  TTOLI- 


Socrates  in  Plat.  Protogora,  voL  I,/,  342.. 
X 


*53  AN  ESSAY  ON 'TRUTH.  PART  IIT. 

Peripatetic  philosophy  ;  but  their  efforts,  instead 
of  proving  successful,  served  only  to  provoke  perse 
cution  ;  and  at  length  the  scholastic  system  grew  so 
corrupt,  and  at  the  same  time  so  enormous  in  magni 
tude,  that  it  became  an  insuperable  incumbrance  to 
the  understanding,  and  contributed  not  a  little  to 
perpetuate  the  ignorance  and  barbarism  of  those  times. 
The  chief  aim  of  the  old  logic,  even  in  its  purest 
form,  (so  far  at  least  as  it  was  a  practical  science^, 
was  to  render  men  expert  in  arguing  readily  on  eith 
er  side  of  any  question.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  em 
ploy  our  faculties  in  searching  after  truth,  and  a 
very  different  thing  to  employ  them  equally  in  de 
fence  of  truth  and  of  error  ;  and  the  same  modifica 
tion  of  intellect  that  fits  a  man  for  the  one,  will  by 
no  means  qualify  him  for  the  other.  Nay,  if  I  mis 
take  nor,  the  talents  that  fit  us  for  discovering  truth 
are  rather  hurt  than  improved  by  the  practice  of 
sophistry.  To  argue  against  one's  own  conviction, 
must  always  have  a  bad  effect  on  the  heart,  and  ren 
der  one  more  indifferent  about  the  truth,  and  per 
haps  more  incapable  of  perceiving  it  *. 

To  dispute  readily  on  either  side  of  any  question, 
is  admired  by  some  as  a  very  high  accomplishment : 
but  it  is  what  any  person  of  moderate  abilities  may 
easily  acquire  by  a  little  practice.  Perhaps  moderate 
abilities  are  the  most  favourable  to  the  acquisition  of 
this  talent.  Sensibility  and  penetration,  the  insepa 
rable  attendants,  or  rather  the  most  essential  parts 
of  true  genius,  qualify  a  man  for  discovering  truth 
with  little  labour  of  investigation  ;  and  at  the  same 
time  interest  hiiB  so  deeply  in  it,  that  he  cannot  bear 
to  turn  his  view  to  the  other  side  of  the  question. 
Thus  he  never  employs  himself  in  devising  argu- 

*  See  the  story  of  Pertinax  in  the  Rambler,  No.  95  j 
Y/here  the  effects  of  habitual  disputation ,  in  perverting  the 
Judgments,  and  vitiating  the  heart,  are  illustrated  with  the 
it'.mcst  energy  and  elegance. 


CHAP.  I.  AN  ESSAY  OH  TRUTH,  253 

ments  ;  and  therefore  seldom  arrives  at  any  profi 
ciency  in  that  exercise.  But  the  man  of  slow  intel 
lect  and  dull  imagination  advances  step  by  step  in  his 
enquiries,  without  any  keenness  of  sentiment,,  or  ar 
dor  of  fancy,  to  distract  his  attention  j  and  without 
that  instantaneous  anticipation  of  consequences,  that 
leads  the-  man  of  genius  to  the  conclusion,  even  be 
fore  he  has  examined  all  the  intermediate  relations. 
Hence  he  naturally  acquires  a  talent  for  minute  ob 
servation,  and  for  a  patient  examination  or  circum 
stances  ;  at  the  same  time  that  his  insensibility  pre 
vents  his  interesting  himself  warmly  on  either  side, 
and  leaves  him  leisure  to  attend  equally  to  his  own 
arguments,  and  to  those  of  the  antagonist.  This  gives 
him  eminent  superiority  in  a  dispute,  and  fits  him, 
not  indeed  for  discovering  truth,  but  for  baffling  an 
adversary  and  supporting  a  system* 

I  have  been  told  that  Newton,  the  first  time  he 
read  Euclid's  Elements,  perceived  instantly,  and  al 
most  intuitively,  the  truth  of  the  several  pioposU 
tions,  before  he  consulted  the  proof*  Such  vivacity 
and  strength  of  judgment  are  extraordinary  :  and  in 
deed,  in  the  case  of  mathematical  and  physical  truths, 
we  are  seldom  to  expect  this  instantaneous  anticipa 
tion  of  consequences,  even  from  men  of  more  than 
moderate  talents.  But  in  moral  subjects,  and  in  most 
of  the  matters  that  are  debated  in  conversation,  there 
is  rarely  any  need  of  comparing  a  great  number  of 
intermediate  relations  :  every  person  of  sound  judg 
ment  sees  the  truth  at  once  :  or,  if  he  does  not,  it  is 
owing  to  his  ignorance  of  some  facts  or  circumstan 
ces,  which  may  be  soon  learned  from  a  plain  narra 
tive,  but  which  are  disguised  and  confounded  more 
and  more  by  wrangling  and  contradiction.  If  there 
be  no  means  of  clearing  the  disputed  facts  or  difficul 
ties,  it  would  not,  I  presume,  be  imprudent  to  drop 
the  subject,  and  talk  of  something  else. 

It  .is  pleasant  enough  to  hear  the  habitual  wrang 
ler  endeavouring  to  justify  his  conduct  by  a  pretence 


2fJ4  AN  ESSAY. ON  TRUTH.  PART    III. 

of  zeal  for  the  truth.  It  is  not  the  love  of  truth, 
"but  of  victory,  that  engages  him  in  disputation.  I 
have  witnessed  many  contests  of  this  kind  ;  but  have 
seldom  seen  them  lead,  or  even  tend  to  any  useful 
discovery.  Where  ostentation,  self-conceit.,  or  love 
of  paradox,  are  not  concerned,  they  commonly  arise 
from  some  verbal  ambiguity,  or  from  the  misconcep 
tion  of  some  fact,  which  both  parties  taking  it  for 
granted  that  they  perfectly  understand,  are  at  no 
pains  to  ascertain  :  and,  when  once  begun,  are,  by 
the  vanity  or  obstinacy  of  the  speakers,  or  perhaps 
by  their  mere  love  of  speaking,  continued,  till  acci 
dent  put  an  end  to  them  by  silencing  the  parties,  ra 
ther  than  reconciling  their  opinions.  I  once  saw  a 
number  of  persons,  neither  unlearned  nor  ill-bred, 
meet  together  to  pass  a  social  evening.  As  ill-luck 
would  have  it,  a  dispute  arose  about  the  propriety  of 
a  certain  manoeuvre  at  quadrille,  in  which  some  of 
the  company  had  been  interested  the  night  before. 
Two  parties  of  disputants  were  immediately  formed  ; 
and  the  matter  was  warmly  argued  from  six  o'clock 
till  midnight,  when  the  company  broke  up.  Being 
no  adept  in  cards,  I  could  not  enter  into  the  merits 
of  the  cause,  nor  take  any  part  in  the  controversy  ; 
but  I  observed,  that  each  of  the  speakers  persisted 
to  the  last  in  the  opinion  he  took  up  at  the  begin 
ning,  in  which  he  seemed  to  be  rather  confirmed  than 
staggered  by  the  arguments  that  had  been  urged  in 
opposition. — With  such  enormous  waste  of  time,  with 
such  vile  prostitution  of  reason  and  speech,  with 
such  wanton  indifference  to  thepleasures  of  friendship, 
all  disputes  are  not  attended  ;  but  most  of  them,  if 
I  mistake  not,  will  be  found  to  be  equally  unprofit 
able. 

I  grant,  that  much  of  our  knowledge  is  gathered 
from  our  intercourse  with  one  another}  but  I  can 
not  think  that  we  are  greatly  indebted  to  the  argu 
mentative  part  of  conversation  ;  and  nobody  will  say, 
that  the  most  disputatious  companions  are  either 


CHAP.  I.  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH. 

the  most  agreeable  or  the  most  instructive.  For  my 
own  part,  I  have  always  found  those  to  be  the  most 
delightful  and  most  improving  conversations,  in 
which  there  was  the  least  contradiction  ;  every  per 
son  entertaining  the  utmost  possible  respect,  both  for 
the  judgment,  and  for  the  veracity  of  his  associate  ; 
and  none  assuming  any  of  those  dictatorial  airs, 
which  are  so  offensive  to  the  lovers  of  liberty,  mo 
desty  and  friendship — If  a  catalogue  were  to  be 
made  of  all  the  truths  that  have  been  discovered  by 
wrangling  in  company,  or  by  solemn  disputations  in 
the  schools,  I  believe  it  would  appear,  that  the  con 
tending  parties  might  have  been  employed  as  advan 
tageously  to  mankind,  and  much  more  so  to  them 
selves,  in  whipping  a  top,  or  brandishing  a  rattle. 

The  extravagant  fondness  of  the  Stoics  for  logical 
quibbles,  is  one  of  the  most  disagreeable  peculiari 
ties  in  the  writings  of  that  sect.  Every  body  must 
have  been  disgusted  with  it  in  reading  some  passa 
ges  of  the  conversations  of  Epictetus,  preserved  by 
Arrian  ;  and  must  be  satisfied,  that  it  tended  rather 
to  weaken  and  bewilder,  than  to  improve  the  under 
standing.  One  could  hardly  believe  to  what  ridicu 
lous  excess  they  carried  it.  There  was  a  famous 
problem  among  them  called  the  Pseudomenos,  which 
waa  to  this  purpose  :  "  When  a  man  says,  I  lie,  does 
"  he  lie,  or  does  he  not  ?  If  he  lies,  he  speaks  truth  j. 
"  if  he  speaks  truth,  he  lies."  Many  were  the  books 
that  their  philosophers  wrote,  in  order  to  solve  this 
wonderful  problem.  Chrysippus  favoured  the  world 
with  no  fewer  than  six  ;  and  Phiietas  studied  him 
self  to  death  in  his  attempts  to  solve  it.  Epictetus, 
whose  good  sense  often  triumphs  over  the  extrava 
gance  of  Stoicism,  justly  ridicules  this  logical  phren- 
z.y  *. 

Socrates  made  little  account  of  the  subtleties  of 
logic  ;  being  more  solicitous  to  instruct  others^  tham 

*  Arrian,  lib.  ii.  cap.  17. 


AN  ESSAT  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III. 

to  distinguish  himself  *.  He  inferred  his  doctrine 
from  the  concessions  of  those  with  whom  he  convers 
ed  ;  so  that  he  left  no  room  for  dispute,  as  the  adver 
sary  could  not  contradict  him,  without  contradicting 
himself.  And  yet  to  Socrates,  philosophy  is  perhaps 
more  indebted  than  to  any  other  person  whatever. 

We  have  therefore  no  reason  to  think,  that  truth 
is  discoverable  by  those  means  only  which  the  tech 
nical  logic  prescribes.  Aristotle  knew  the  theory 
both  of  sophisms  and  syllogisms,  better  than  any  o- 
ther  man  ;  yet  Aristotle  himself  is  sometimes  im 
posed  on  by  sophisms  of  his  own  invention  §.  And 
it  is  remarkable,  that  his  moral,  rhetorical,  and  poli 
tical  writings,  in  which  his  own  excellent  judgment 
is  little  warped  by  logical  subtleties,  are  far  the  most 
useful,  and,  in  point  of  sound  reasoning,  the  most 
unexceptionable  part  of  his  philosophy. 

The  apparent  tendency  of  the  school-logic  is,  to 
render  men  disputatious  and  sceptical,  adepts  in  the 
knowledge  of  words,  but  inattentive  to  fact  and  ex 
perience.  It  makes  them  fonder  of  speaking  than 
thinking,  and  therefore  strangers  to  themselves  ;  so 
licitous  chiefly  about  rule?,  names,  and  distinctions, 
and  therefore  leaves  them  neither  leisure  nor  incli 
nation  for  the  study  of  life  and  manners.  In  a  word, 
it  makes  them  more  ambitious  to  distinguish  them 
selves  as  the  partisans  of  a  dogmatist,  than  as  enquir 
ers  after  truth.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  far  a  man  of 
this  temper  is  qualified  to  make  discoveries  in  know 
ledge.  To  such  a  rnan,  indeed,  the  name  of  truth 
is  only  a  pretence  :  he  neither  is,  nor  can  be,  much 

*  Supra,  part  2.  chap.  2.  sect.  1. 

$  Thus  he  is  said  to  have  proved  the  earth  to  be  the 
centre  of  the  universe,  by  the  following  sophism. — "  Hea~ 
"  vy  bodies  naturally  tend  to  the  centre  of  the  universe  j 
"  we  know  by  experience,  that  heavy  bodies  tend  to  the 
**  centre  of  the  earth  j  therefore  the  centre  of  the  earth  is 
**  the  same  with  that  of  the  universe."— Which  is  what 
the  logicians  call  peiiiio  frincipii,  or  begging  the 


CHAP.  I.  AN  ESSAY  Otf    TRUTH.  157 

interested  in  the  solidity  or  importance  of  his  tenets; 
it  is  enough  if  he  can  render  them  plausible  ;  nay,  it 
is  enough  if  he  can  silence  his  adversary  by  any 
means.  The  captious  turn  of  an  habitual  wrangler, 
deadens  the  understanding,  sours  the  temper,  <md  har 
dens  the  heart  :  by  rendering  the  mind  suspicions, 
and  attentive  to  trifles,  it  weakens  the  sagacity  of 
instinct,  and  extinguishes  the  fire  of  imagination  ;  it 
transforms  conversation  i  ;to  a  state  of  warfare,  and 
restrains  those  lively  sallies  of  fancy,  so  effectual  in 
promoting  good  humour  and  good-will,  which,  tho' 
often  erroneous,  are  a  thous;md  times  more  valuable 
than  the  dull  correctness  of  a  mood-  and-figure  dis 
ciplinarian. 

One  of  the  first  maxims  of  the  school-logic  is, 
That  nothing  is  to  be  bt-lieved,  but  what  we  can  give 
a  reason  for  believing ;  a  maxim  destructive  of  all 
truth  and  science,  as  hath  been  fully  shown  in  the 
former  part  of  this  discourse.  We  must  not,  how 
ever,  lay  this  maxim  to  the  charge  of  the  ancient  lo 
gic.  Dts  CARTES,  and  the  modern  sceptics,  got  it 
from  the  schoolmen,  who  forged  it  out  of  some  pas 
sages  of  Aris'otle  misunderstood.  The  philosopher 
said  indeed,  that  all  investigation  should  begin  with 
doubt ;  but  this  doubt  is  to  remain  only  till  the  un 
derstanding  be  convinced  ;  which,  in  Aristotle's  judg 
ment,  may  be  effected  by  intuitive  evidence  as  well 
as  by  argumentative.  The  doctrine  we  have  been 
endeavouring  to  illustrate,  tends  not  to  encourage  any 
prejudices,  or  any  opinions,  unfriendly  to  truth  or 
virtue  :  its  only  aim  is,  to  establish  the  authority  of 
those  instinctive  principles  of  conviction  and  assent, 
which  the  rational  part  of  mankind  have  acknow 
ledged  in  all  ages,  and  which  the  condition  of  man, 
in  respect  both  of  action  and  intelligence,  renders  it 
absurd  not  to  acknowledge. — We  cannot  suppose, 
that  the  human  mind,  unlike  to  all  other  natural  sy 
stems,  is  made  up  of  incompatible  principles;  in  it, 
as  in  all  the  rest,  there  must  be  unity  of  design  ;  and 


258  AN  ESSAY  Otf  TRUTH.  PART    III. 

therefore  the  principles  of  human  belief,  and  of  hu 
man  action,  must  have  one  and  the  same  tendency. 
But  many  of  our  modern  philosophers  teach  a  dif 
ferent  doctrine ;  endeavouring  to  persuade  themselves, 
and  others,  that  they  otighc  not  to  believe  what  they 
cannot  possibly  disbelieve  ;  and  that  those  actions 
may  be  absurd,  and  contrary  to  truth,  the  perfor 
mance  of  which  is  necessary  to  our  very  existence. 
If  they  will  nave  it,  that  this  is  philosophy,  I  shall 
not  dispute  about  the  word  ;  but  I  insist  on  it,  that 
ail  such  philosophy  is  no  better  than  pedantic  non 
sense  ;  and  that,  if  a  man  were  to  write  a  book,  to 
prove,  that  fire  is  the  element  in  which  we  ought  to 
live,  he  would  not  act  more  absurdly,  than  some  me 
taphysicians  of  these  times  would  be  thought  to  have 
acted,  if  their  works  were  understood,  and  rated  ac 
cording  to  their  intrinsic  merit. 

That  every  thing  may  be  made  matter  of  dispute, 
is  another  favourite  maxim  of  the  school-logic  ;  and 
it  would  not  be  easy  to  devise  one  more  detrimental 
to  true  science.  What  a  strange  propensity  these 
doctors  have  had  to  disputation  !  One  would  think, 
that,  in  their  judgment,  "  the  chief  end  of  man  is, 
"  to  contradict  his  neighbour,  and  wrangle  with  him 
"  for  ever."  To  attempt  a  proof  of  what  I  know  to 
J>*  false,  and  a  confutation  of  what  I  know  to  be 
true,  is  an  exercise  from  which  1  can  never  expect 
CK"  vantage  so  long  as  I  deem  rationality  a  blessing. 
I  never  heard  it  prescribed  as  a  recipe  for  strength 
ening  the  si^ht,  to  keep  constantly  blindfolded  in  the 
4ay-time,  and  put  on  spectacles  when  we  go  to  sleep  ; 
nor  can  I  imagine  how  the  ear  of  a  musician  could 
be  improve...  by  his  playing  frequently  on  an  ill-tuned 
fiddle.  And  yet  the  school-men  seem  to  have 
thought,  that  the  more  we  shut  our  eyes  against  the 
truth,  we  shall  the  more  distinctly  perceive  it  ^  and 
that  the  oftener  we  practise  falsehood,  we  shall  be 
the  more  sagacious  in  detecting,  and  the  more  hearty 
in  abhorring  it.  To  suppose,  that  we  may  make 


CHAP.    I.  AN    ESSAY   ON    TRUTH.  2J9 

every  thing  matter  of  dispute,  is  to  suppose,  that  we 
can  account  for  every  thing.  Alas  !  in  most  cases, 
to  feel  and  believe,  is  all  we  have  to  do,  or  can  do. 
Destined  for  action  rather  than  for  knowledge,  and 
governed  more  by  instinct  than  by  reason,  we  can 
extend  our  investigations,  especially  with  regard  to 
ourselves,  but  a  very  little  way.  And,  alter  all, 
when  we  acquiesce  with  implicit  confidence  in  the 
dictates  of  our  nature,  where  is  the  harm  or  the 
danger  of  such  a  conduct  ?  Is  our  life  shortened,  or 
health  injured  by  it  ?  No.  Are  our  judgments  per 
verted,  or  our  hearts  corrupted  ?  No.  Is  our  happi 
ness  impaired,  or  the  sphere  of  our  gratification  con 
tracted  ?  Quite  the  contrary.  Have  we  less  leisure 
for  attending  to  the  duties  of  life,  and  for  adorning 
our  minds  with  useful  and  elegant  literature  ?  We 
have  evidently  more  time  left  for  those  purposes. 
Why  then  so  much  logic  ?  so  many  disputes,  and  so 
many  theories,  about  the  first  philosophy  ?  Rather 
than  in  disguising  falsehood,  and  labouring  to  sub 
vert  the  foundations  of  truth,  why  do  we  not,  with 
humility  and  candour,  employ  our  faculties  in  the 
attainment  of  plain,  practical,  and  useful  knowledge  ? 
The  consequences  of  submit  ting  every  sentiment 
and  principle  to  the  test  of  reasoning,  have  been  con 
sidered  already.  This  practice  has,  in  every  age, 
tended  much  to  confound  science,  to  pi  event  the  de 
tection  of  error,  and  Cinay  we  not  add  ?)  to  debase 
the  human  understanding.  For,  have  we  not  seen 
real  genius,  under  the  influence  of  a  disputatious 
spirit,  derived  from  nature,  fashion,  or  education, 
evaporate  in  subtlety,  sophistry,  and  vain  refinement  ? 
Lucretius,  Cicero,  and  Des  Cartes,  might  be  men 
tioned  as  examples.  And  it  will  be  matter  of  last 
ing  regret  in  the  republic  of  letters,  that  a  greater 
than  the  greatest  of  these,  I  mean 'John  Milton,  had 
the  misfortune  to  be  borne  in  an  age  when  the  study 
of  scholastic  theology  was  deemed  an  essential  part 
of  intellectual  discipline. 

Y 


2()0  AN  ESSAY  QN  TRUTH.  PART    III. 

It  is  either  affectation,  or  false  modesty,  that  makes 
men  say  they  know  nothing  with  certainty.  Man's 
knowledge,  indeed,  compared  with  that  of  superior 
beings,  may  be  very  inconsiderable  ;  and  compared 
with  that  of  The  Supreme,  is  "  as  nothing  and  va- 
"  nity  :"  and  it  is  true,  that  we  are  daily  puzzled  in 
attempting  to  account  for  the  most  familiar  appear 
ances.  But  it  is  true,  notwithstanding,  that  we  do 
know,  and  cannot  possibly  doubt  of  our  knowing, 
some  things  with  certainty.  And 

"  Let  school-taught  pride  dissemble  all  it  can, 
"  These  little  things  are  great  to  little  man."  * 

To  be  vain  of  any  attainment,  is  presumption  and 
folly :  but  to  think  every  thing  disputable,  is  a  proof 
of  a  weak  mind  and  captious  temper.  And  however 
sceptics  may  boast  of  their  modesty,  in  disclaiming 
all  pretensions  to  certain  knowledge,  I  would  appeal 
to  the  man  of  candour,  whether  they  or  we  seem  to 
possess  least  of  that  virtue  ; — they,  who  suppose,  that 
they  can  raise  insurmountable  objections  in  every 
subject ;  or  we,  who  believe,  that  our  Maker  has 
permitted  us  to  know  with  certainty  some  few 
things  ? 

In  opposition  to  this  practice  of  making  every 
thing  matter  of  dispute,  we  have  endeavoured  to 
show,  that  the  instinctive  suggestions  of  common 
sense  are  the  ultimate  standard  of  truth  to  man  ;  that 
\vhatever  contradicts  them  is  contrary  to  fact,  and 
therefore  false  ;  that  to  suppose  them  cognisable  by 
reason,  is  to  suppose  truth  as  variable  as  the  intel 
lectual,  or  as  the  argumentative,  abilities  of  men  j 
and  that  it  is  an  abuse  of  reason,  and  tends  to  the 
subversion  of  science,  to  call  in  question  the  authen 
ticity  of  our  natural  feelings,  and  of  the  natural  sug 
gestions  of  the  human  understanding. 

*  Goldsmith's  Traveller, 


CHAP.  JI.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  i6'l 

That  science  never  prospered  while  the.  old  logic 
continued  in  fashion,  is  undeniable.  Lord  Verulam 
was  one  of  the  first  who  brought  it  into  disrepute  ; 
and  proposed  a  different  metho  A  of  investigating  truth,, 
namely,  that  the  appearances  of  nature  should  be  care 
fully  observed,  and  instead  of  facts  being  wrested  to 
make  them  fall  in  with  theory,  that  theory  should 
be  cautiously  inferred  from  facts,  and  from  them  only. 
The  event  has  fully  proved,  that  our  great  philoso 
pher  was  in  the  right :  for  science  has  made  more 
progress  since  his  time,  and  by  his  method,  than  for 
a  thousand  years  before.  The  court  of  Rome  well 
knew  the  importance  of  the  school-logic  in  support 
ing  their  authority  ;  they  knew  it  could  be  employed 
more  successfully  in  disguising  error,  than  in  vindi 
cating  truth  :  and  PufFendorff  scruples  not  to  affirm, 
that  they  patronised  it  for  this  very  reason  *.  Let 
it  not  then  be  urged,  as  an  objection  to  this  discourse, 
that  it  recommends  a  method  of  confutation  which  is 
not  strictly  logical.  It  is  enough  for  me,  that  the 
method  here  recommended  is  agreeable  to  good  sense 
and  sound  philosophy,  and  to  the  general  notions  and- 
practices  of  men. 

CHAP.     II. 

Tie    subject    continued.       Estimate    of  Metaphysic* 
Causes  'J  the  Degeneracy  of  Moral  Science. 

HPHE  reader  has  no  doubt  observed,  that  I  have 
•*•  frequently  used  the  term  metapbysic,  as  if  it  im 
plied  something  worthy  of  contempt  or  censure. 
That  no  lover  of  science  may  be  offended,  I  shall 
now  account  for  this  ;  by  explaining  the  nature  of 
that  metaphysic  which  1  conceive  to  be  repugn  ait  to 
true  philosophy,  though  it  has  often  assumed  the 
name;  and  which,,  therefore,  in  my  judgment,  the 
friends  of  truth  ought  solicitously  to  guard  against* 

*  De  Monarchia  Pontificis  Romani,  cap.  34v 
Y  2 


262  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III. 

This  explanation  will  lead  to  some  remarks  that  may 
perhaps  throw  additional  light  on  the  present  sub 
ject. 

Aristotle  bequeathed  by  legacy  his  writings  to 
Theophrastus  ;  who  left  them  together  with  his 
own,  to  Neleus  of  Scepsis.  The  posterity  of  Ne- 
leus,  being  illiterate  met),  kept  them  for  some  time 
locked  up  ;  but  afterwards  hearing,  that  the  king  of 
the  country  was  making  a  general  search  for  books 
to  furnish  his  library  at  Pergamus-,  they  hid  them  in 
a  hole  underground  ,  where  they  lay  for  many  years, 
and  suffered  much  from  worms  and  dampness,  At 
last,  however,  they  were  sold  to  one  Apeilicon,  who 
caused  them  to  be  copied  cut ;  and,  having  (accord- 
Ing  £o  btraboj  a  greater  passion  for  books  than  for 
knowledge,  ordered  the  transcribers  to  supply  the 
chasms  from  their  own  invention.  When  Sylla 
took  Athens,  he  seized  on  Apeliicon's  library,  and 
carried  it  to  Rome.  Here  the  books  of  Aristo 
tle  were  revised,  by  Tyrannic  the  grammarian,  and 
afterwards  by  Andronicus  of  Rhodes,  a  Peripatetic 
philosopher,  who  published  the  first  complete  edi 
tion  of  them  *.  To  fourteen  of  these  books,  \vhich 
it  seems  had  no  general  title,  Andronicus  prefixed 
the"  words,  Ta  meta  ta  physica  f,  that  is,  the  books 
posterior*  to  tie  physics  ;  either  because,  in  the  or 
der  of  the  former  arrangement,  they  happened  to  be 
placed,  or  because  the  editor  meant  that  they  should 
be  studied,  next  after  the  physics.  This  is  said  to 
be  the  origin  of  the  word  l\ietaphysic. 

The  subject  of  these  fourteen  books  is  mis 
cellaneous  :  yet  the  Peripatetics  seem  to  have  con 
sidered  them  as  constituting  but  one  branch  of 
science  ;  the  place  of  which  in  their  system  may  be 
thus  conceived.  All  philosophy  is  either  specula 
tive  or  practical.  The  practical  regulates  the  moral 

*  Strabo,  p.  609.     Paris  edit.  1620.     Plut.  Sylla. 
j*  Ta  fJLtroi  ra  fvma. 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  263 

and  intellectual  operations  of  men,  and  therefore 
comprehends  ethics  and  logic.  The  speculative  rests 
in  the  knowledge  of  truth  ;  and  is  divided  into  three 
parts,  to  wit,  Physics,  which  inquire  into  the  na 
ture  of  material  substances,  and  the  human  soul  ;• 
Mathematics,  which  consider  certain  properties  of 
body  as  abstracted  from  body  ;  and  this  MetaphyJ 
sic,  (which  Aristotle  is  said  to  have  called  Theolo 
gy,  and  the  First  Philosophy),  which,  besides 
some  remarks  on  truth  in  genera],  the  method  of 
discovering  it,  and  the  errors  of  former  philosc« 
phers,  explains,  first,  the  general  properties  of  be 
ing,,  and,  secondly,  the  nature  of  things  separate 
from  matter,  namely,  of  God  the  one  first  cause, 
and  of  the  forty-seven  inferior  deities. 

Following  the  notion,  that  these  fourteen  books 
comprehend  only  one  part  of  philosophy,  the  Chris 
tian  Peripatetics  divided  metaphysics  into  universal 
and  particular.  In  the  first,  they  treated  of  being, 
and  its  properties  and  parts,  considered  as  it  is  be 
ing  *  j  in  the  second,  of  God  and  angels. 

The  schoolmen  disjoined  the  philosophy  of  the 
human  mind  from  physics,  where  Aristotle  had  pla 
ced  it  ;  and  added  it  to  metaphysics,  because  its  ob-- 
ject  is  an  immaterial  substance.  So  that  their  me 
taphysics  consisted  of  three  parts  ;  Ontology,  in 
which  they  pretended  to  explain  the  general  proper 
ties  of  being  ;  Pneumatics,  which  treated  of  the 
human  mind  ;  and  Natural  Theology,  which  treated 
of  the  Supreme  Being,  and  of  those  spirits  which 
have  either  no  body  at  all,  or  on .  so  very  fine  as  to- 
be  imperceptible  to  human  se<;se. 

From  the  account  we  have  given  of  the  manner 
in  which  Aristotle's  works  were  fiist  published,  the 
reader  will  admit,  that  some  of  the  errors  to  be 

*  Metaphysique  universelle  — a  laquelle  il  est  traicte  de 
1'estant,  et  des  ses  pro; -.{"..oz,  r  des  parties  ou  membrcs 
de  1'estant,  selon  qu'il  est  estant,  &c.  Bouju, 


264  AN    ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  PART   Ilf. 

found  in  them  may  reasonably  enough  be  imputed 
to  the  first  transcribers  and  editors.  It  was  a  gross 
error  in  distribution,  to  reduce  God,  and  the  inferior 
deities,  who  were  conceived  to  be  a  particular  spe 
cies  of  beings,  to  the  same  class  with  those  qualities 
or  attributes  that  are  common  to  all  being,  and  to 
treat  of  both  in  the  same  part  of  philosophy.  It 
•was  no  less  improper  than  if  a  physiologist  should 
compose  a  treatise,  "  Of  men,  horses,  and  identi 
ty."  This  inaccuracy  could  not  have  escaped  Aris 
totle  :  it  is  to  be  charged  on  his  editors,  who  pro 
bably  mistook  a  series  of  treatises  on  various  sub 
jects  for  one  treatise  on  one  particular  subject.  To 
many  this  may  seem  a  trifling  mistake  ;  but  it  has 
produced  important  consequences.  It  led  the  earlier 
Peripatetics  into  the  impropriety  of  explaining  the 
divine  existence,  and  the  general  properties  of  be 
ing,  by  the  same  method  of  reasoning  ;  and  it  indu 
ced  the  schoolmen  to  confound  the  important  scien 
ces  of  pneumatics  and  natural  theology  with  the  idle 
distinctions  and  logomachies  of  ontology.  Natural 
theology  ought  to  consist  of  legitimate  inferences 
from  the  effect  to  the  cause  ;  pneumatics,  or  the 
philosophy  of  the  human  mind,  are  nothing  but  a 
detail  of  tacts,  illustrated,  methodized,  and  applied 
to  practice,  by  obvious  and  convincing  reasonings  : 
both  sciences  are  founded  in  experience  ;  but  onto 
logy  pretends  to  ascertain  its  principles  by  demon 
strations  a  priori.  In  fact,  though  ontology  were, 
what  it  professes  to  be,  an  explication  of  the  gener 
al  properties  of  being,  it  could  not  throw  any  light 
on  Jiatural  theology  and  pneumatics  ;  for  in  them  the 
ontological  method  of  reasoning  would  be  as  impro 
per  as  the  mathematical.  But  the  systems  of  ontology 
that  have  come  into  my  hands  are  little  better  t>»an 
vocabularies  of  those  hard  words  which  the  school 
men  had  contrived,  in  order  to  give  an  air  of  mys 
tery  and  importance  to  their  doctrine.  While,  there 
fore,  the  sciences  of  Natural  Theology  and  Pneu- 


CHAP.    II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTIJ.  lj 

matics  were,  by  this  preposterous  division,  referred 
to  the  same  part  of  philosophy  with  ontology,  how 
was  it  possible  they  could  prosper,  or  be  explained 
by  their  own  proper  evidence  !  In  fact,  they  did  not 
prosper  :  experience,  their  proper  evidence,  was  laid 
aside  ;  and  fictitious  theory,  disguised  by  ontologi- 
cal  terms  and  distinctions,  and  supported  by  ontok)- 
gical  reasoning,  was  substituted  in  its  stead. 

LOCKE  was  one  of  the  first  who  rescued  the  phi 
losophy  of  human  nature  out  of  the  hands  of  the 
schoolmen,  cleared  it  of  the  enormous  incumbrance 
of  strange  words  which  they  had  heaped  upon  it, 
and  set  the  example  of  ascertaining  our  internal  o- 
perations,  not  by  theory,  but  by  experience.  His 
success  was  wonderful :  for,  though  he  has  some 
times  fallen  into  the  scholastic  way  of  arguing,  as  in 
Iris  first  book ;  and  some  times  suffered  himself  to 
be  imposed  on  by  words,  as  in  his  account  of  secon 
dary  qualities,  too  rashly  adapted  from  the  Carte 
sians  ;  yet  has  he  done  more  to  establish  the  abstract 
sciences  on  a  proper  foundation,  than  could  have 
been  expected  from  one  man  who  derived  almost  all 
his  lights  from  himself.  His  successors,  Butler  and 
Hutcheson  excepted,  have  not  been  very  fortunate. 
BERKELEY'S  book,  though  written  with  a  good  de* 
sign,  did  more  harm  than  good,  by  recommending 
and  exemplifying  a  method  of  argumentation  sub 
versive  of  all  knowledge,  and  leading  directly  to 
universal  scepticism.  Mr  HUME'S  Treatise  and 
Essays  are  still  more  exceptionable.  This  author 
-has  revived  the  scholastic  way  of  reasoning  from  theo 
ry,  and  of  wresting  facts  to  make  them  coincide 
with  it.  His  language  is  indeed 'more  modish,  but 
equally  favourable  to  sophistical  argument,  and  e- • 
quaily  proper  for  giving  an  air  of  plausibility  and 
importance  to  what  is  fiivolous  or  unintelligible. 
What  regard  we  are  to  pay  to  his  profession  of  ar~ 
guing  from  experience  has  been  already  considered,. 


266  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH,  PART  III. 

The  word  metaphysics,  according  to  the  vulgar 
use,  is  applied  to  all  disquisitions  concerning  things 
immaterial  :  In  this  sense,  the  plainest  account  of 
the  faculties  of  the  mind,  and  of  the  principles  of 
moral  and  natural  religion,  would  be  termed  meta 
physics.  Such  metaphysics,  hov\  ever,  we  are  so  far 
from  despising  or  censuring,  that  we  account  it  the 
sublimest  and  most  useful  part  of  science. 

Those  arguments  also  and  illustrations  in  the  ab 
stract  philosophy,  which  are  not  obvious  to  ordina 
ry  understandings,  are  sometimes  called  metaphysi 
cal.  But  as  the  principles  of  this  philosophy,  how 
ever  well  expressed,  appear  somewhat  abstruse  to 
one  who  is  but  a  novice  in  the  study  ;  and  as  very 
plain  principles  may  seem  intricate  in  an  author  who 
is  inattentive  to  his  expression,  as  the  best  authors 
sometimes  are,  it  would  be  unfair  to  reject,  or  con 
ceive  a  prejuvlice  against,  every  doctrine  in  morals 
that  is  not  perfectly  free  from  obscurity.  Yet  a  con 
tinued  obscurity,  in  matters  whereof  every  man 
should  be  a  competent  judge,  cannot  fail  to  breed  a 
suspicion,  either  that  the  doctrine  is  faulty,  or  that 
the  writer  is  not  equal  to  his  subject. 

The  term  metaphysical,  in  those  passages  of  this 
book  where  it  is  expressive  of  censure,  will  be  found 
to  allude  to  that  mode  of  abbtract  investigation,  so 
common  among  the  modern  sceptics  and  the  school 
men,  which  is  supported,  either  wholly  by  an  am 
biguous  and  indefinite  phraseology,  or  bv  th,.t  in  con 
junction  with  a  partial  experience;  and  which  sel 
dom  fails  to  lead  to  .such  conclusions  as  contradict 
matter  of  fact,  or  truths  of  indisputable  authority. 
It  is  this  nif.-de  of  iv.veatigatipn  that  has  introduced 
so  many  UT<  rs  ii«to  the  moral  sciences  ;  for  few,  e- 
ven  of  01.1  most  can  .id  moral  philosophers,  are  en 
tirely  free  iroin  it.  The  love  of  system,  or  partia 
lity  to  a  favourite  opinion,  not  only  putb  a  imm  off 
his  guard,  so  as  to  -ake  him  overlook  inaccurate 
expressions,  and  indefinite  notions,  but  may  some- 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  267 

times  occasion  even  a  mistake  of  fact.  When  such 
mistakes  are  frequent,  and  affect  the  most  important 
truths,  we  must  blame  the  author  for  want  of  can 
dour,  or  want  of  capacity :  when  they  are  innocent, 
and  recur  but  seldom,  we  ought  to  ascribe  them  to 
the  imperfection  of  human  nature. 

Instances  of  this  metaphysic  are  so  common,  that 
we  might  almost  fill  a  volume  with  a  list  of  them. 
Spinosa's  pretended  demonstration  of  the  existence 
of  the  one  great  Being,  by  which,  however,  he 
meant  only  the  universe,  is  a  metaphysical  argu 
ment,  founded  in  a  series  of  false  or  unintelligible, 
though  plausible,  definitions  *.  BERKELEY'S  proof 
of  the  non-existence  of  matter  is  wholly  metaphysi 
cal  ;  and  arises  chiefly  from  the  mistake  of  suppo 
sing  certain  words  to  have  but  one  meaning,  whieh 
really  have  two,  and  sometimes  three.  The  same 
author,  in  a  book  of  sermons,  said  to  have  been  de 
livered  at  the  chapel  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin  •{*,- 
has  endeavoured  to  enforce  the  detestable  doctrine  of 
passive  obedience  and  none-resistance,  by  metaphy 
sical  arguments  founded  on  an  arbitrary  explication 
of  the  term  moral  duty  ;  from  which  he  pretends  to 
prove,  that  negative  moral  duties  must  never,  on 
any  account,  be  violated  ;  and  that  passive  obedience 
to  supreme  power,  wherever  placed,  is  a  negative 
moral  duty.  In  this  inquiry,  he  makes  no  account 
of  those  instinctive  sentiments  of  morality  whereof 
men  are  conscious  ;  ascribing  them  to  the  blood  and 
spirits,  or  to  education  and  habit  ;  and  asserting, 
that  the  conduct  of  rational  beings  is  to  be  directed, 
not  by  them,  but  by  the  dictates  of  sober  and  inij>ar- 
ti^l  reason.  LOCKE'S  discourse  against  innate  ideas 
and  principles,  is  likewise  too  metaphysical.  Some 

*  See  the  Appendix  to  vol.  I.  of  Chev.  Ramsay's  Prin» 
ciples  of  Religion. 

f  The  third  edition  of  these  sermons,  which  are  threa 
in  number,  is  printed  at  London  iu  the  year  1713. 


268  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III. 

of  his  notions  on  that  subject  are,  I  believe,  right  j 
but  he  has  not  explained  them  with  his  wonted  pre 
cision  ;  and  most  of  his  arguments  arc  founded  on  an 
ambiguous  acceptation  of  the  words  idea  and  j«- 
nate. 

The  author  of  the  Falls  of  the  Bees  seems  to  have 
carried  this  mode  of  reasoning  as  far  as  it  will  go. 
If  there  had  been  no  ambiguous  words  in  the  Eng 
lish  language,  the  understanding  of  mankind  would 
never  have  been  affronted  with  his  system.  Many 
of  our  appetites  become  criminal  only  when  exces 
sive  ;  and  we  have  not  always  names  to  express  that 
degree  of  indulgence  which  is  consistent  with  virtue, 
The  shameless  word-catcher  takes  advrnt:»ge  of  this, 
and  confounds  the  innocent  gratification  \vith  the 
excessive  or  criminal  indulgence  ;  calling  both  bv  the 
saaie  name,  and  taking  it  for  granted,  tbst  what  he 
proves  to  be  true  of  the  one  is  also  true1  of  the  other. 
What  is  it  that  may  ;iot  be  proved  by  diis  way  of 
arguing  ?  May  not  vice  be  proved  to  be  virtue,  and 
virtue  to  be  vice  ?  May  not  a  regard  to  reputation, 
cleanliness,  industry,  generosity,  conjugal  love,  be 
proved  to  be  the  same  with  vanity,  luxury,  avarice, 
profusion,  sensuality  ?  May  it  not  be  proved,  that 
private  virtues  are  private  vices  ;  and,  consequently, 
that  private  vices  are  public  benefits  ?  Such  a  con- 
clu..-;ioii  is  indeed  so  easily  made  out  by  such  logic, 
that  nothing  but  ignorance,  impudence,  and  a  hard 
heart,  is  necessary  to  qualify  a  man  for  making  it. 
If  it  be  said,  that  considerabl "  genius  must  be  em 
ployed  in  dressing  up  these  absurd  doctrines,  sy  as 
to  render  them  plausible  ;  I  would  ask,  who  are 
the  persons  that  think  them  plausible  ?  Never  did  I 
hear  of  one  man  of  virtue  or  learning,  who  did  not 
both  detest  and  despise  them.  They  seem  plausible, 
perhaps,  to  gamblers,  highwaymen,  zndpetit  maitres  \ 
but  it  will  not  be  pretended,  that  those  gentlemen 
have  leisure,  inclination,  or  capacity,  to  reflect  OH 


CHAP.  II.        AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.          269 

•what  they  read  or  hear,  so  as  to  separate  truth  from 
falsehood. 

Among  metaphysical  writers,  Mr  HUME  holds  a 
distinguished  place.  Every  part  of  philosophy  be 
comes  raetaphysic  in  his  hands.  His  whole  theory 
of  the  understanding  is  founded  on  the  doctrine  of 
impressions  and  ideas,  which,  as  he  explains  it,  is  so 
contrary  to  fact,  that  nothing  but  the  illusion  of 
words  could  make  it  pass  upon  any  reader.  1  have 
already  given  several  instances  of  this  author's  me 
taphysical  spirit.  I  shall  give  one  more  j  which  I 
beg  leave  to  consider  at  some  length  ;  that  I  may  have 
an  opportunity  of  confuting  a  very  dangerous  error, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  of  displaying  more  minutely, 
than  by  this  general  description,  the  difference  be 
tween  metaphysical  and  philosophical  investigation. 

Does  any  one  imagine,  that  moral,  intellectual, 
and  corporeal  virtues, — that  justice,  genius,  and  bo 
dily  strength,  are  virtues  of  the  same  kind  ;  that 
they  are  contemplated  with  the  same  sentiments, 
and  known  to  be  virtues  by  the  same  criterion?  Few, 
I  presume,  are  of  this  opinion  ;  but  Mr  HUME  has 
adopted  it,  and  taken  a  great  deal  of  pains  to  prove 
it.  I  shall  demonstrate,  that  this  very  important 
error  has  arisen,  either  from  inaccurate  observation, 
or  from  his  being  imposed  on  by  words  not  well  un 
derstood,  or  rather  from  both  causes. 

It  is  true,  that  justice,  great  genius,  and  bodily 
strength,  are  all  useful  to  the  possessor  and  to  society ; 
and  all  agreeable  to,  or  (which  in  this  author's  style 
amounts  to  the  same  thingj)  approved  by  every  one 
•who  considers  or  contemplates  them.  They  there 
fore,  at  least  the  two  first,  completely  answer  to  our 
author's  definition  of  virtue  *.  And  it  would  be 

*  It  is  the  nature,  and  indeed  the  definition,  of  virtue, 
"  that  it  is  a  quality  of  the  mind  agreeable  to,  or  approved 
"  by,  every  one  who  considers  or  contemplates  it."  Hume's 
Essays,  "Jo/.  2. />.  333.  edit.  1767.  Note. 

Bodily  qualities  are  indeed  excluded  by  this  definition, 
but  admitted  by  our  author  in  his  subsequent  reasonings. 


270  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III; 

easy  to  write  a  great  book,  to  show  the  reasons  why 
moral,  intellectual,  and  corporeal  abilities,  yield  plea 
sure  to  the  beholder  and  possessor,  and  to  trace  out 
a  number  of  analogies,  real  or  verbal,  subsisting  be 
tween  them.  But  this  is  nothing  to  the  purpose  : 
they  may  resemble  in  ten  thousand  respects,  and  yet 
differ  as  widely,  as  a  beast  or  statue  differs  from  a 
man.  Let  us  trace  the  author's  argument  to  its 
source. 

Virtue  is  known  by  a  certain  agreeable  feeling 
or  sentiment,  arising  from  the  consciousness  of  cer 
tain  affections  or  qualities  in  ourselves,  or  from  the 
view  of  them  in  others.  Granted.  Justice,  hu 
manity,  generosity,  excite  approbation  ;  —  a  handsome 
face  excites  approbation  ;  —  great  genius  excites  ap 
probation  :  the  effect  or  sentiment  produced  is  the 
same  in  each  instance  :  the  object,  or  cause,  must 
therefore,  in  each  instance,  be  of  the  same  kind.; 
This  is  genuine  metaphysic  :  but  before  a  man  can 
be  misled  by  it,  he  must  either  find,  on  consulting 
his  experience,  that  the  feeling  excited  by  the  con 
templation  of  these  objects  is  the  same  in  each  in 
stance  ;  in  which  case  I  would  say,  that  his  feelings 
are  defective,  or  himself  an  inaccurate  observer  of 
nature  :  —  or  he  must  suppose,  that  the  word  appro- 
luitiotij  because  written  and  pronounced  the  same  way, 
does  really  mean  the  same  thing  in  each  of  the  three 
propositions  above  mentioned,  in  which  case,  I  would 
say,  that  his  judgment  and  ideas  are  confounded  by 
the  mere  sound  and  shape  of  a  word.  I  am  con-  : 
scions,  that  my  approbation  of  a  fine  face  is  different 
in  kind  from  my  approbation  of  great  genius  ;  and  i 
that  both  are  extremely  different  from  my  approba 
tion  of  justice,  humanity,  and  generosity  :  if  I  call 
these  three  different  kinds  of  approbation  by  the 
sam  :-  general  name,  I  use  that  name  in  three  different 
significations.  Therefore  moral,  intellectual,  and  cor- 
virtues,  are  not  of  the  same,  but  of  different  . 


i  '  j 
kinds. 


CHAP.    II.  AN  fcSSAY  ON  TRUTH.  27! 

I  confess,  says  our  author,  that  these  three  virtues 
are  contemplated  with  three  different  kinds  of  appro 
bation.  But  the  same  thing  is  true  of  different  moral 
virtues  :  piety  excites  one  kind  of  approbation,  jus 
tice  another,  and  compassion  a  third  ;  the  virtues  of 
Cato  excite  our  esteem,  those  of  Cesar  our  love  :  if 
therefore  piety,  justice,  and  compassion,  be  virtues 
of  the  same  kind,  notwithstanding  that  they  excite 
different  kinds  of  approbation,  why  should  justice, 
genius,  a"nd  beauty,  be  accounted  virtues  of  different 
kinds  *  ? — This  is  another  metaphysical  argument  5 
an  attempt  to  determine  by  words  what  facts  only 
can  determine.  I  still  insist  on  fact  and  experience. 
My  sentiments,  in  regard  to  these  virtues,  are  so 
diversified,  and  in  each  variety  so  peculiar,  that  I 
know,  and  am  assured  that  piety,  justice,  and  hu 
manity,  are  distinct  individual  virtues  of  the  same- 
kind  ;  and  that  piety,  genius,  and  beauty,  are  virtues 
of  different  kinds.  Applied  to  each  of  the  former 
qualities,  the  word  virtue  means  the  same  thing  ; 
but  beauty  is  virtue  in  one  sense,  genius  in  another, 
and  piety  in  a  third. 

Well,  if  the  sentiments  excited  in  you  by  the  con. 
templation  of  these  virtues,  are  so  much  diversified, 
and  in  each  variety  so  peculiar,  you  must  be  able  to 
explain  in  what  respect  your  approbation  of  intel 
lectual,  virtue  differs  from  your  approbation  of  moral ; 
which  I  presume  you  will  find  no  easy  task. — It  is 
not  so  difficult,  Sir,  as  you  seem  to  apprehend. 
When  a  man  has  acted  generously,  or  justly  I  praise 
him,  and  think  him  worthy  of  praise  and  reward, 
for  having  done  his  duty  ;  when  ungenerously  or 
unjustly,  I  blame  him  ;  and  think  him  worthy  of 
blame  and  punishment  ;  but  a  man  deserves  neither 
punishment  nor  blame  for  want  of  beauty  or  of  un 
derstanding  ;  nor  reward  nor  praise  for  being  hand- 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  3.  p.  258,  Hume's 
fesays,  ubi  supra. 

z 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  'PART  III. 

some  or  ingenius But  why  are  we  thought  wor 
thy  of  blame  and  punishment  for  being  unjust,  and 
not  for  being  homely,  or  void  of  understanding  ?  The 
general  conscience  of  mankind  would  reply,  Because 
\ve  have  it  in  our  power  to  be  just,  and  ought  to  be 
so  ;  but  an  idiot  cannot  help  his  want  of  understand 
ing,  nor  an  ugly  man  his  want  of  beauty.  This  our 
author  will  not  allow  to  be  a  satisfactory  answer; 
because,  says  he,  I  have  shown  that  free-will  has  no 
place  with  regard  to  the  actions,  no  more  than  the 
qualities  of  men  *.  What  an  immense  metaphysical 
labyrinth  should  we  have  to  run  through  if  we  were 
to  disintangle  ourselves  out  of  this  argument  in  the 
common  course  of  logic  !  To  shorten  the  controver 
sy,  I  must  beg  leave  to  affirm,  in  my  turn,  that  our 
moral  actions  are  in  our  own  power,  though  beauty 
and  genius  are  not  j  and  to  appeal,  for  proof  of  this 
affirmation,  to  the  second  part  of  this  Essay,  or,  ra 
ther,  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind. 

Again,  "  Moral  distinctions,"  says  Mr  HUME, 
**  arise  from  the  natural  distinctions  of  pain  and 
"  pleasure  ;  and  when  we  receive  those  feelings  from, 
"  the  general  considerations  of  any  quality  or  char- 
"  acter,  we  denominate  it  virtuous  or  vitious.  Now 
*'  I  believe  no  one  will  assert,  that  a  quality  can  ne- 
f£  ver  produce  pleasure  or  pain  to  the  person  who  con- 
<5f  siders  it,  unless  it  be  perfectly  voluntary  in  the 
•'  person  who  possesses  it  f."— More  metaphysic  ! 
•and  a  sophism  too— a  petitio  principii  !  Here  our 
author  endeavours  to  confound  intellectual  with  mo 
ral  virtue,  by  an  argument  which  supposeth  his 
own  theory  of  virtue  to  be  true  ;  of  which  theory 
this  confusion  of  the  virtues  is  a  necessary  conse 
quence.  The  reader  must  see,  that  this  argument, 
if  it  prove  any  thing  at  all,  might  be  made  to  prove 
that  the  smell  or  beauty  of  a  rose,  the  taste  of  an 
apple,  the  hardness  of  steel,  and  the  glittering  of  a 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  3.  p.  260. 

*  Id  ibid. 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  OX    TRUTH.  273 

diamond,  as  well  as  bodily  strength  and  great  genius 
are  all  virtues  of  the  same  kind  with  justice,  gener 
osity,  and  graticude. — Still  we  wander  from  the 
point.  How  often  must  it  be  repeated,  that  this 
matter  is  to  be  determined,  not  by  metaphysical  ar 
guments  founded  on  ambiguous  words,  but  by  facts 
and  experience  ! 

"  Have  I  not  appealed  to  facts?"  he  will  say, 
"  Are  not  all  the  qualities  that  constitute  the  great 
"  man,  constancy,  fortitude,  magnanimity,  as  invol- 
"  untary  and  necessary,  as  the  qualities  of  the  judg«' 
"  ment  and  imagination  ?*'  The  term  great  man  is 
so  very  equivocal,  that  I  will  have  nothing  to  do 
with  it.  The  vilest  scoundrel  on  earth,  if  possessed 
of  a  title  immediately  commences  great  man,  when 
he  has  with  impunity  perpetrated  any  extraordina 
ry  act  of  wickedness ;  murthered  fifty  thousand 
men  :  robbed  all  the  houses  of  half  a  dozen  provin 
ces  ;  or  dexterously  plundered  his  own  country,  to 
defray  the  expence  of  a  ruinous  war,  contrived  on 
purpose  to  satiate  his  avarice,  or  divert  the  public 
attention  from  his  blunders  and  villanies.  I  speak 
of  the  qualities  that  constitute  the  good  man,  that  is, 
of  moral  qualities  ;  and  these,  I  affirm,  to  be  xvith- 
in  every  man's  reach,  though  genius  and  beauty  are 
not, 

"  But  are  not  men  afraid  of  passing  for  good-na- 
**  tured,  lest  that  should  be  taken  for  want  of  under- 
"  standing  ? — and  do  they  not  often  boast  of  more 
"  debauches  than  they  have  been  really  engaged  in, 
"  to  give  themselves  airs  of  fire  and  spirit  ?i"  Yes 
fools  do  the  first,  to  recommend  themselves  to  fools  ; 
and  profligates  the  best,  to  recommend  themselves  to 
profligates  :  but  he  is  little  acquainted  with  the  hu 
man  heart,  who  does  not  perceive,  that  such  senti- 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  3.  p.  259. 
Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  3.  p,  257^ 

Z  2 


274  A'tf  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  P^RT  m. 

rnents  are  affected,  and  contrary  to  the  way  of  think 
ing  that  is  most  natural  to  mankind  * 

"  But  are  you  not  as  jealous  of  your  character, 
"  with  regard  to  sense  and  knowledge,  as  to  honour 
<(  and  courage  ?  *  '  This  question  ought  to  be  ad 
dressed  to  those  in  ivhom  courage  is  a  virtue,  and 
the  want  of  it  a  vice  :  and  I  am  certain,  there  is  not 
in  his  Majesty's  service  one  officer  or  private  man, 
who  would  not  wish  to  be  thought  rather  a  valiant 
soldier,  though  of  no  deep  reach,  than  a  very  clever 
fellow,  \vith  the  addition  of  an  infamous  coward. — 
The  term  honour  is  of  dubious  import.  According 
to  the  notions  of  these  times,,  a  man  may  blaspheme 
God,  sell  his  country,  murder  his  friend,  pick  the 
pocket  of  his  fellow-sharper,  and  employ  his  whole 
life  in  seducing  others  to  vice  and  perdition,  and  yet 
be  accounted  a  man  of  honour  j  provided  he  be  ac 
customed  to  speak  certain,  words,  wear  certain  clothes, 
and  haunt  certain  company.  If  this  be  the  honour 
alluded  to  by  the  author,  an  honest  man  may,  for  a 
very  slender  consideration,  renounce  all  pretensions 
to  it.  But  if  he  allude  (as  I  rather  suppose)  to 
those  qualities  of  the  heart  and  understanding  which 
intitle  one  to  general  esteem  and  confidence,  Mr 
HUME  knows,  that  this  kind  of  honour  is- nearer  to  a 
man  than  life. 

"  Well,  then,  temperance  is  a  virtue  in  every  sta- 
"  tion  ;  yet  would  you  not  chuse  to  be  convicted  of 
"  drunkenness  rather  than  of  ignorance  ?  *" — I  have 
heard  ot  a  witty  parson,  who,  having  been  dismissed 
for  '•  regularities,  used  afterwards,  in  conversation, 
to  say,  that  he  thanked  God  he  was  not  cashiered  for. 
ignorance  and  insufficiency,  but  only  for  vice  and  im- 
moralitv.  According  to  our  author's  doctrine,  this 
speech  was  neither  absurd  nor  profane  :  but  I  am 
sure  the  generality  of  mankind  would  be  of  a  different 

*  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  3.  p.  257. 
f  Ibid. 


CHAP.  II.       AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  275 

opinion.  To  be  ignorant  of  what  we  ought  to  know, 
is  to  be  deficient  in  moral  virtue  ;  to  profess  to  know 
what  we  are  ignorant  of,  is  falsehood,  a  breach  of 
moral  virtue  :  whether  these  vices  be  more  or  less 
atrocious  than  intemperance,  must  be  determined  by 
the  circumstances  of  particular  cases.  To  be  igno 
rant  of  what  we  could  not  know,  of  what  we  do  not 
profess  to  know,  and  of  what  it  is  not  our  duty  to 
know,  is  no  vice  at  all  :  and  a  man  must  have  made 
some  progress  in  debauchery,  before  he  can  say,  from 
serious  conviction,  I  would  rather  be  chargeable  with 

intemperance,  than    with  ignorance  of  this  kind 

These,  and  many  of  our  author's  mistakes,  must  be 
imputed  to  want  of  knowledge  of  human  nature  : 
which  I  suppose  is  owing  to  his  having  confined  his 
observation  chiefly  to  the  outside  of  what  is  called 
fashionable  life,  where  the  sentiments  publicly  a- 
vowed  are  often  different  from  what  is  inwardly 
felt,  and  extremely  different  from  the  truth  and  sim 
plicity  of  nature. 

It  appears,  then,  that  our  author's  reasoning  on 
the  present  subject,  is  not  philosophical,  but  what  I . 
call  metaphysical  *  ;  being  founded,  not  on  fact,  but 
on  theory,  and  supported  by  ambiguous  words  and 
inaccurate  experience. 

The  judgment  of  the  wiser  ancients  in  matters  of 
morality,  is  doubtless  of  very  great  weight,  but,  in 
opposition  to  our  own  experience,  can  never  prepon 
derate  :  because  this  is  our  ultimate  standard  of 
truth.  Mr  HUME  endeavours  to  confirm  his  theory 
of  virtue  by  authorities  from  the  ancients,  particular 
ly  the  Stoics  and  Peripatetics.  Though  he  had  ac 
complished  this,  we  might  have  appealed  from  their 

*  I  do  not  contend,  that  tills  use  of  the  word  metaphysi 
cal  is  strictly  proper  :  I  mean  nothing  more,  than  to  give 
the  reader  a  notion  of  this  particular  mode  of  false  reason 
ing  :  and,  by  satisfying  him  that  it  is  not  philosophical^  to 
guard  him  against  its  influence. 

£  3 


275  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III. 

opinion,  as  well  as  from  his,  to  our  own  feelings. 
But  he  fails  in  this,  as  in  the  other  parts  of  his  proof. 
It  is  true,  the  Peripatetics  and  Stoics  made  Pru 
dence  the  first  (not  the  most  important)  of  the  car 
dinal  virtues  ;  because  they  conceived  it  necessary 
to  enable  a  man  to  act  his  part  aright  in  life,  and  be 
cause  they  thought  it  their  duty  to  take  every  op 
portunity  of  improving  their  nature  :  but  they  never 
said,  that  an  incurable  defect  of  understanding  is  a 
vice,  or  that  it  is  as  much  our  duty  to  be  learned  and 
ingenious,  as  to  be  honest  and  grateful.  "  All  the 
'*  praise  of  virtue  consists  in  action,"  says  Cicero  *, 
in  name  of  the  Stoics,  when  treating  of  this  virtue 
of  prudence.  And,  when  explaining  the  comparative 
merit  of  the  several  classes  of  moral  duty,  he  declares, 
that  "  All  knowledge  which  is  not  followed  by  ac- 
*'  tion,  is  unprofitable  and  imperfect,  like  a  begin- 
"  ning  without  an  end,  or  a  foundation  without  a 
61  superstructure  ;  and  that  the  acquisition  of  the 
'*'  most  sublime  and  most  important  science  ought  to 
"  be,  and  will  by  every  good  man  be  relinquished, 
*'  when  it  interferes  with  the  duties  we  owe  our 
"  country,  our  parents,  and  society  f."  Wisdom, 
indeed,  he  allows  to  be  the  first  and  most  excellent 
of  the  virtues  :  but  it  is  well  known,  that  the  Stoics 
:.nade  a  distinction  between  Prudence  and  Wisdom. 
By  prudence  they  meant  that  virtue  which  regulates 
our  desires  and  aversions,  and  fixes  them  on  proper 
objects.  Wisdom  was  another  name  for  mental  per 
fection  :  it  comprehended  all  the  virtues,  the  religi 
ous  as  well  as  the  social  and  prudential  ;  and 
was  equally  incompatible  with  vice  and  with  error  f. 
The  wise  man,  the  standard  of  Stoicd  excellence, 
was,  by  their  own  acknowledgement,  an  ideal  c.ia- 
racter  ;  the  purest  virtue  attainable  in  this  life  being 
necessarily  tainted  with  imperfection.  Hence  some 

*  De  officiis,  lib.  1,  cap.  6.         f  Id.  lib.  1.  cap.  43,  44. 
Id,   ib. 


CHAP.  II.  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  277" 

have  endeavoured  to  turn  their  notions  of  wisdom 
into  ridicule  ;  but  1  think,  without  reason.  For  is 
there  any  thing  absurd  or  ridiculous  in  an  artist 
working  after  a  model  of  such  perfection  as  he  can 
never  hope  to  equal  ?  In  the  judgment  of  Aristotle 
and  Bacon,  the  true  poet  forms  his  imitations  of  na* 
ture  after  a  model  of  ideal  perfection,  which  perhaps 
hath  no  existence  but  in  his  own  mind  *...  And  are 
not  Christians  commanded  to  imitate  the  Deity  hiir^ 
self,  that  great  original  and  standard  of  perfection, 
between  whom  and  the-  most  excellent  of  his  crea 
tures  an  infinite  distance  must  remain  for  ever  f  ? 

"  The  ancient  moralists,"  says  Mr  Hume,  "made 
"  no  material  distinction  among  the  different  species 
"  of  mental  endowments  and  defects  J."  To  every 
person  who  has  read  them,  the  contrary  is  well 
known.  I  might  here  fill  many  a  page  with  quota 
tions,  but  a  few  will  suffice  :  "  Man's  virtue  and 
"  vice,"  says  Marcus  Aurdius,  "consists  not  in 
"  those  affections  in  which  we  are  passive,  but  in  ac- 
"  tion.  To  a  stone  thrown  upward,  it  is  no  evil  to 
"  fall,  nor  good  to  have  mounted  $."  And  in  ano 
ther  place,  "  The  vain-glorious  man  placeth  his  good 
**  in  the  action  of  another  ;  the  sensual,  in  his  own 
passive  feelings  j  the  wise  man,,  in  his  own  action  ||." 

*  Aristot.  Poetica.  Bacon,  De  augmentis  scientarium, 
lib.  2. 

f  Matth.  v.  48. 

J  Hume's  Essays,  vol.  2.  p.  3S7,  388. 

Qvll  y]  aiTV  K   KOLxioi  an  TV  tv  Tr'uau  o.x>.oc  ' 


Lib.  ix.  c.  IX 
||    O*  fjilv  <piholc%oc  £$&rff&  iv'fytixv  '(/iov  ayct.$ov  v- 

7TO\OL/!/.fi3.Vir  0    Oi    f'/X/'jOOFOC'    toMl   TliiTiy'     0      06    YOVY,    t%W, 

tliav  cr^a^/r. 

Lib.  6.  c.  51, 


278  AM  ESSAY  0!N*  TRUTH.  PART  III. 

"  The  contemplative  life,"  says  Plutarch,  "  when  it 
**  fails  to  produce  the  active,  is  unprofitable  *."  "To 
**  acquire  knowledge,"  says  Lucian,  "  is  of  no  use,  if 
"  we  do  not  also  frame  our  lives  according  to  some- 
**  thing  better  f."  It  is  remarkable  that  the  Greek 
tragedians  (I  know  not  by  what  authority,  for  Ho 
mer's  idea  is  very  different^)  represent  Ulysses  as  a 
character  more  distinguished  for  political  prudence 
or  cunning,  than  for  strict  moral  virtue  ;  and  often 
place  him  in  such  attitudes  as  make  him  appear  o- 
dious  on  this  very  account  ^.  And  Cicero  in  his 

*  O*  li  SvATixaf  C/0f  TV 


Plutarch,  de  Educatione. 

j"  Oully  o<p£A0£  fiY  'fzcrtfd^oit  Toi  jua.&;tuoc.Taf  u  (UY)  rif 

KfX    £  TOY   flO&fpQftffyt   7TpO{    TO  £t\T/GV. 

Lucian.  Conviv. 

^  See  particularly  Sophocles.  Philoct.  vers.  100.  and 
vers.  1260.  I  beg  leave  to  quote  a  few  very  remarkable 
lines.  Neoptolemus  having,  by  the  advice  of  Ulysses, 
fraudulently  got  possession  of  the  arrows  of  Philoctetes, 
repents  of  what  he  had  done,  and  is  going  to  restore  them. 
To  deter  him  from  his  purpose,  Ulysses  threatens  him  with 
the  resentment  of  tlie  whole  Grecian  army. 

Neot>.  20!p<k  TrtyvKbs  cvliv  i^o 
\  v  "  » 

U/VS.     2^    0     OVTi    <pd)X£/V  ,    OVTl 

Neop.  A\\'  it  $nidiec,  ruv  coyuv  xpii 
U/ys.  Ka/  TTCJC  QIKOUQV,  a  y  eAaCtf 
TCLVTOL  ;  Neop. 


a**  /  r^ 

<pok>,i  TrqaLvvw  race  ; 


U/ys.   "^TPOCTOV 

Neofi.  SuV  rw  X/idfiS    TOY  yov  ov  rapCw  <po£o 


oy. 
Krs.  1279. 


.          Necp*  Wise  as  thou  art,  Ulysses, 
Thou  talkest  most  idly.     U/ys.  Wisdom  is  not  thine, 
Either  in  word  or  deed.     Neop.  Know,  to  be  Just 
If  better  far  than  to  be  wise,     Ufys.  But  where? 


CHAP.  II.  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

Treatise  of  moral  duties,  often  declares,  that  cunning, 
when  it  violates  the  rules  of  justice,  is  criminal  and 
detestable.  Does  Virgil  consign  cripples  and  idiots, 
as  well  .s  tyrants,  to  Tartarus  ?  does  he  say,  that  a- 
great  memory  and  handsome  facer  as  well  as  a  pure- 
heart,  were  the  passports  to  Elysium  ?  No  :  Virgil 
was  too  good  a  man  to  injure  the  cause  of  virtue,  and 
too  wise  to  shock  common  sense  by  so  preposterous 
a  distribution  of  reward  and  punishment.  The  im 
pious,  the  unnatural,  the  fraudulent,  the  avaricious  : 
adulterers,  incestuous  persons,  traitors,  corrupt  judg 
es,  venal  statesmen,  tyrants,  and  the  minions  of  ty 
rants,  are  those  whom  he  dooms  to  eternal  misery  ; 
and  he  peoples  Elysium  with  the  shades  of  the  pure 
and  the  pious,  of  "heroes  who  have  died  in  defence  of 
their  country,  of  ingenious  men  who  have  employed, 
their  talents  in  recommending  piety  and  virtue,  and 
of  all  who  by  acts  of  beneficence  have  merited  the 
love  and.  gratitude  of  their  fellow-creatures  *.. 

Where  is  the  justice,  thus  unauthorised, 

To  give  a  treasure  back  thou  owest  to  me, 

And  to  my  counsels  ?  Ncop.  I  have  done  a  wrong, 

And  1  will  try  to  make  atonement  for  it. 

Ufys.  Dost  thou  not  fear  the  power  of  Greece  ?  Ntop.  I  fear< 

Nor  Greece,  nor  th.ee,  when  1  am  doing  right. 

Frank/in. 

Throughout  the  whole  play,  the  fire  and  generosity  of 
the  young  hero  (so  well-becoming  the  son  of  Achilles)  is 
finely  opposed  to  the  caution  and  craft  of  the  politician,  and 
forms  one  of  the  most  striking  contrasts  that  can  well  be 
imagined. 

*  Virgil,  ^.neid  vi.  547—665.  As  the  moral  senti 
ments  of  nations  may  often  be  learned  from  their  fabler 
and  traditions,  as  well  as  from  their  history  and  philoso* 
phy,  it  will  not  perhaps  be  deemed  foreign  from  our  design, 
to  give  the  following  brief  abstract  of  this  poet's  sublime 
theory  of  future  rewards  and  punishments  -,  the  outlines  cf 
which,  he  is  known  to  h3,ve  taken  from  the  Pythagoreans 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  FART  III. 

The    Peripatetics   held    prudence  to  be  an  active 
principle,  diffused  through  the  whole  of  moral  vir- 

and  Platonists,  who  probably  were  indebted   for  them  to 
some  ancient  tradition. 

The  shades  below  are  divided  by  Virgil  into  three  dis 
tricts  or  provinces.  On  this  side  Styx,  the  souls  of  those 
whose  bodies  have  not  been  honoured  with  the  rites  of  se 
pulture,  wander  about  in  a  melancholy  condition  for  a 
hundred  years,  before  they  are  permitted  to  pass  the  river. 
When  this  period  expires,  or  when  their-  bodies  are  buried, 
they  are  ferried  over,  and  appear  before  Minos  and  the  o- 
ther  judges,  who  allot  them  such  a  mansion  as  their  lives 
en  earth  are  found  to  have  deserved.  They,  who  have 
Been  of  little,  or  no  use  to  mankind,  or  who  have  not  been 
guilty  of  any  very  atrocious  crimes  j  or  whose  crimes, 
though  atrocious,  were  the  effects  rather  of  an  unhappy 
destiny,  than  of  wilful  depravation,  are  disposed  of  in  dif 
ferent  parts  of  the  regions  of  mourning,  (lugentes  campi), 
where  they  undergo  a  variety  of  purifying  pains.  From 
thence,  when  thoroughly  refined  from  all  the  remains  of 
vice,  they  pass  into  Elysium,,  where  they  live  a  thousand 
years  in  a  state  of  happiness  ;  and  then,  after  taking  a 
draught  of  the  waters  of  oblivion,  are  sent  back  to  earth 
to  animate  new  bodies. — Those  who  have  been  guilty  of 
great  crimes,  as  impiety,  want  of  natural  affection,  adulte 
ry,  incest,  breach  of  trust,  subverting  the  liberties  of  their 
country,  &c.  are  delivered  by  the  judge  Rhadamanthus  to 
Tisiphone  and  the  other  furies,  who  shut  them  up  in  an 
immense  dungeon  of  darkness  and  fire,  called  Tartarus, 
where  their  torments  are  unspeakable  and  eternal. — The 
souls  of  good  men  are  re-united,  either  with  the  Deity  him 
self,  or  with  that  universal  spirit  which  he  created  in  the 
beginning,  and  which  animates  the  world  *,  and  their 
shades,  ghosts,  or  idola,  enjoy  for  ever  the  repose  and  plea 
sure-  of  Elysium.  These  s-hades  might  be  seen,  though 
not  touched  ;  they  resembled  the  bodies  with  which  they 
tad  formerly  been  invested  5  and  retained  a  consciousness 
of  their  identity,  and  a  remembrance  of  their  past  life,  with 
almost  the  same  affections  and  character  that  had  distin 
guished  them,  on  earth. 


CHAP,    II.  AN1   ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

tue  *."  "  None  but  a  good  man,"  says  Aristotle, 
"  can  be  prudent  j"  and  a  little  after,  **  It  is  not  pos- 
*'  sible  for  a  man  to  be  properly  good  without  pru- 
"  dence,  nor  prudent  without  moral  virtue  f."  Will 

On  this  system,  Virgil  has  founded  a  series  of  the  su- 
blimest  descriptions  that  are  to  be  met  with  in  poetry. 
Milton  alone  has  equalled  them  in  the  first  and  second 
books  of  Paradise  Lost.  Homer's  Necyomanteia,  in  the 
eleventh  of  the  Odyssey,  has  the  merit  of  being  original  j 
but  Virgil's  imitation  is  confessedly  far  superior.  The 
dream  of  Henry,  in  the  seventh  canto  of  the  Henriade,  not 
withstanding  the  advantages  that  the  author  might  have 
drawn  from  the  Christian  theology,  is  but  a  trifle,  compar 
ed  with  the  magnificent  and  stupendous  scenery  exhibited 
in  the  sixth  book  of  the  ./Eneid. 

This  theory  of  future  rewards  ar.d  punishments,  however 
imperfect,  is  consonant  enough  with  the  hopes  and  fears  of 
men,  and  their  natural  notions  of  virtue  and  vice,  to  ren 
der  the  poet's  narrative  alarming  and  interesting  in  a  very 
high  degree.  But  were  an  author  to  adopt  Mr  Hume's 
theory  of  virtue  and  the  soul,  and  endeavour  to  set  it  off 
in  a  poetical  description,  all  the  powers  of  human  genius, 
could  not  save  it  from  being  ridiculous.  A  metaphysician 
may  "  blunder"  for  a  long  time,  "  round  about  a  mean- 
"  ing,"  without  giving  any  violent  shock  to  an  inattentive 
reader  :  but  a  poet  v;ho  clothes  his  thoughts  with  image 
ry,  and  illustrates  them  by  examples,  must  come  to  the 
point  at  once  j  and,  if  he  means  to  please,  and  not  disgust 
his  readers,  to  move  their  admiration,  and  not  their  con 
tempt,  must  be  careful  not  to  contradict  their  natural  no 
tions,  especially  in  matters  of  such  deep  and  universal  con 
cern  as  morality  and  religion. 

5  —  AWyxn  TW  Qfotww  t%ty  uv&i  —  •7Tfaxr;>t;V. 

Ethic,  ad  Nicom.  vi.  5. 

"j*  A&uVaTOK  $povi{A.w    urai   prj    OVTOL    aya^cx. 


Id.  vi.  13, 

See  the  elegant  paraphrase  of  Andronicus  the 
upon  these  passages. 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  -FART  III, 

it  yet  be  said,  that  the  ancient  moralists  made  no  ma 
terial  distinction  between  moral  and  intellectual  vir 
tues  ?  Is  it  not  evident,  that  though  they  considered 
both  as  necessary  to  the  formation  of  a  perfect  char 
acter,  and  sometimes  discoursed  of  both  in  the  same 
treatise  or  system,  yet  they  deemed  the  latter  valu 
able  only  as  means  to  qualify  us  for  the  former,  and 
insignificant,  or  even  odious,  when  they  failed  to  an 
swer  this  end  ? 

"  We  may,"  says  Mr  Hume,  "  by  perusing  the 
*'  titles  of  the  chapters  in  Aristotle's  Ethics,  be  con- 
"  vinced,  that  he  ranks  courage,  temperance,  magni- 
*'  licence,  magnanimity,  modesty,  prudence,  and  a 
•"  manly  freedom  among  the  virtues,  as  well  as  jus- 
41  tice  and  friendship  *."  True  ;  but  if  our  learned 
metaphysician  had  extended  his  researches  a  little 
.beyond  the  titles  of  those  chapters,  he  would  have 
found,  that,  in  Aristotle's  judgment,  "  Moral  virtue 
"  is  a  voluntary  disposition  or  habit ;  and  that  mo- 
"  ral  approbation  or  disapprobation  are  excited  by 
*'  those  actions  and  affections  only  which  are  in  our 
*.*  own  power  ;  that  is,  of  which  the  first  motion  a- 
"  rises  in  ourselves,  and  proceeds  from  no  extrinsic 
"  cause  f." 

This  is  true  philosophy  :  it  is  accurate,  perspicu 
ous,  and  just,  and  very  properly  determines  the  de 
gree  of  merit  of  our  intellectual  and  constitutional 
virtues,  A  man  makes  proficiency  in  knowledge  ; — 

*  Hume's  Essays,  vol.  2.  p.  388. — The  term  manly 
freedom  does  not  express  the  meaning  of  the  Greek.  \KV&I- 
fw\y\S*  Mr  Hume  was  perhaps  misled  by  the  etymology  : 
but  he  ought  to  have  known,  that  by  this  word  the  phi 
losopher  denotes  that  virtue  which  consists  in  the  moderate 
use  of  wealth .  ff\fi  Af^aotTa  ptwoTnt.  See  Ethic,  ad 
Kicom.  lib.  4.  cap.  1,2. 

f  Etnic.  ad  Nicom.  iii.  1.— ii.  6.  Mag.  Mor.  i.  15. 
Andronicus  Rhodius,  p.  89,  90,  188.  edit.  Cantab.  1679. 
Stephanus,  in  voce  ^ 


ir.  AN  ESSAY  ON  "TRUTH. 

if  in  this  he  has  acted  from  a  desire  to  improve  his 
nature,  and  qualify  himself  for  moral  virtue,  that 
desire,  and  the  action  consequent  upon  it,  are  virtu 
ous,  laudable  and  of  good  desert.  Is  a  man  possessed  of 
great  genius? — this  invests  him  with  dignity  and  di 
stinction,  and  qualifies  him  for  noble  undertakings  : 
but  this  of  itself  is  no  moral  virtue;  because  it  is 
not  a  disposition  resulting  from  a  spontaneous  effort. 
Is  his  constitution  naturally  disposed  to  virtue  ?  he 
still  has  it  in  his  power  to  be  vitious,  and  therefore 
his  virtue  is  truly  meritorious  5  though  not  so  high 
ly  as  that  of  another  man,  who,  in  spite  of  outrage 
ous  appetites,  and  tempting  circumstances,  hath  at 
tained  an  equal  degree  of  moral  improvement.  A  man 
constitutionally  brave,  generous,  or  grateful,  com 
mands  our  admiration  more  than  another,  who  strug 
gles  to  overcome  the  natural  baseness  of  his  temper. 
The  former  is  a  sublimer  object,  and  may  be  of  great 
er  service  to  society  ;  and  as  his  virtue  is  secured 
by  constitution  as  well  as  by  inclination,  we  repose 
in  it  without  fear  of  being  disappointed.  Yet  per 
haps  the  latter,  if  his  merit  were  equally  conspicu 
ous,  would  be  found  equally  worthy  of  our  moral 
approbation.  Indeed,  if  his  virtue  be  so  irresolute 
as  to  leave  him  wavering  between  good  and  evil,  he 
is  not  entitled  to  praise  :  such  irresolution  is  crimi 
nal,  because  he  may,  and  ought  to  correct  it;  we 
can  not,  and  we  ought  not  to  trust  him,  till  we  see  a 
strong  prepossession  established  in  favour  of  virtue. 
—However,  let  us  love  virtue  wherever  we  find  it : 
whether  the  immediate  gift  of  heaven,  or  the  effect 
of  human  industry  co-operating  with  divine  influence, 
it  always  deserves  our  esteem  and  veneration. 

The  reader  may  now  form  an  estimate  at  that  au 
thor's  attention,  who  says,  that  "  the  ancient  moral- 
"  ists  made  no  material  distinction  among  the  diff?r- 
"  ent  species  of  mental  endowments  and  defects.*'  If 
any  one  is  disposed  to  think,  that  I  have  made  out 
my  point  rather  by  inference  than  by  direct  proof,  I 
A  a 


284  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  TART  III. 

submit  to  his  consideration  the  following  passages, 
which  are  too  plain  to  need  a  commentary. 

.Having  proposed  a  general  distribution  of  our  men- 
tal  powers,  (which  seems  to  amount  to  this,  that 
some  of  them  fit  us  for  knowledge,  and  others  for  ac 
tion)  Aristotle  proceeds  in  this  manner.  "  Accord- 
"  ing  to  this  distribution,  virtue  is  also  divided  into 
"  intellectual  and  moral.  Of  the  former  kind  are 
"  wisdom  intelligence,  and  prudence  ;  of  the  latter, 
"  temperance  and  frugal  liberality.  "When  we  speak 
"  of  morals,  we  do  not  say,  that  a  man  is  wise  or 
"  intelligent,  but  that  he  is  gentle  or  temperate.  Yet 
*'  we  praise  a  wise  man  in  respect  of  his  dispositions 
"  [or  habits]  ;  for  laudable  dispositions  are  what  we 
"  call  virtues  *." 

"  The  virtues  of  the  soul,"  says  Cicero,  "  and 
"  of  its  principal  part  the  understanding,  are  various, 
"  but  may  be  reduced  to  two  kinds.  The  first  are 
"  those  which  nature  has  implanted,  and  which  are 
«*  called  not  voluntary.  The  second  kind  are  more 
**  properly  called  virtues,  because  they  depend  on  the 
"  will  ;  and  these,  as  objects  of  approbation,  are 
"  transcendently  superior.  Of  the  former  kind  are 
"  docility,  memory,  and  all  the  virtues  distinguished 
"  by  the  general  name  of  genius,  or  capacity  :  per- 
"  sons  possessed  of  them  are  called  ingenuous.  The 
"  latter  class  comprehends  the  great  and  genuine  <uir- 
•"  tues,  which  we  denominate  voluntary,  as  prudence, 

/£era;  ll  KOLI  Y}  OL^TYI  Kara  TYIV  X/apofax.  TO.UTVY. 
OL^    auTuv    T&i    fj.lv    d/a^o^r/x^c,  ra;  ll  r 

JS.lv,    XOU   (7VVt!7lV,    X.CCI     q^WlV,      llOLYOnTtX.O(.C 

oe  xa;  GtotyfOffvvviv,  ^9/Kaf.    XeyoKrec    yap 
v  teyo^iv  crt  votpw,  \i  VVVITO/;,  axx  OTI 

l   KXI    TOY   <TO<OY    TY.V    tlY      TUV 


Ethic,  ad  Nicom.  lib.  1.  sub.  Jin. 


CHAP.  II.  AN   ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  285 

"  temperance,  fortitude,  justice,  and  others  of  the 
same  kind  *." 

The  word  virtue  has  indeed  great  latitude  of  sig-« 
nification.  It  denotes  any  quality  of  a  thing  tending 
to  the  happiness  of  a  percipient  being ;  it  denotes 
that  quality,  or  perfection  of  qualities,  by  which  a 
thing  is  fitted  to  answer  its  end  ;  sometimes  it  de 
notes  power  or  agency  in  general ;  and  sometimes 
any  habit  which  improves  the  faculties  of  the  human 
rnind.  In  the  first  three  senses  we  ascribe  virtue  to 
the  soul,  and  to  the  body,  to  brutes,  and  inanimate 
things  ;  in  the  last,  to  our  intellectual  as  well  as 
moral  nature.  And  no  doubt  instances  may  be  found 
cf  ambiguity  and  want  of  precision,  even  in  the  best 
moralists,  from  an  improper  use  of  this  word.  Yet 
I  believe  this  attempt  of  Mr  HUME'S  is  the  first 
that  has  been  made  to  prove,  that  among  these  very 
different  sorts  of  virtue  there  is  little  or  no  difference. 
Our  author  seems  indeed  to  have  a  singular  aversion 
to  that  kind  of  curiosity,  which,  not  satisfied  with 
knowing  the  names,  is  industrious  to  discover  the 
natures  of  things.  When  he  finds  two  or  three  dif 
ferent  things  called  by  the  same  name,  he  will  rather 
%v  rite  fifty  pages  of  metaphysic  to  prove  that  they  are 
the  same,  than  give  himself  the  trouble  to  examine 

*  Animi  autem,  et  eius  animi  partis  quse  prmceps  est, 
quceque  mens  nominatur,  plures  simt  virtutes,  sed  duo  primn 
genera  :  unum  earum  quae  ingenerantur  suapte  natura,  ap- 
pellanturquc  non  voluntariae  :  alterum  autem  earum,  quce 
in  voluntate  positae,  magis  proprie  eo  nomine  appellari  so- 
lent  j  quarumestexcellensinanimorumlaudeprciestantia.  Pri- 
oris  generis  est  docilitas,  memoria  ,  qualia  fere  omnia  ap- 
pellantur  uno  ingenii  nomine  j  casque  virtutes  qui  habent 
ingeniosi  vocantur.  Alterum  autem  genus  est  magnaruw 
verarumque  -virtutiim,  quas  appellamus  voluntaries,  ut  pru- 
dentiam,  temperantiam,  fcrtitndinem,  justitiam,  et  reliquas 
ejusdeni  generis.— —Virtutes  voluntaries  proprie  virtutes 
appellantur,  multumquc  excellunt,  &c. 

Cicera  De  Finibus,  lib.  5.  caj>.  i3.  ex  editions  Davisii. 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III. 

them  so  as  to  see  what  they  really  are  *.  Is  it  not 
strange,  that  a  man  of  science  should  ever  have  taken 
it  in  his  head,  that  the  chacteristic  of  a  genus  is  a 
sufficient  description  of  a  species  ?  He  might  as  well 
have  supposed,  that  because  perception  and  self-mo 
tion  belong  to  animal  life  in  general,  it  is  therefore 
a  sufficient  definition  of  man,  to  call  him  a  self-mov 
ing  and  percipient  creature  :  from  which  profound 
principle  it  clearly  follows,  that  man  is  a  beast,  and 
that  a  beast  is  a  man. 

By  such  reasoning  as  Mr  HUME  has  used  on  the 
present  occasion,  it  would  be  easy  to  prove  any  doc 
trine.  The  method  is  this  : — and  I  hope  those  who 
may  hereafter  chuse  to  astonish  the  world  with  a 
system  of  metaphysical  paradoxes,  will  do  me  the 
honour  and  the  justice  to  acknowledge,  that  I  was 
the  first  who  unfolded  the  whale  art  and  mystery  of 
that  branch  of  manufacture  within  the  compass  of 
one  short  RECIPE  : — Take  a  word  (an  abstract  term 
is  the  most  convenient)  which  admits  of  more  than 
one  signification ;  and  by  the  help  of  a  predicate  and 
copula,  form  a  proposition,  suitable  to  your  system, 
or  to  your  humour,  or  to  any  other  thing  you  please, 
except  truth.  When  laying  down  your  premises, 
you  are  to  use  the  name  of  the  quality  or  subject,  in 
one  sense  ;  and,  when  inferring  your  conclusion,  in 
another.  You  are  then  to  urge  a  few  equivocal 
facts,  very  slightly  examined,  (the  more  slightly  the 
betteO,  as  a  further  proof  of  the  said  conclusion  ; 
and  to  shut  up  all  with  citing  some  ancient  authori 
ties,  either  real  or  licfitious,  as  may  best  suit  your 
purpose.  A  few  occasional  strictures  on  religion  as 
an  U'lphilosophical  -thing,  and  a  sneer  at  the  Whole 
Duty  of  Man  f,  or  any  other  good  book,  will  give 
your  Dissertation  what  many  are  pleased  to  call  a 
"liberal  turn  ;  and  will  go  near  to  convince  the  world, 

*  Se?,   anotuer  remarkable   instance,  Part   2.  chap.  2. 
ect.  1.  of  tins  Essay. 
-If  t  See  Hume's  Essays,  vol.  2.  p.  338.  edit.  1767. 


GHAF.  II.  AN  ESS  AT  ON  TRtftlf.  2y 

that   you  are  a  candid  philosopher,  a  manly  free 
thinker,  and  a  very. fine  writer . 

It  is  to  no  purpose  that  our  author  calls  this  a- 
verbal  dispute,  and  sometimes  condescends  to  soften 
matters  by  an  almost,  or  some  such  evasive  word. 
His  doctrine  obviously  tends  to  confound  all  our 
ideas  of  virtue  and  duty,  and  to  make  us  consider' 
ourselves  as  mere  machines,  acted  upon  by  external 
and  irresistible  impulse,  and  not  more  accountable 
for  moral  blemishes,  than  for  ignorance,  want  of  un 
derstanding,  poverty,  deformity,  and  disease.  If  the 
reader  think  as  seriously  of  the  controversy  as  I  do, 
he  will  pardon  the  length  of  this  digression. 

I  hope  it  now  appears,  that  there  is  a  kind  of  me* 
taphysic,  which,  whatever  respectable  names  it  may 
have  assumed,  deserves  contempt  or  censure  from 
every  lover  of  truth.  If  it  be  detrimental  to  science, 
it  is  equally  so  to  the  affairs  of  life.  Whenever  one 
enters  on  business,  the  metaphysical  spirit  must  be 
laid  aside,  otherwise  it  will  render  him  ridiculous, 
perhaps  detestable.  Sure  it  will  not  be  said,  that 
any  portion  of  this  spirit  is  necessary  to  form  a  man 
for  stations  of  high  importance.  For  these,  a  turn 
to  metaphysic  would  be  as  effectual  a  disqualifi 
cation  as  want  of  understanding.  The  metaphy 
sician  is  cold,  wavering,  distrustful,  and  perpetually 
ruminates  on  words,  distinctions,  arguments  and  sys 
tems.  He  attends  to  the  events  of  life  with  a  view 
chiefly  to  the  system  that  happens  for  the  time  to 
predominate  in  his  imagination,  and  to  which  he  is* 
anxious  to  reconcile  every  appearance.  His  obser 
vation  is  therefore  partial  and  inaccurate,  because, 
he  contemplates  nature  through  the  medium  of  his' 
favourite  theory,  which  is  always  false;  so  that,  ex 
perience,  which  enlarges,  ascertains,  and  methodises, 
the  knowledge  of  other  men,  serves  only  to  heighten 
the  natural  darkness  and  contusion  of  his.  His  li~ 
terary  studies  are  conducted  with  the  same  spirit,, 
and  produce  the  same  effects— Whereas,  to  the  ad- 
A  a  3 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  1IJ. 

ministration  of  great  affairs,  truth  and  steadiness  of 
principle,  constancy  of  mind,  intuitive  sagacity,  ex 
treme  quickness  in  apprehending  the  present  and  an 
ticipating  the  future,  are  indispensably  necessary. 
Whatever  tends  to  weaken  and  unsettle  the  mind,  to 
cramp  the  imagination,  to  fix  the  attention  on  minute 
and  trifling  objects,  and  withdraw  it  from  those  en 
larged  prospects  of  nature  and  mankind,  in  which 
true  genius  loves  to  expatiate  ;  whatever  has  this  ten 
dency,  and  surely  metaphysic  has  it,  is  the  bane  of 
genius,  and  of  every  thing  that  is  great  in  human 
nature. 

In  the  lower  walks  of  life,  our  theorist  will  be 
oftener  the  object  of  ridicule  than  of  detestation. 
Yet  even  here,  the  man  is  to  be  pitied,  who,  in  mat 
ters  of  moment,  happens  to  be  connected  with  a 
stanch  metaphysician.  Doubts,  disputes,  and  con 
jectures,  will  be  the  plague  of  his  life.  If  his  as 
sociate  form  a  system  of  action  or  inaction,  of  doubt 
or  confidence,  he  will  stick  by  it,  however  absurd, 
as  long  as  he  has  one  verbal  argument  unanswered  to 
urge  in  defence  of  it.  In  accounting  for  the  conduct 
of  others,  he  will  reject  obvious  causes,  and  set  him 
self  to  explore  such  as  are  more  remote  and  refined. 
Making  no  proper  allowance  for  the  endless  variety 
of  human  character,  he  will  suppose  all  men  influen 
ced,  like  himself,  by  system  and  verbal  argument  : 
certain  causes,  in  his  judgment,  must  of  necessity  pro 
duce  certain  effects ;  for  he  has  twenty  reasons  ready 
to  offer,  by  which  it  is  demonstrable,  that  they  can 
not  fail :  and  it  is  well,  if  experience,  at  last  con 
vince  him,  that  there  was  a  small  verbal  ambiguity 
in  his  principles,  and  that  his  views  of  mankind  were 
not  quite  so  extensive  as  they  ought  to  have  been. 
In  a  word,  unless  he  be  very  good-natured,  and  of  a 
passive  disposition,  his  refinements  will  do  more 
harm  than  even  the  stiff  stupidity  of  un  idiot.  If 
inclined  to  fraud,  or  ai.y  sort  of  vce,  he  will  i:ever 
be  at  a  iojS  for  an  evasion  j  which,  if  it  should  not 


C«AP.   II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  289 

satisfy  his  associate  will  perplex  and  plague  him 
most  effectually.  1  need  not  enlarge  ;  the  reader  may 
conceive  the  rest.  To  aid  his  fancy,  he  will  find 
some  traits  of  this  character,  in  one  of  its  most  a- 
musing  and  least  disagreeable  forms,  delineated  with 
a  masterly  pencil  in  the  person,  of  Walter  Shandy, 
Esquire. 

It,  is.  astonishing  to  consider,  how  little  mankind 
value  the  good  within  their  reach,  and  how  ardently 
they  pursue  what  nature  has  placed  beyond  it ;  how 
blindly  they  over-rate  what  they  have  no  experience 
of,  and  how  fondly  they  admire  what  they  do  not 
understand  This  verbal  rnetaphysic  has  been  digni- 
iied  with  the  name  of  science,  and  verbal  metaphy 
sicians  have  been  reputed  philosophers,  and  men  of 
genius.  Doubtless  a  man  of  genius  may,  by  the 
fashion  of  the  times,  be  seduced  into  these  studies  : 
but  that  particular  cast  of  mind  which  fits  a  man  for 
them^and  recommends  them  to  his  choice,  is  not  ge 
nius,  but  a  minute  and  feeble  understanding  ;  capable 
indeed  of  being  made,  by  long  practice,  expert  in  the 
management  of  words  ;  but  which  never  did,  and  ne 
ver  will,  qualify  any  man  for  the  discovery  or  illus* 
tration  of  sentiment.  For  what  is  genius?  What," 
but  sound  judgment,  sensibility  of  heart,  and  a  talent 
for  accurate  and  extensive  observation  ?  And  will 
sound  judgment  prepare  a  man  for  being  imposed  on 
by  words?  will  sensibility  of  heart  Tender  him  in 
sensible  to  his  own  feelings  and  inattentive  to  those 
of  other  men  ?  will  a  talent  for  accurate  and  extensive 
observation,  make  him  ignorant  of  the  real  pheno 
mena  of  nature,  and  consequently,  incapable  of  de 
tecting  what  is  false  or  equivocal  in  the  representa 
tion  of  facts  ?  And  yet,  when  facts  are  fairly  and 
itilly  represented;  when  human  sentiments  are  strong-, 
ly  felt,  and  perspicuously  described  ;  and  when  the 
meanin^  of  words  is  ascertained,  and  the  same  word 
has  always  the  same  idea  annexed  to  it,  .  there  is 
an  end  of  inetaphysic. 


290  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART    III. 

A  body  is  neither  vigorous  nor  beautiful,  in  which 
the  size  of  some  members  is  above,  and  that  of  oth 
ers  below,  their  due  proportion  :  every  part  must 
have  its  proper  size  and  strength,  otherwise  the  re 
sult  of  the  whole  will  be  deformity  and  weakness. 
Neither  is  real  genius  consistent  with  a  dispropor 
tionate  strength  of  the  reasoning  powers  above  those 
of  taste  and  imagination.  Those  minds  in  whom  all 
the  faculties  are  united  in  their  due  proportion,  are 
far  superior  to  the  puerilities  of  metaphysical  scepti 
cism.  They  trust  to  their  own  feelings,  which  are 
strong  and  decisive,  and  leave  no  room  for  hesitation 
or  doubts  about  their  authenticity.  They  see 
through  moral  subjects  at  one  glance  ;  and  what 
they  say,  carries  both  the  heart  and  the  understand 
ing  along  with  it.  When  one  has  long  drudged  in 
the  dull  and  unprofitable  pages  of  metaphysic,  how 
pleasing  the  transition  to  a  moral  writer  of  true  ge 
nius  !  Would  you  know  what  that  genius  is,  and 
where  it  may  be  found  ?  Go  to  Shakespeare,  to  Ba 
con,  to  Johnson^  to  Montesquieu,  to  Rosseau  *  ;  and 

*  As  several  persons,  highly  respectable  both  for  their 
talents  and  principles,  have  desired  to  know  my  reasons  for 
joining  Rousseau's  name  to  those  of  Bacon,  Shakespeare, 
Johnson,  and  Montesquieu,  I  beg  leave  to  take  this  oppor 
tunity  of  explaining_  my  sentiments  in  regard  to  that  cele 
brated  author. 

It  is  because  I  consider  Rousseau  as  a  moral  writer  cf 
true  genius,  that  I  mention  his  name  in  this  place.  Sensi 
bility  of  heart  '7  a  talent  for  extensive  and  accurate  obser 
vation  5  liveliness  and  ardour  of  fancy  j  and  a  style  copious, 
nervous,  and  elegant,  beyond  that  of  any  other  French  wri 
ter, — are  his  distinguishing  characteristics.  In  argument 
he  is  not  always  equally  successful,  fof  lie  often  mistakes 
declamation  for  proof,  and  hypothesis  for  fact  j  but  his 
eloquence,  when  addressed  to  the  heart,  over-powers  with 
force  irresistable.  A  greater  number  of  important  facts 
relating  to  the  human  mind  are  recorded  in  his  works  than 
in  all  the  books  of  all  the  sceptical  philosophers  ancient 


CHAP.  II.  AN    ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  2C}I 

Avhen  you  have  studied  them,  return,  if  you  can,  to 
HUME,  and  HOBBES,  and^MALEBRANCHE,  and  LEIB 
NITZ,  and  SPINOSA.  If,  while  you  learned  wisdom 
from  the  former,  your  heart  exulted  within  you, 

and  modem.  And  he  appears  in  general  to  be  a  friend  "to 
virtue,  to  mankind,  to  natural  religion,  and  sometimes  to 
Christianity. 

Yet  none  even  of  his  best  works  are  free  from  absurdi 
ty.  His  reasoning,  on  the  effects  of  the  sciences,  and  on 
the  origin  and  progress  of  human  society,  are  diffuse,  inac 
curate,  and  often  weak  ;  much  perverted  by  theo  ries  of 
his  own,  as  well  as  by  too  implicit  an  admittance  of  the 
vague  assertions  of  travellers,, and  of  the  systems  and  doc 
trines  of  some  favourite  French  philosophers :  and  he 
seems,  in  these,  and  frequently  too  in  his  other  writings,  to 
consider  animal  pleasure  arid  bodily  accomplishments  as 
the  happiness  and  perfection  of  man.  His  plan  of  educa 
tion,  though  admirable  in  many  parts,  ais  in  some  injudi 
cious  and  dangerous,  and  impracticable  as  a  whole.  The 
character  of  Julia's  Lover  is  drawn  with  a  masterly  hand 
indeed,  and  well  conducted  throughout  5  but  the  lady  has 
two  characters,  and  those  incompatible ; — the  Wife  of 
Weimar  is  quite  a  different  person  from  the  mistress  of  St 
Preux.  Wolmar  himself  is  an  impossible  character  ;  des 
titute  of  p'T.iciple,  yet  of  ri^:d  yjrtr.e  j  destitute  of  feeling, 
yet  capable:  of  tenderness  and  attachment  \  delicate  in  his 
notions  of  honour,  yet  not  ashamed  to  marry  a  woman 
whom  he  knew  to  be  to  all  intents  and  purposes  devoted  to 
another. 

Some  of  this  anther's  remarks  on  the  spirit  of  Chris 
tianity,  and  on  the  character  of  its  .Divine  Founder,  are 
not  only  excellent,  but  transcendency  so,  and  1  believe 
no  Christian  ever  read  them  without  feeling  his  heart  v*  ar 
med,  and  his  faith  confirmed.  But  what  he  says— of  the 
absurdities  which  he  fancies  to  be  contained  in  the  sacred 
history, — of  the  impropriety  of  the  evidence  of  miracles, 
— of  the  analogy  between  those  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the 
tiicks  of  jugglers,---of  '.he  insignificancy  and  impertinence 
of  prayer, — of  the  sufficiency  of  human  reason  for  discov 
ering  a  complete  and  comfortable  scheme  of  natural  reli- 


ESSAY    ON    TRUTH.  PART    III. 

and  rejoiced  to  contemplate  the  sublime  and  success 
ful  efforts  of  human  intellect  ;  perhaps  it  may  now 
be  of  use,  as  a  lesson  of  humility,  to  have  recourse  to 
the  latter,  and,  for  a  while,  to  behold  the  picture  of 

gion, — of  the  discouraging  nature  of  the  terms  of  salvation 
offered  in  the  Gospel,— of  the  measure  of  evidence  that 
ought  to  accompany  divine  revelation  (which,  as  he  states 
it,  would  be  incompatible  with  man's  free  agency  and  moral 
probation) — what  he  says  of  these,  and  of  several  other 
theological  points  of  great  importance,  betrays  a  degree  of 
ignorance  and  prejudice,  of  which,  as  a  philosopher,  as  a 
scholar,  and  as  a  man,  he  should  have  been  utterly  asham 
ed.  He  appears  to  be  distressed  with  his  doubts  ;  and  yet, 
without  having  ever  examined  whether  they  be  well  or  ill- 
founded,  scruples  not  to  exert  all  his  eloquence  on  purpose 
to  infuse  them  into  others  :  a  conduct,  which  I  must  e- 
ver  condemn  as  illiberal,* unjust,  and  cruel.  Had  Rousseau 
studied  the  scripture,  and  the  writings  of  rational  divines, 
with  as  much  care  as  he  seems  to  have  employed  in  read 
ing  the  books,  and  listening  to  the  conversation  of  French 
infidels,  and  in  attending  to  the  unchristian  practices  and 
doctrines  warranted  by  some  ecclesiastical  establishments  j 
I  may  venture  to  assure  him,  that  his  mind  would  have 
been  much  more  at  ease,  his  works  much  more  valuable, 
and  his  memory  much  dearer  to  all  good  men. 

Rousseau  is,  in  my  opinion,  a  great  philosophical  genius,, 
but  wild,  irregular,  and  often  self-contradictory  5  disposed, 
from  the  fashion  of  the  times,  and  from  his  desire  of  being 
reputed  a  bold  speaker  and  freethinker,  to  adopt  the  doc 
trines  of  infidelity  j  but  of  a  heart  too  tender,  and  an  ima  • 
gination  too  lively,  to  permit  him  to  become  a  thorough 
paced  i:ifideJ.  Had  he  lived  in  an  age  less  addicted  to 
hypothesis,  he  might  have  distinguished  himself  as  a  mo 
ral  philosopher  of  the  first  rank.  What  pity,  that  a  pro 
per  sense  of  his  superiority  to  his  contemporaries  upon  the 
continent  could  not  preserve  him  from  the  contagion  of 
their  example  !  For,  though  now  it  is  the  fashion  for  eve 
ry  French  declaimer  to  talk  of  Bacon  and  Newton,  I 
question,  whether  in  any  age  since  the  days  of  Socrates  the 
building  of  fanciful  theories  was  so  epidemical  as  in  the 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH  $93 

a  soul  wandering  from  thought  to  thought,  without 
knowing  where  to  fix  ;  and  from  a  total  want  of  feel 
ing,  or  a  total  ignorance  of  what  it  feels,  mistaking 
names  for  things,  verbal  distinctions  and  analogies 
for  real  difference  and  similitude,  and  the  obscure  in 
sinuations  of  a  bewildered  understanding,  puzzled 
with  words,  and  perverted  with  theory,  for  the  sen 
timents  of  nature,  and  the  dictates  of  reason.  A 
metaphysician,  exploring  the  recesses  of  the  human 
heart  has  just  such  a  chance  for  finding  the  truth,  as 
a  man  with  microscope  eyes  would  have  for  finding 
the  road.  The  latter  might  amuse  himself  with 
contemplating  the  various  mineral  strata  that  are 
diffused  along  the  expansion  of  a  needle's  point;  but 
of  the  face  of  nature  he  could  make  nothing  ;  he 
would  start  back  with  horror  from  the  caverns  yaw 
ning  between  the  mountainous  grains  of  sand  that  lie 
before  him  ;  but  the  real  gulf  or  mountain  he  could 
not  see  at  all. 

present.  If  the  men  of  learning  formerly  employed  their 
ingenuity  in.  defending  the  theories  of  that  philosopher  by 
whose  name  they  were  ambitious  to  be  distinguished  j  they 
are  now  no  less  industrious  in  devising  and  vindicating, 
each  man  a  theory  of  his  own. 

To  conclude  :  the  writings  of  this  author,  with  all  their 
imperfections,  may  be  read  by  the  philosopher  with  advantage 
as  they  often  direct  to  the  right  observation  and  interpreta 
tion  of  nature  ;  and  by  the  Christian  without  detriment,  as 
the  cavils  they  contain  against  religion  are  too  slight  and 
too  paradoxical  to  weaken  the  faith  of  any  one  who  is  tol 
erably  instructed  in  the  principles  and  evidence  of  Chris 
tianity.  To  the  man  of  taste  they  can  never  fail  to  re 
commend  themselves,  by  the  irresistible  charms  of  the 
composition. 

The  improprieties  in  Rousseau's  late  conduct  appear  to 
me  to  have  arisen  rather  from  bcdily  infirmity  than  from 
moral  depravation,  and  consequently  to  render  him  an  ob 
ject  of  forbearance  and  pity,  rather  than  of  persecution  or 
ridicule. 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART    TIT. 

Is  the  futility  of  metaphysical  systems  exaggerat 
ed  beyond  the  truth  by  this  allusion  ?  Tell  me, 
then,  in  which  of  those  systems  I  shall  find  such  a 
description  of  the  soul  of  man  as  would  enable  me  to 
know  what  it  is.  A  great  and  excellent  author  ob 
serves,  that  if  all  human  things  were  to  perish  ex 
cept  the  works  of  Shakespeare,  it  might  still  be 
known  from  them  what  sort  of  creature  man  was  *  : 
— A  sentiment  nobly  imagined,  and  as  just  as  it  is 
sublime  !  Can  the  same  thing  be  said  with  truth  of 
any  one,  or  of  all  the  metaphysical  treatises  that  have 
been  written  on  the  nature  of  man  ?  If  any  inhabi 
tant  of  another  planet  were  to  read  The  Trea 
tise  of  Human  Nature^  what  notions  of  human  na 
ture  could  he  gather  from  it  ? — That  man  must  be 
lieve  one  thing  by  instinct^  and  must  also  believe  the 
contrary  by  reason  : — That  the  universe  is  nothing 
but  a  heap  of  perceptions  unperceived  by  any  sub 
stance  :  That  this  universe,  for  any  thing  man  knows 
to  the  contrary,  might  have  made  himself,  that  is, 
existed  before  it  existed  ;  as  we  have  no  reason  to 
believe  that  it  proceeded  from  any  cause,  notwith 
standing  it  may  have  had  a  beginning  : — That  though 
a  man  could  bring  himself  to  believe,  yea,  'and  have 
reason  to  believe,  that  every  thing  in  the  universe 
proceeds  from  some  cause,  yet  it  would  be  unreason 
able  for  him  to  believe,  that  the  universe  itself  pro- 
ceeds  from  a  cause  : — That  the  soul  of  man  is  not 
the  same  this  moment  it  was  the  last  ;  that  wTe  know 
not  what  it  is  ;  that  it  is  not  one,  but  many  things  ; 
and  that  it  is  nothing  at  all ; — and  yet,  that  in  this 
soul  is  the  agency  of  all.  the  causes  that  operate 
throughout  the  sensible  creation  ; — and  yet,  that  in 
this  soul  there  is  neither  power  nor  agency,  nor  any 
idea  of  either: — That  if  thieves,  cheats,  and  cut- 
throa'.s,  deserve  to  be  hanged,  criuples,  idiots,  and 
diseased  person-,  shouV  not  be  permitted  to  live  ; 

*  Lord  Lytt'.ti.oi/_      :  .    gues  of  the  Dead. 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  295 

because  the  imperfections  of  the  latter,  and  the  faults 
of  the  former,  are  on  the   very   same  footing,  both 
being  disapproved  by  those  who  contemplate   them  : 
— That  the   perfection   of  human   knowledge   is   to 
doubt  : — That  man  ought  to  believe  nothing,  and  yet 
that  man's  belief  ought   to  be   influenced   and  deter 
mined  by  certain    principles  : — That   we   ought   to 
doubt  of  every  thing,  yea  of  our  doubts  themselves  ; 
and  therefore  the  utmost  that  philosophy   can  do,   is 
to  give  a  doubtful  solution  of  doubtful   doubts  *  :-— 
That  nature  continually  imposes  on  us,  and  continual 
ly  counteracts  herself,  by  giving  us  sagacity  to  de 
tect  the  imposture  : — That   we   are   necessarily   an£ 
unavoidably  determined  to  act  and   think  in    certain 
cases  after  a  certain  manner,  but  that  we  ought   not 
to  submit   to   this  unavoidable  necessity  ;  and  that 
they  are  fools  who  do  so  ; — That  man,  in  all  his  per 
ceptions,  actions,  and  volitions,  is  a  mere  passive  ma 
chine,  and  has  no  separate  existence  of  his  own,  being 
entirely  made  up  of  other  things,  of  the  existence  of 
which,  however,  he  is  by  no  means  certain  ;  and  yet, 
that  the  nature  of  all  things  depends  so  much    upon 
man,  that  two  and  two  could  not  be   equal  to  four, 
nor  fire  produce  heat,  nor  the  sun  light,  without  an 
express  act  of  the  human  understanding  :-— .That  none 
of  our  actions  are  in  our  power  ;  that   we   ought   to 
exercise  power  over  our  actions  ;  and   that   there  is 
no  such  thing   as   power  : — That  body  and   motion 
may  be  regarded  as  the  cause  of  thought  ;  and   that 
body  does  not  exist  : — That  the   universe  exists  in 
the  mind  ;  and  that  the  mind  does  not  exist  : — That 
the  human  understanding,  acting  alone,  does  entirely 
subvert  itself,  and  prove  by  argument,  that  by  argu 
ment  nothing  can  be  proved  : — These   are  a  few  of 

*  Strange  as  this  expression  may  seem,  it  is  not  with 
out  a  precedent.  The  fourth  section  of  Mr  HUME'S  Es- 
says  on  the  Human  Understanding  is  called,  Sceptical  doubts 
concerning  the  operations  of  the  understanding  ;  and  the 
£fth  section  bears  this  title,  Sceptical  solution  of  these  doubts . 

B  b 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III. 

the  many  sublime  mysteries  brought  to  light  by  this 
great  philosopher.  But  these,  however  they  may 
illuminate  our  terrestrial  literati,  would  convey  no 
information  to  the  planetary  stranger,  except  perhaps 
that  the  sage  metaphysician  knew  nothing  of  this 
subject. 

What  a  strange  detail  !  does  not  the  reader  ex- 
clairn  ?  Can  it  be,  that  any  man  should  ever  bring 
himself  to  think,  or  imagine  that  he  could  bring  o- 
thers  to  think  so  absurdly  !  What  a  taste,  what  a 
heart  must  he  possess,  whose  delight  it  is,  to  repre 
sent  nature  as  a  chaos,  and  man  as  a  monster  ;  to 
search  for  deformity  and  confusion,  where  others  re 
joice  in  the  perception  of  order  and  beauty  ;  and  to 
seek  to  imbitter  the  happiest  moments  of  human  life, 
namely,  those  we  employ  in  contemplating  the  works 
of  creation,  and  adoring  their  Author,  by  this  sug 
gestion,  equally  false  and  malevolent,  that  the  moral 
as  well  as  material  world,  is  nothing  but  darkness, 
dissonance,  and  perplexity  ! 

"  Where  all  life  dies,  death  lives,  and  nature  breeds 
**  Perverse,  all  monstrous,  all  prodigious  things, 
"  Abominable,  unutterable,  and  worse 
"  Than  fables  yet  hath  feign'd,  or  fear  conceiv'd  ! 

Were  this  system  a  true  one,  we  should  be  little  o- 
bliged  to  him  who  gives  it  to  the  public  ;  for  we 
could  hardly  imagine  a  greater  misfortune  than  such 
a  cast  of  understanding  as  would  make  us  believe  it. 
But  founded,  as  it  is,  in  words  misunderstood,  and 
facts  misrepresented  ; — supported,  as  it  is,  by  so 
phistry  so  egregious,  and  often  so  puerile,  that  we 
can  hardly  conceive  how  even  the  author  himself 
should  be  imposed  upon  by  it  ; — surely  he  who  at 
tempts  to  obtrude  it  on  the  weak  and  unwary,  must 
have  something  in  his  disposition,  which,  to  a  man 
of  a  good  heart,  or  good  taste,  can  never  be  the  ob 
ject  of  envy. 


CHAP.  II.  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

We  are  told,  that  the  end  of  scepticism,  as  it  was 
taught  by  Pyrrho,  Sextus  Empiricus,  and  other  an 
cients,  was  to  obtain  indisturbance.  I  know  not 
whether  this  be  the  end  our  modern  sceptics  have 
in  view  ;  if  it  is,  the  means  they  employ  for  attain 
ing  it  are  strangely  preposterous.  If  the  prospect 
of  nature  exhibited  in  their  systems  produce  tran 
quillity  or  indisturbance,  how  dreadful  must  that 
tranquillity  be  !  It  is  like  that  of  a  man,  turned  a-drift 
amidst  a  dark  and  tempestuous  ocean,  in  a  crazy 
skiff,  with  neither  rudder  nor  compass,  who,  ex 
hausted  by  the  agitations  of  despair  and  distraction, 
loses  at  last  all  sense  of  his  misery,  and  becomes  to 
tally  stupid.  In  fact,  the  only  thing,  that  can  enable 
sceptics  to  endure  existence,  is  insensibility.  Au4 
how  far  that  is  consistent  with  delicacy  of  mind,  let 
those  among  them  explain  who  are  ambitious  of  pas 
sing  for  men  of  taste. 

It  is  remarked  by  a  very  ingenious  and  amiable 
writer,  that  "  many  philosophers  have  been  infidels, 
"  few  men  of  taste  and  sentiment  *."  This,  if  I 
mistake  not,  holds  equally  true  of  our  sceptics  in 
philosophy,  and  infidels  in  religion  :  and  it  holds  true 
of  both  for  the  same  reason.  The  views  and  expec 
tations  of  the  infidel  and  sceptic  are  so  full  of  horror, 
that  to  a  man  of  taste,  that  is,  of  sensibility  and  ima 
gination,  they  are  insupportable.  On  the  other  hand, 
what  true  religion  and  true  philosophy  dictate  of  God, 
and  providence,  and  man,  is  so  charming,  so  conso 
nant  with  all  the  finer  and  nobler  feelings  in  human 
nature,  that  every  man  of  taste  who  hears  of  it  must 
wish  it  to  be  true  :  and  I  never  yet  heard  of  one  per 
son  of  candour,  who  wished  to  find  the  evidence  of 
the  gosp  '1  satisfactory,  and  did  not  find  it  so.  Dull 
imaginations  and  hard  hearts  can  bear  the  thought  of 
endless  confusion,  of  virtue  depressed  and  vice  tri- 

*  Dr  Gregory's  Comparative  View,  p.  20 1,  fourth  edi 
tion  * 


29$  Atf    ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  IIT. 

utnphant,  of  au  universe  peopled  with  fiends  and  fu 
ries,  of  creation  annihilated,  and  chaos  restored  to  re 
main  a  scene  of  darkness  and  solitude  for  ever  and 
for  ever  :  But  it  is  not  so  with  the  benevolent  and 
tender-hearted  ;  their  notions  are  regulated  by  a- 
riother  standard  ;  their  hopes  and  fears,  their  joys 
and  sorrows,  are  quite  of  a  different  kind. 

The  moral  powers  and  the  powers  of  taste  are 
rnore  congenial  than  is  commonly  imagined  ;  and  he 
who  is  destitute  of  the  latter  will  ever  be  found  as 
incapable  to  describe  or  judge  of  the  former,  as  a 
man  wanting  the  sense  of  smell  is  to  decide  concer 
ning  relishes.  Nothing  is  more  true,  than  that 
**  a  little  learning  is  a  dangerous  thing."  If  we  are 
but  a  little  acquainted  with  one  part  of  a  complicated 
system,  how  is  it  possible  for  us  to  judge  aright,  ei 
ther  of  the  nature  of  the  whole,  or  the  fitness  of  that 
part  !  And  a  little  knowledge  of  one  small  part  of 
the  mental  system,  is  all  that  any  man  can  be  allow 
ed  to  have,  who  is  defective  in  imagination,  sensi 
bility,  and  the  other  powers  of  taste.  Yet,  as  igno 
rance  is  apt  to  produce  temerity,  I  should  not  be 
surprised  to  find  such  men  most  forward  to  attempt 
reducing  the  philosophy  of  human  nature -to  system  : 
and,  if  they  made  the  attempt,  I  should  not  wonder 
that  they  fell  into  the  most  important  mistakes. 
Like  a  short-sighted  landscape  painter,  they  might 
^possibly  delineate  some  of  the  largest  and  roughest 
figures  with  tolerable  exactness  :  but  of  the  minuter 
objects,  some  would  wholly  escape  their  notice,  and 
others  appear  blotted  and  distorted,  on  which  nature 
had  bestowed  the  utmost  delicacy  of  colour,  and  har 
mony  of  proportion. 

The  modern  sceptical  philosophy  is  as  corrupt  a 
body  of  science  as  ever  appeared  in  the  world.  And 
it  deserves  our  notice,  that  the  most  considerable  of 
its  adherents  and  promoters  were  more  eminent  for 
subtlety  of  reason,  than  for  sensibility  of  taste.  We 
know  that  this  was  the  case  with  MALI  BRANCHED 


II.  AN    ESSAY   ON    TRUTH.  29$ 

of  whom  Mr  D'Alembert  says,  that  he  could  not 
read  the  most  sublime  verses  without  weariness  and 
disgust  *.  This  was  also  the  case  with  another  au 
thor,  to  whom  our  latter  sceptics  are  more  obliged 
than  they  seem  willing  to  acknowledge,  I  mean  Mr 
HOBBES;  whose  translation  of  Homer  bears  just  such 
a  resemblance  to  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey,  as  a  putre 
fying  carcase  bears  to  a  beautiful  and  vigorous  hu 
man  body.  Of  the  taste  of  our  later  sceptics,  I  leave 
the  reader  to  judge  from  his  own  observation. 

The  philosophy  of  the  mind,  if  such  as  it  ought 
to  be,  would  certainly  interest  us  more  than  any  o- 
ther  science.  Are  the  sceptical  treatises  on  this 
subject  interesting  ?  Do  they  bring  conviction  to  the 
judgment,  or  delight  to  the  fancy?  Do  they  either 
reach  the  heart,  or  seem  to  proceed  from  it  ?  Do 
they  make  us  better  acquainted  with  ourselves,  or 
better  prepared  for  the  business  of  life  ?  Do  they  not 
raiher  infeeble  and  harass  the  sou),  divert  its  atten 
tion  from  every  thing  that  can  enlarge  and  improve 
it,  give  it  a  disrelish  for  itself,  and  for  every  thing 
else,  and  disqualify  it  alike  for  action,  and  for  useful 
knowledge  ? 

Other  causes  might  be  assigned  for  the  present 
degeneracy  of  the  moral  sciences.  I  shall  mention 
one,  which  I  the  rather  chuse  to  take  notice  of,  and 
insist  upon,  because  it  has  been  generally  overlooked. 
DES  CARTES  and  MALEBRANCHE  introduced  the  fa 
shion,  whicfi  continues  to  this  day.  of  neglecting  the 
ancients  in  all  their  philosophical  inquiries.  We 
Seem  to  think,  because  we  are  confessedly  superior 
in  some  sere. ices,  that  we  must  be  so  in  all  But 
that  this  is  a  rash  judgment,  may  easily  be  made  ap 
pear,  even  on  the  supposition,  that  human  genius  is 
nearly  the  same  in  all  ages* 

When  accidental  discovery,  long  experience,  or 
profound  investigation,  are  the  means  of  advancing  a 

*  Essai  sur  le  Gout. 

Bb3 


300  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  -  PART  Ilf, 

science/it  is  reasonable  to  expect,  that  the  improve 
ments  of  that  science  will  increase  with  length  of 
time.  Accordingly  we  find,  that  in  natural  philoso 
phy,  natural  history,  and  some  parts  of  mathematical 
learning,  the  moderns  are  far  superior  to  the  an 
cients.  But  the  science  of  human  nature,  being  at 
tainable  rather  by  intuition  than  by  deep  reasoning 
or  nice  experiment,  must  depend  for  its  cultivation 
upon  other  causes.  Different  ages  and  nations  have 
different  customs.  Sometimes  it  is  the  fashion  to  be 
reserved  and  affected,  at  other  times  to  be  simple 
and  sincere  :  sometimes,  therefore,  it  will  be  easy, 
and  at  other  times  difficult  to  gain  a  competent  know 
ledge  of  human  nature  by  observation.  In  the  old 
romances,  we  seek  for  human  nature  in  vain  ;  the 
manners  are  all  affected  ;  prudery  is  the  highest,  and 
almost  the  only  ornament,  of  the  woman  :  and  a  fan 
tastical  honour  of  the  men  :  but  the  writers  adapted 
themselves  to  the  prevailing  taste,  and  painted  the 
manners  as  they  saw  them.  In  our  own  country, 
we  have  seen  various  modes  of  affectation,  succes 
sively  prevail  within  a  few  years.  To  say  nothing 
of  present  times  ;  every  body  knows,  how  much  pe 
dantry,  libertinism,  and  false  wit,  contributed  to  dis 
guise  human  nature  in  the  last  century.  And  1  ap 
prehend,  that  in  all  monarchies  one  mode  or  other  of 
artificial  manners  must  always  prevail  ;  to  the  for 
mation  of  which  the  character  of  princes,  the  taste 
of  the  times,  and  a  variety  of  other  causes  will  co 
operate. 

Montesquieu's  opinion,  that  the  courts  of  monarchs 
must  always  of  necessity  be  corrupt,  I  cannot  sub 
scribe  to.  I  think,  that  virtue  may  be,  and  sometimes 
is>  the  principle  of  action,  even  in  the  highest  offices 
of  monarchy  :  my  meaning  is,  that,  under  this  form 
of  government,  human  manners  must  generally  de 
viate,  more  or  less,  from  the  simplicity  of  nature, 
and  thutj  consequently,  human  sentiments  must  be  of 


611 AP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  30* 

more  difficult  investigation  than  under  some  other 
forms.  In  Courts,  it  seems  requisite,  for  the  sake 
of  that  order  which  is  essential  to  dignity,  to  esta 
blish  certain  punctilios  in  dress,  language,  and  ges 
ture  :  there  too,  the  most  inviolable  secrecy  is  expe 
dient  j  and  there,  where  men  are  always  under  the 
eye  of  their  superiors,  and.  for  the  most  part  enga 
ged  in  the  pursuits  of  ambition  or  interest,  a  smooth 
ness  of  behaviour  will  naturally  take  place,  which-, 
among  persons  of  ordinary  talents, .and  ordinary  vir 
tue,  must  on  many  occasions  degenerate  into  hypo 
crisy.  The  customs  of  the  court  are  always  imita 
ted  by  the  higher  ranks  ;  the  middle  ranks  follow  the 
higher;  and  the  people  come  after  as  fast  as  they 
can.  It  is  however,  in  the  last  mentioned  class,  where 
nature  appears  with  the  least  disguise  :  but,  unhap 
pily  for  moral  science,  the  vulgar  are  seldom  ob 
jects  of  curiosity,  either  to  our  philosophers,  or  his*, 
torians. 

The  influence  of  these  causes,  in  distinguishing 
human  sentiments,  will,  I  presume,  be  greater  or  less, 
according  as  the  monarchy  partakes  more  or  less  of 
democratical  principles. — There  is,  indeed,  one  set 
of  sentiments,  which  monarchy  and  modern  manners 
are  peculiarly  fitted  for  disclosing,  1  mean  those  that 
relate  to  gallantry  :  but  whether  these  tend  to  make 
human  nature  more  or  less  known,,  might  perhaps 
bear  a  question. 

Modern  history  ought,  on  many  accounts,  to  in 
terest  us  more  than  the  ancient.  It  describes  man 
ners  that  are  familiar  to  us,  events  whereof  we  see 
and  feel  the  consequences,  political  establishments  on 
which  our  property  and  security  depend,  and  places 
and  persons  in  which  experience  or  tradition  has  al 
ready  given  us  a  concern.  And  yet  I. believe  it  will 
be  generally  acknowledged,  that  the  ancient  histories, 
particularly  of  Greece  and  Rome,  are  more  interest 
ing  than  those  of  later  times.  In  fact  the  most  af 
fecting  part,  both  of  history  and  of  poetry,  is  that 


302  AN  ESSAr  ON  TRUTH,  FART  ITT, 

which  best  displays  the  characters,  manners,  and 
sentiments  of  men.  Histories  that  are  deficient  in 
this  respect,  may  communicate  instruction  to  the  geo 
grapher,  the  warrior,  the  genealogist,  and  the  politi 
cian  ;  but  will  never  please  the  general  taste,  be 
cause  they  excite  no  passion,  and  awaken  no  sym 
pathy.  Now,  I  cannot  help  thinking,  that  the  per 
sonages  described  in  modern  history  haver  with  a 
very  few  exceptions,  a  stiffness  and  reserve  about 
them,  which  doth  not  seem  to  adhere  to  the  great 
men  of  antiquity,  particularly  of  Greece.  I  will  not 
say,  that  our  historians  have  less  ability  or  less  in 
dustry  ;  but  1  would  say,  that  demociatical  govern 
ments,  like  those  of  ancient  Greece,  are  more  fa 
vourable  to  simplicity  of  manners,  and  consequently 
to  the1  knowledge  of  the  human  mind,  than  our  mo 
dern  monarchies.  At  Athens  and  Sparta,  the  public 
assemblies,  the  public  exeicises,  the  regular  atten 
dance  given  to  all  the  public  solemnities,  whether  re 
ligious  or  civil,  and  other  institutions  that  might  be 
mentioned,  gave  the  citizens  many  opportunities  of 
being  well  acquainted  with  one  another.  There  the 
great  men  were  not  cooped  up  in  palaces  and  coaches  ; 
they  were  almost  constantly  in  the  open  air,  and  on 
foot.  The  people  saw  them  every  day,  conversed 
with  them,  and  observed  their  behaviour  in  the  hours 
of  relaxation,  as  well  as  of  business.  Themistocles 
could  c*ll  every  citizen  of  Athens  by  his  name  ;  a 
proof  that  the  great  men  courted  an  universal  ac 
quaintance. 

No  degree  of  genius  will  ever  make  one  a  profici 
ent  in  tt.e  science  of  man,  without  accurate  observa 
tion  of  human  nature  in  all  its  varieties.  Homer, 
the  greatest  master  in  this  science  ever  known,  pass 
ed  the  most  of  his  life  in  travelling  :  his  poverty,, 
and  other  misfortunes,  made  him  often  dependent  on 
the  meanest,  as  his  talents  recommended  him  to  the 
friendship  of  the  greatest  ;  so  that  what  he  says  of 
Ulysses  may  justly  be  applied  to  himself,  that  "  he 


CHAP.  II.        AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  303 

"  visited  many  states  and  nations,  and  knew  the 
"  characters  of  many  men."  Virgil  had  not  the 
same  opportunities  :  he  lived  in  an  age  of  more  re 
finement,  and  was  perhaps  too  much  conversant  in 
courtly  life,  as  well  as  too  bashful  in  his  deportment^ 
and  delicate  in  his  constitution,  to  study  the  varieties 
of  human  nature,  where  in  a  monarchy  they  are  most 
conspicuous,  namely  in  the  middle  and  lower  ranks  of 
mankind.  Need  we  wonder,  then,  that  in  the  dis 
play  of  character  he  falls  so  far  short  of  his  great 
original?  Shakespeare  was  familiarly  acquainted  with 
all  ranks  and  conditions  of  men  ;  without  which,  not 
withstanding  his  unbounded  imagination,  it  is  not  to 
be  supposed,  that  he  could  have  succeeded  so  Well 
iii  delineating  every  species  of  human  character,  from 
the  consiable  to  the  monarch,  from  the  hero  to  the 
clown.  And  it  deserves  our  notice,  that,  however 
ignorant  he  might  be  of  Latin  and  Greek,  he  was 
well  acquainted,  by  translation,  with  some  of  the 
ancients,  particularly  Plutarch,  whom  he  seems  to 
have  studied  with  much  attention,  and  who  indeed 
excels  all  historians  in  exhibiting  lively  and  interest 
ing  views  of  human  nature.  Great  vicissitudes  of 
fortune  gave  Fielding  an  opportunity  of  associating 
with  all  classes  of  men,  except  perhaps  the  highest, 
whom  he  rarely  attempts  to  describe  :  Swift's  way 
of  life  is  well  known  :  and  I  have  been  told,  that 
Congreve  used  to  mingle  in  disguise  with  the  com 
mon  people,  and  pass  whole  days  and  weeks  among 
them. 

That  the  ancient  painters  and  statuaries  were  in 
many  respects  superior  to  the  modern,  is  universally 
allowed.  The  monuments  of  their  genius  that  still  re 
main,  would  convince  us  of  it,  even  though  we  were 
to  suppose  the  accounts  given  by  Pliny,  Lucian,  and 
other  contemporary  authors,  to  be  a  little  exaggerat 
ed.  The  uuc'.»rm:o'i  spirit  and  elegance  of  their  at 
titudes  and  proportions  are  obvious  to  every  eye: 
and  a  great  master  seems  to  think,  that  modern  axv. 


304  AN"  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  in. 

tists,  though  they  ought  to  imitate,  can  never  hope 
to  equal  the  magnificence  of  their  ideas,  or  the  beauty 
of  their  figures  *.  To  account  for  this,  we  need  not 
suppose,  that  human  genius  decays  as  the  world 
grows  older.  It  may  be  ascribed,  partly  to  the  su 
perior  elegance  of  the  human  form  in  those  days,  and 
partly  to  the  artists  having  then  better  opportunities 
of  observing  the  human  body,  free  from  the  incum- 
brances  of  dress,  in  all  the  varieties  of  action  and  mo 
tion.  The  ancient  discipline  of  the  Greeks  and  Ro 
mans,  particularly  the  former,  was  admirably  calcu 
lated  for  improving  the  human  body  in  health, 
strength,  swiftness,  flexibility,  and  grace.  In  these 
respects,  therefore,  they  could  hardly  fail  to  excel  the 
moderns,  whose  education  and  manners  tend  rather 
to  enervate  the  body,  and  cramp  all  its  faculties. 
And,  as  the  ancients  performed  their  exercises  in 
public,  and  performed  many  of  them  naked,  and 
thooght  it  honourable  to  excel  in  them  ;  as  their 
clothing  was  much  less  cumbersome  than  our  Go 
thic  apparel,  and  shewed  the  body  to  more  advantage  ; 
it  must  be  allowed,  that  their  painters  and  statuaries 
had  far  better  opportunities  of  observation  than  ours 
enjoy,  who  see  nothing  but  aukward  and  languid 
figures,  disguised  by  an  unwieldly  and  ungraceful 
attire. 

Will  it  not,  then,  be  acknowledged,  that  the  ancients 
may  have  excelled  the  moderns  in  the  science  of  hu 
man  nature,  provided  it  can  be  shewn,  that  they  had 
better  opportunities  of  observing  it  ?  That  this  was 
the  case,  appears  from  what  has  been  already  said. 
And  that  they  really  excelled  us  in  this  science,  will 
not  be  doubted  by  those  who  acknowledge  their  su 
periority  in  rhetoric  and  criticism  ;  two  arts  which 
are  founded  in  the  philosophy  of  the  human  mind. 
But  a  more  direct  proof  of  the  point  in  question  may 
be  had  in  the  writings  of  Homer,  Plutarch,  and  the  So- 

*  Fresnoy,  De  Arte  Graphica,  lin.  190, 


CHAP.  II.        AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.          305 

cratic  philosophers  ;  which,  for  their  admirable  pic 
tures  of  human  nature  in  its  genuine  simplicity,  are 
not  equalled  bj  any  compositions  of  a  later  date. 
Of  Aristotle  I  say  nothing.  We  are  assured  by  those 
who  have  read  his  works,  that  no  author  ever  un 
derstood  human  nature  better  than  he.  Fielding 
himself  *  pays  him  this  compliment  ;  and  his  tes 
timony  will  be  allowed  to  have  considerable  weight. 

Let  me  therefore  recommend  it  to  those  philoso 
phers  who  may  hereafter  make  human  nature  the 
subject  of  their  speculation,  to  study  the  ancients 
more  than  our  modern  sceptics  seem  to  have  done. 
If  we  set  out,  like  the  author  of  The  Treatise  oj 
Human  Nature,  with  a  fixed  purpose  to  advance  as 
many  paradoxes  as  possible  ;  or  with  this  foolish 
conceit,  that  men  in  all  former  ages  were  utter  stran 
gers  to  themselves,  and  to  one  another  ;  and  that  we 
are  the  first  of  our  species  on  whom  Nature  has  be 
stowed  any  glimmerings  of  discernment  ;  we  may  de 
pend  on  it,  that  in  proportion  as  our  vanity  and  arro 
gance  are  great,  our  success  will  be  small.  It  will 
be,  like  that  of  a  musician,  who  should  take  it  in  his 
head,  that  Corelli  had  no  taste  in  counterpoint,  nor 
Handel  or  Jackson  any  genius  for  melody  ;  of  an  epic 
poet,  who  should  fancy  that  Homer,  Virgil,  and 
Milton,  were  very  bad  writers  ;  or  of  a  painter,  who 
should  suppose  all  his  brethren  of  former  times  to 
have  been  unacquainted  with  the  colours,  lineaments, 
and  proportions  of  visible  objects. 

If  Columbus,  before  he  set  out  on  his  famous  ex 
pedition  to  the  western  world,  had  amused  himself 
with  writing  a  history  of  the  countries  he  was  going 
to  visit  ;  would  the  lovers  of  truth,  and  interpreters 
of  nature,  have  received  any  improvement  or  satis 
faction  from  such  a  specimen  of  his  ingenuity  ?  And 
is  not  the  system  which,  without  regard^to  experience, 

15  Fielding's  works,  vol.  xi.  page  384,  London  1766, 
12  mo. 


306  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART    III. 

a  philosopher  frames  in  his  closet,  concerning  the  na 
ture  of  man,  equally  frivolous?  If  Columbus,  in 
such  a  history,  had  described  the  Americans  with 
two  heads,  cloven  feet,  wings,  and  a  scarlet  com 
plexion  ;  and,  after  visiting  them,  and  finding  his  de 
scription  false  in  every  particular,  had  yet  published 
that  description  to  the  world,  affirming  it  to  be  true, 
and  at  the  same  time,  acknowledging,  that  it  did  not 
correspond  with  his  experience  ;  I  know  not  whe 
ther  mankind  would  have  been  most  disposed  to 
blame  his  disingenuity,  to  laugh  at  his  absurdity,  or 
to  pity  his  want  of  understanding.  And  yet  we  have 
known  a  metaphysician  to  contrive  a  system  of  hu 
man  nature,  and,  though  sensible  that  it  did  not  cor 
respond  with  the  real  appearances  of  human  nature, 
deliver  it  to  the  world  as  incontrovertible  truth  ;  we 
have  heard  this  system  applauded  as  a  master-piece 
of  genius,  and  admitted  as  incontrovertible  truth  ; 
and  we  have  seen  the  experience  of  individuals,  the 
universal  consent  of  nations,  the  accumulated  wisdom, 
of  ages,  and  every  principle  in  philosophy,  every  truth 
in  religion,  and  every  dictate  of  common  sense,  sa 
crificed  to  this  contemptible  and  self-contradictory 
chimera. 

I  would  further  recommend  it  to  our  moral  philo 
sophers,  to  study  themselves  with  candour  and  atten 
tion,  and  cultivate  an  acquaintance  with  mankind, 
especially  with  those  whose  manners  retain  most  of 
the  truth  and  simplicity  of  nature.  Acquaintance 
with  the  great  makes  a  man  of  fashion,  but  will  not 
make  a  philosopher.  They  who  are  ambitious  to 
merit  this  appellation,  think  nothing  below  them 
which  the  author  of  nature  has  been  pleased  to  create, 

to  preserve,  and  to  adorn Away  with  this  passion 

for  system-building  !  it  is  pedantry  :  away  with  this 
last  of  paradox  !  it  is  presumption.  Be  equally  a- 
shamed  of  dogmatical  prejudice,  and  sceptical  incre 
dulity  ;  for  both  are  as  remote  fiem  the  spirit  of  true 


CHAP.  ir.          AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  307 

philosophy,   as   bullying   and  cowardice   from   true 
valour. 

It  will  be  said,  perhaps,  that  a  general  knowledge 
of  man  is  sufficient  for  the  philosopher  ;  and  that 
this  particular  knowledge  which  we  recommend,  is 
necessary  only  for  the  novelist  and  poet.  But  let  it 
be  remembered,  that  many  important  errors  in  moral 
philosophy  have  arisen  from  the  want  of  this  parti 
cular  knowledge  ;  and  that  it  is  by  too  little,  not  by 
too  much  experience,  by  scanty,  not  by  copious,  in 
duction-,  that  philosophy  is  corrupted.  Men  have 
rarely  framed  a  system,  without  first  consulting  ex 
perience  in  regard  to  some  few  obvious  facts.  We 
are  apt  to  be  prejudiced  in  favour  of  the  notions  that 
prevail  within  our  own  narrow  circle  ;  but  we  must 
quit  that  circle  if  we  would  divest  ourselves  of  pre 
judice,  as  we  must  go  from  home  if  we  would  get 
rid  of  our  provincial  accent.  "  Horace  asserts  wis- 
"  dom  and  good  sense  to  be  the  source  and  principle 
"  of  goo'd  writing;  for  the  attainment  of  which  he 
"  prescribes  a  careful  study  of  the  Socrntic,  that  is, 
"  moral  wisdom,  and  a  thorough  acquaintance  with 
"  human  nature  that  great  exemplar  of  manners,  as 
"  he  finely  calls  it ;  or,  in  other  words,  a  wide  ex- 
"  tensive  view  of  real  practical  life.  The  joint  di- 
"  rection  of  these  two,"  I  quote  the  words  of  an  ad 
mirable  critic  and  most  ingenuous  philosopher,  lt  as 
*•*  means  of  acquiring  moral  knowledge,  is  perfectly 
*c  necessary.  For  the  former,  when  alone,  is  apt  to 
"  grow  abstracted  and  unaiFecting  ;  the  latter  unin- 
"  structing  and  superficial.  The  philosopher  talks 
*'  without  experience,  and  the  man  of  the  world  with- 
f*  out  principles.  United  they  supply  each  other's 
"  defects  ;  while  the  man  of  the  world  borrows  so 
"  much  of  the  philosopher,  as  to  be  able  to  adjust 
"  the  several  sentiments  with  precision  and  exact- 
"  ness  ;  and  the  philosopher  so  much  of  the  man  of 
"  the  world,  as  to  copy  the  manners  of  life  (which 
((  we  can  only  do  by  experience)  with  truth  and 

C  c 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III. 

*'  spirit.  Both  together  furnish  a  thorough  and  com- 
"  plete  comprehension  of  human  life  *.. 

That  I  may  not  be  thought  a  blind  admirer  of  an 
tiquity,  I  would  here  crave  the  reader's  indulgence 
for  one  short  digression  more,  in  order  to  put  him 
in  mind  of  an  important  error  in  morals,  inferred 
from  partial  and  inaccurate  experience,  by  no  less  a 
person  than  Aristotle  himself,  He  argues,  "  That 
**  men  of  little  genius,  and  great  bodily  strength,  are 
"by  nature  destined  to  serve,  and  those  of  better 
"  capacity,  to  command  ;  that  the  natives  of  Greece, 
"  and  of  some  other  countries,  being  naturally  supe- 
"  rior  in  genius,  have  a  natural  right  to  empire  ;  and 
"  that  the  rest  of  mankind,  being  naturally  stupid, 
"  are  destined  to  labour  and  slavery  f."  This  rea 
soning  is  now,  alas  I  of  little  advantage  to  Aristotle's 
countrymen,  who  have  for  many  ages  been  doomed 
to  that  slavery,  which,  in  his  judgment,  nature  had 
destined  them  to  impose  on  others  ;  and  many  nations 
•whom  he  would  have  consigned  to  everlasting  stu 
pidity,  have  shown  themselves  equal  in  genius  to  the 
most  exalted  of  human  kind.  It  would  have  been 
more  worthy  of  Aristotk,  to  have  inferred  man's  na 
tural  and  universal  right  to  liberty,  from  that  natural 
and  universal  passion  with  which  men  desire  it,  and 
from  the  salutary  consequences  to  learning,  to  vir 
tue,  and  to  every  human  improvement,  of  which  it 
never  fails  to  be  productive.  He  wanted,  perhaps, 
to  devise  some  excuse  for  servitude  ;  a  practice  which 
to  their  eternal  reproach,  both  Greeks  and  Romans 
tolerated  even  in  the  days  of  their  glory. 

Mr  HUME  argues  nearly  in  the  same  manner  in 
regard  to  the  superiority  of  white  men  over  black. 
"  I  am  apt  to  suspect,"  says  he,  "  the  negroes,  and 
•"  in  general  all  the  other  species  of  men,  (for  there 

.-,  -r-r  .          T-      •    i4tt£  ,1 

*  .Kurd's  Commentary  on  Horace's  .Epistle  to  the 
Pisos,  p.  25.  edit.  4. 

t  De  Republ.  lib.  1.  cap,  5,  6, 

•  v  * 


ClfAP.    II.  AN  ESSAY  Otf  TRUTH. 

"  are  four  or  five  different  kinds),  to  be  naturally 
"  inferior  to  the  whites.  There  never  was  a  civilized 
"  nation  of  any  other  complexion  than  white,  nor 
"  even  any  individual  eminent  either  in  action  or  spe- 
"  culation.  No  ingenious  manufactures  among  them, 
"  no  arts,  no  sciences. — There  are  negroe-slaves  dis- 
"  persed  all  over  Europe,  of  which  none  ever  dis- 
"  covered  any  symptons  of  ingenuity  *."  These 
assertions  are  strong  ;  but  I  know  not  whether  they 
have  any  thing  else  to  recommend  them. — For,  first, 
though  true,  they  would  not  prove  the  point  in  ques 
tion,  except  it  were  also  proved,  that  the  Africans 
and  Americans,  even  though  arts  and  sciences  were 
introduced  among  them,  would  still  remain  unsus 
ceptible  of  cultivation.  The  inhabitants  of  Great 
Britain  arid  France  were  as  savage  two  thousand  years 
ago,  as  those  of  Africa  and  America  are  at  this  day. 
To  civilize  a  nation  is  a  work  which  requires  long 
time  to  accomplish.  And  one  may  as  well  say  of 
an  infant,  that  he  can  never  become  a  man,  as  of  a 
nation  now  barbarous,  that  it  never  can  be  civilized. 
— Secondly,  of  the  facts  here  asserted,-  no  man  could 
have  sufficient  evidence,  except  from  a  personal  ac 
quaintance  with  all  the  negroes  that  now  are,  or  ever 
were,  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  These  people  write 
no  histories ;  and  all  the  reports  of  all  the  travellers 
that  ever  visited  them7  will  not  amount  to  any  thing- 
like  a  proof  of  what  is  here  affirmed Bur,  thirdly, 

we  know  that  these  assertions  are  not  true.  The 
empires  of  Peru  and  Mexico  could  not  have  been 
governed,  nor  the  metropolis  of  the  latter  built  after 
so  singular  a  manner,  in  the  middle  of  a  lake,  without 
men  eminent  both  for  action  and  speculation.  Every 
body  has  heard  of  the  magnificence,  good  government, 
and  ingenuity,  of  the  ancient  Peruvians.  The  Afri 
cans  and  Americans  are  known  to  have  many  inge 
nious  manufactures  and  arts  among  them,  which  e- 
ven  Europeans  would  find  it  no  easy  matter  to  imi- 
*  Hume's  Essay  on  National  Characters, 
Cc  2 


3IO  AN    ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  PART    II*. 

tate.  Sciences  indeed  they  have  none,  because  they 
have  no  letters  ;  but  in  oratory,  some  of  them,  par 
ticularly  the  Indians  of  the  Ftve  Nations,  are  said  to 
be  greatly  our  superiors.  It  will  be  readily  allowed 
that  the  condition  of  a  slave  is  riot  favourable  to  ge 
nius  of  any  kind  ;  and  yet,  the  negroe-slaves  dispers 
ed  over  Europe,  have  often  discovered  symptoms  of 
ingenuity,  notwithstanding  their  unhappy  circum 
stances.  They  become  excellent  handicraftsmen,  and 
practical  musicians,  and  indeed  learn  every  thing 
their  masters  are  at  pains  to  teach  them,  perfidy  and 
debauchery  not  excepted.  That  a  negroe-slave,  who 
can  neither  read  nor  write,  nor  speak  any  European 
language,  who  is  not  permitted  to  do  any  thing  but 
what  his  master  commands,  and  who  has  not  a  single 
friend  on  earth,  but  i.s  universally,  considered  and 
treated  as  if  he  were  of  a  species  inferior  to  the  hu 
man  ;— that  such  a  creature  should  so  distinguish 
himself  among  Europeans,  as  to  be  talked  of  through 
the  world  for  a  man  of  genius,  is  surely  no  reasonable 
expectation.  To  suppose  him  of  an  inferior  species, 
because  he  does  not  thus  distinguish  himself,  is  just 
as  rational,  as  to  suppose  any  private  European  of  an 
inferior  species,  because  he  has  not  raised  himself  to 
the  condition  of  royalty. 

Had  the  Europeans  been  destitute  of  the  arts  -of 
writing  and  working  in  iron,  they  might  have  re- 
xaiaiaed  to  this  day  as  barbarous  as  the  natives  of  A- 
frica  and  America.  Nor  is  the  invention  of  these 
arts  to  be  ascribed  to  our  superior  capacity.  The 
genius  of  the  invt'iif.oi:  is  not  always  to  he  estimated 
according  to  the  importance  of  ihe  invemion.  Gun* 
powuer  end  the  ix^nr.c-rs  compass  have  produced 
wonderful  revolution-;  in  human  affairs,  and  yet  were 
lU-clderitsldLeovxriiiK.  bach,  probably,  were  the  first 
s  in  writing  iind  \vorking  in  iron,  Suppose 
them  the  .effects  of  contrivance  ;  they  were  at  least 
contrived  by  a  few  individuals  ;  and  if  they  required 
a  superiority  cf  understanding,  cr  of  species,  in  the 


CHAP.  II.  AN  ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  3!! 

inventors,  those  inventors,  and  their  descendents,  are 
the  only  persons  who  can  lay  claim  to  the  honour  of 
that  superiority. 

That  every  practice  and  sentiment  is  barbarous 
which  is  not  according  to  the  usages  of  modern  En- 
rope,  seems  to  be  a  fundamental  maxim  with  many 
of  our  critics  and  philosophers.  Their  remarks  of 
ten  put  us  in  mind  of  the  fable  of  the  man  and  the 
lion.  If  Negroes  or  Indians  were  disposed  to  re 
criminate  ;  if  a  Lucian  or  a  Voltaire  from  the  coast 
of  Guinea,  or  from  the  five  nations,  were  to  pay  us 
a  visit,  what  a  picture  of  European  manners  might 
he  present  to  his  countrymen  at  his  return  !  Nor 
would  caricatura,or  exaggeration,  be  necessary  to  ren 
der  it  hideous.  A  plain  historical  account  of  some 
of  our  most  fashionable  duelists,  gamblers,  and  adul 
terers,  (to  name  no  more),  would  exhibit  specimens 
of  brutish  barbarity,  and  sottish  infatuation,  such  as 
might  vie  with  any  that  ever  appeared  in  Kamschat- 
ka,  California,  or  the  land  of  the  Hottentots, 

It  is  easy  to  see  with  what  views  some  modern 
authors  throw  out  these  hints  to  prove  the  natural 
inferiority  of  negroes.  Bat  let  every  friend  to  hu 
manity  pray,  that  they  may  be  disappointed.  Bri 
tons  are  famous  for  generosity  ;  a  virtue  in  which  it 
is  easy  for  them  to  excel  both  the  Romans  and  the 
Greeks.  Let  it  never  be  said,  that  slavery  is  coun 
tenanced  by  the  bravest,  and  most  generous  people 
on  earth  ;  by  a  people  who  are  animated  with  that 
heroic  passion,  the  love  of  liberty,  beyond  all  nations 
ancient  or  modern  ;  and  the  fame  of  whose  toilsome, 
but  unwearied  perseverance,  in  vindicating,  at  the  ex- 
pence  of  life  and  fortune,  the  sacred  rights  of  man 
kind,  will  strike  terror  into  the  hearts  of  sycophants- 
and  tyrants,  and  excite  the  admiration  and  gratitude 
ef  all  good  men  to  the  latest  posterity., 
Cc3 


312  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III. 

CHAP.     III. 

Consequences  of  Metaphysical  Scepticism. 

A  FTKR  all,  it  will  perhaps  be  objected  to  thisdis- 
•*••*•  course,  that  I  have  laid  too  much  stress  upon 
the  consequences  of  metaphysical  absurdity,  and  re 
presented  them  as  much  more  dangerous  than  they 
are  found  to  be  in  fact.  I  shall  be  told,  that  many 
pf  the  controversies  in  metaphysic  are  merely  verbal  ; 
and  the  errors  proceeding  from  them  of  so  abstract  a 
nature,  that  philosophers  run  little  risk,  and  the  vul 
gar  no  risk  at  all,  of  being  influenced  by  them  in 
practice.  It  will  be  said,  that  I  never  heard  of  any 
man  who  fell  a  sacrifice  to  Berkeley's  system,  by 
breaking  his  neck  over  a  material  precipice,  which 
he  had  taken  for  an  ideal  one  ;  nor  of  any  Fatalist, 
whose  morals  were,  upon  the  whole,  more  exception 
able  than  those  of  the  assertors  of  free  agency :  in  a 
word,  that  whatever  effect  such  tenets  may  have  up 
on  the  understanding,  they  seldom  or  never  produce 
any  sensible  effects  upon  the  heart.  In  considering 
this  objection,  I  must  confine  myself  to  a  few  topics, 
for  the  subject  to  which  it  leads  is  of  vast  extent, 
The  influence  of  the  metaphysical  spirit  upon  art, 
science,  and  manners,  would  furnish  matter  for  a  large 
treatise,  it  will  suffice  at  present  to  shew,  that  me 
taphysical  errors  are  not  harmless,  but  may  produce, 
•and  actually  have  produced  some  very  important  and 
interesting  consequences. 

I  begin  with  an  observation  often  made,  and  in 
deed  obvious  enough,  namely,  That  happiness  is  the 
end  of  our  being  ;  aud  that  knowledge,  and  even 
iruth  itself,  are  valuable  only  as  they  tend  to  pro 
mote  it.  Every  ustkss  study  is  a  pernicious  thing, 
because  it  wastes  our  time  and  misemploys  our  fa 
culties.  To  prove  that  metaphysical  absurdities  do 
no  good,  would  therefore  sufficiently  justify  the  pre 
sent  undertaking.  But  it  requires  no  deep  sagacity 
to  be  able  to  prove  a  great  deal  more. 


CHAP.  HI.       AN  ESSAY  ON  TROTH.         313 

We  acknowledge,  however,  that  all  metaphysical 
errors  are  not  equally  dangerous.  There  is  an  ob 
scurity  in  the  abstract  sciences,  as  they  are  common 
ly  taught,  which  is  often  no  bad  preservative  against 
their  influence.  This  obscurity  is  sometimes  una 
voidable,  on  account  of  the  insufficiency  of  language  ;, 
sometimes  it  is  owing  to  the  spiritless  and  slovenly 
style  of  the  writer  ;  and  sometimes  it  is  affected  :  as 
when  a  philosopher,  from  prudential  considerations, 
thinks  fit  to  disguise  any  occasional  attack  on  the  re 
ligion  or  laws  of  his  country,  by  some  artful  equivoca* 
tion,  in  the  forn>  of  allegory,  dialogue,  or  fable  *.  The 
style  of  The  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  is  so  exceed 
ingly  obscure  and  uninteresting,  that  if  the  Author 
had  not  in  his  Essays  re-published  the  capital  doc- 

*  Mr  Hume  is  not  unacquainted  with  this  piece  of  po 
licy.  His  apology  for  Atheism  he  delivers  by  the  mouth 
of  a  friend,  in  the  way  of  conference,  prefaced  with  a  de 
claration,  that  though  he  cannot  by  any  means  approve 
many  of  the  sentiments  of  that  friend,  yet  he  thinks  they 
bear  some  relation  to  the  chain  of  reasoning  carried  on  in 
his  enquiry  concerning  human  nature.  He  had  something, 
it  seems,  to  say  against  his  Maker,  which  he  moaestly  ac 
knowledges  to  be  curious,  and  worthy  of  attention^  and 
which  he  thought  no  doubt,  to  be  mighty  smart  and  cle 
ver.  To  call  it  what  it  really  is,  An  attemyi:  tp  vindicate 
Atheism,  cr  what  he  probably  thought  it ;  ^-.  /indication 
of  Atheism,  seemed  dangerous,  and  might  di:  wust  many  of 
his  well-meaning  readers  :  He  calls  it,  thereiore,  dn  Es 
say  on  a  Particular:  Prwidence  and  a  Tuturs  S/ta'e,  and  puts. 
liis  capital  arguments  in  the  mouth  of  another  person :  thus 
providing  by  the  same  generous,  candid,  and.  manly  expe 
dient,  a  snare  for  the  unwary  reader,  and  an  evasion  for 
himself.  Perhaps  it  will  be  asked,  what  I  mean  by  the 
word  Atheist  ?  I  answer,  A  reasonable  creature,  who  dis 
believes  the  being  of  God,  cr  thinks  it  inconsistent  with 
sound  reason,  to  believe  that  the  great  First  Cause  is  per 
fect  in  holiness,  power,  wisdom,  justice  and  beneficence, — 
is  a  speculative  Atheist  5  and  he  who  endeavours  to  instil 
the  same  unbelief  into  others,  is  a  practical  Atheist. 


3*4  AN  £*SAV  ON  TRUTH.  ?ART  IIR 

frines  of  that  work  in  a  style  more  elegant  and 
sprightly,  a  confutation  of  them  would  have  been 
altogether  unnecessary  :  their  uncouth  and  gloomy 
aspect  would  have  deterred  most  people  from  court 
ing  their  acquaintance.  And,  after  all,  though  this 
author  is  one  of  the  deadliest,  he  is  not  perhaps  one 
of  the  most  dangerous  enemies  of  religion.  Boling- 
broke,  his  inferior  in  subtlety,  but  far  superior  in 
wit,  eloquence,  and  knowledge  of  mankind,  is  more 
dangerous,  because  more  entertaining.  So  that  thoj 
the  reader  may  be  disposed  to  applaud  the  patriot 
ism  of  the  grand  jury  of  Westminster,  who  present 
ed  the  posthumous  works  of  that  noble  Lord  as  a 
public  nuisance,  he  must  be  sensible  that  there  was 
no  necessity  for  affixing  any  such  stigma  to  the  phi 
losophical  writings  of  the  Scottish  author.  And  yet 
it  cannot  be  denied,  that  even  these,  notwithstanding 
their  obscurity,  have  done  mischief  enough  to  make 
every  sober-minded'  person  earnestly  wish  that  they 
had  never  existed. 

Further,  some  metaphysical  errors  are  so  grossly 
absurd,  that  there  is  hardly  a  possibility  of  their  per 
verting  our  conduct.  Such,  considered  in  itself,  is 
the  doctrine  of  the  non-existence  of  matter  ;  which 
no  man  in  his  senses  was  ever  capsble  of  believing  for 
a  single  moment.  Pyrrho  was  a  vain  hypocrite  :  he 
took  it  in  his  head  to  say  that  he  believed  nothing, 
because  he  wanted  to  be  taken  notice  of:  he  affected, 
too,  to  act  up  to  this  pretended  disbelief ;  and  would 
not  of  his  own  accord  step  aside  to  avoid  a  dog,  a 
chariot,  or  a  precipice :  but  he  always  took  care  to 
have  some  friends  or  servants  at  hand,  whose  busi 
ness  it  was  to  keep  the  philosopher  out  of  harm's 
way. — That  the  universe  is  nothing  but  a  heap  of  im 
pressions  and  ideas  unperceived  by  any  substance,  is 
another  of  those  profound  mysteries,  from  which  we 
need  not  apprehend  much  danger  ;  because  it  is  so 
perfectly  absurd,  that  no  words  but  sacu  as  imply  a 
contradiction^  will  express  it,  I  knovv  not  whether 


OHAP.    III.  AN   ESSAY  ON  TRUTH* 

the  absurdity  of  a  system  was  ever  before  urged  as 
en  apology  for  its  author.  But  it  is  better  to  be  ab 
surd  than  mischievous  :  and  happy  it  were  for  the 
world,  and  much  to  the  credit  of  some  persons  now 
in  it,  if  metaphysicians  were  chargeable  with  nothing 
worse  than  absurdity. 

Again,  certain  errors  in  our  theories  of  human  na 
ture,  considered  in  themselves,  are  in  some  measure 
harmless,  when  the  principles  that  oppose  their  in 
fluence  are  strong  and  active.  A  gentle  disposition, 
confirmed  habits  of  virtue,  obedience  to  law,  a  regard 
to  order,  or  even  the  fear  of  punishment,  often  prove 
antidotes  to  metaphysical  poison.  When  Fatality 
has  these  principles  to  combat,  it  may  puzzle  the 
judgment,  but  will  not  corrupt  the  heart.  Natural 
instinct  never  fails  to  oppose  it  ;  all  men  believe 
themselves  free  agents,  as  long  at  least  as  they  keep 
clear  of  metaphysic  ;  nay,  so  powerful  is  the  senti 
ment  of  moral  liberty,  that  I  cannot  think  it  was  e- 
ver  entirely  subdued  in  any  rational  being.  But  if 
it  were  subdued,  (and  surely  no  Fatalist  will  ac 
knowledge  it  invincible^  ;  if  the  opposite  princi 
ples  should  at  the  same  time  cease  to  act  ;  and  if  de 
bauchery,  bad  example,  and  licentious  writings, 
should  extinguish  or  weaken  the  sense  of  duty  j 
what  might  not  be  apprehended  from  men  who  are 
above  law,  or  can  screen  themselves  from  punish 
ment  ?  What  virtue  is  to  be  expected  from  a  being 
who  believes  itself  a  mere  machine  ?  If  I  were  per 
suaded,  that  the  evil  I  commit  is  imposed  upon  me 
by  fatal  necessity,  I  should  think  repentance  as  ab 
surd  as  Xerxes  scourging  the  waves  of  the  Helles 
pont  ;  and  be  as  little  disposed  to  form  resolutions 
of  amendment,  as  to  contrive  schemes  for  preventing 
the  frequent  eclipses  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter.  li 
very  author  who  publishes  an  essay  in  behalf  of  Fa- 
tility,  is  willing  to  run  the  risk  of  bringing  all  men 
over  to  his  opinion.  What  if  this  should  be  the 
consequence  ?  If  it  be  possible  to  make  one  reason- 


316  Aff  ESSAT  OJT  TRUTH.  PART  Ilf. 

able  creature  a  Fatalist,  may  it  not  be  possible  to 
make  many  such  ?  And  would  this  be  a  matter  of 
little  or  no  moment  ?  It  is  demonstrable,  that  it 
would  not.  But  we  have  already  explained  ourselves 
en  this  head. 

Other  metaphysical  errors  there  are,  which, 
though  they  do  not  strike  more  directly  at  the  foun 
dations  of  virtue,  are  more  apt  to  influence  mankind, 
because  they  are  not  so  vigorously  counteracted  by 
any  particular  propensity.  What  shall  we  say  to 
the  theory  of  HoB3-ES,  who  makes  the  distinction  be 
tween  vice  and  virtue  to  be  wholly  artificial,  with 
out  any  foundation  in  the  divine  will,  or  human  con 
stitution,  and  depending  entirely  on  the  arbitrary 
laws  of  human  governors  ?  According  to  this  ac 
count,  no  action  that  is  commanded  by  a  king  can  be 
vitious,  and  none  virtuous  except  Warranted  by  that 
authority.  Were  this  opinion  universal,  what 
eould  deter  men  from  secret  wickedness,  or  such  as 
is  not  cognisable  by  law  ?  What  could  restrain  gov 
ernors  from  the  utmost  insolence  of  tyranny  ?  What 
but  a  miracle  could  save  the  human  race  from  per 
dition. 

In  the  preface  to  one  of  Mr  HUME'S  late  publica 
tions,  we  are  presented  with  an  elaborate  panegyric 
on  the  author.  "  Hs  hath  exerted,  says  the  writer 
"  of  the  preface,-  those  great  talents  he  received 
*4  from  Nature,  and  the  acquisitions  he  made  by 
"  study,  in  search  of  truth,  and  in  promoting  the 
**  good  of  mankind."  A  noble  encomium  indeed  I 
If  it  be  a  true  one,  what  are  we  to  think  of  a  Dou 
glas,  a  Campbell,  a  Gerard,  a  Reid,  and  some  o- 
thers,  who  have  attacked  several  of  Mr  HUME'S 
opinions,  and  proved  them  to  be  contrary  to  truth, 
and  subversive  of  the  good  of  mankind  ?  I  thought 
indeed,  that  the  works  of  those  excellent  writers 
had  given  great  satisfaction  to  the  friends  of  truth 
and  virtue,  and  done  an  important  service  to  soci 
ety  ;  but,  if  I  believe,  this  prefacer,  I  must  look  on 


CHA?.   III.  AN"  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

them,  as  well  as  on  this  attempt  of  my  own,  with 
detestation  and  horror.  But  before  so  great  a  change 
in  my  sentiments  can  take  place,  it  will  be  necessary, 
that  Mr  HUME  prove,  to  my  satisfaction,  that  he  is 
neither  the  authounor  the  publisher  of  the  Essays 
that  bear  his  name,  nor  of  the  Treatise  of  Human 
Nature.  For  I  will  not  take  it  on  his,  nor  on  any 
man's  word,  that  religion,  both  revealed  and  natur 
al,  and  all  conviction  in  regard  to  truth,  are  detri 
mental  to  mankind.  And  it  is  most  certain,  that 
he,  if  he  is  indeed  the  author  of  those  Essays,  and 
of  that  Treatise,  hath  exerted  his  great  talents,  and 
employed  several  years  of  his  life,  in  endeavour 
ing  to  persuade  the  world,  that  the  fundamental  doc 
trines  of  natural  religion  are  irrational,  and  the  proofs 
of  revealed  religion  such  as  ought  not  to  satisfy  an 
impartial  mind  ;  and  that  there  is  not  in  any  science 
an  evidence  of  truth  sufficient  to  produce  certainty. 
Suppose  these  opinions  established  in  the  worlds  and 
say,  if  you  can,  that  the  good  of  mankind  would  be 
promoted  by  them.  To  me  it  seems  impossible  for 
society  to  exist  tinder  the  influence  of  such  opinions* 
Nor  let  it  be  thought,  that  we  give  an  unfavourable 
view  of  human  nature,  when  we  insist  on  the  neces 
sity  of  good  principles  for  the  preservation  of 
good  order.  Such  a  total  subversion  of  human 
sentiment  is,  I  believe,  impossible :  mankind,  at 
their  very  worst,  are  not  such  monsters,  as  to  ad 
mit  it ;  reason,  conscience,  taste,  habit,  interesr,  fear, 
must  perpetually  oppose  it  ;  but  the  philosophy  that 
aims  at  a  total  subversion  of  human  sentiment  is  not 
on  that  account  the  less  detestable.  And  yet  it  is 
said  of  the  authors  of  this  philosophy,  that  they  ex 
ert  their  great  talents  in  promoting  the  good  of  man 
kind.  What  an  insult  on  human  narure  and  common 
sense  !  If  mankind  are  tame  enough  to  acquiesce  in 
such  an  insult,  and  servile  enough  to  reply,  "  It  is 
"  true,  we  have  been  much  obliged  to  the  celebrated 
"  sceptics  of  this  most  enlightened  age," — they 
would  almost  tempt  one  to  express  himself  in  the 


£1 8  AH  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  FART  III, 

style  of  misanthrophy,  and  say,  "  Si  populus  vult 
*'  decipi,  decipiatur." 

Every  doctrine  is  dangerous  that  tends  to  discre 
dit  the  evidence  of  our  senses,  external  or  internal, 
and  to  subvert  the  original  instinctive  principles  of 
human  belief.  In  this  respect  the  most  unnatural 
and  incomprehensible  absurdities,  such  as  the  doc 
trine  of  the  non-existence  of  matter,  and  of  percep 
tions  without  a  percipient,  are  far  from  being  harm 
less  ;  as  they  seem  to  lead,  and  actually  have  led, 
to  universal  scepticism  ;  and  set  an  example  of  a  me 
thod  of  reasoning  sufficient  to  overturn  all  truth,  and 
pervert  every  human  faculty.  In  this  respect  also 
we  hive  proved  the  doctrine  of  fatality  to  be  of  most 
pernicious  tendency,  as  it  leads  men  to  suppose  their 
mor.il  sentiments  fallacious  or  equivocal  ;  not  to 
mention  its  influence  on  our  notions  of  God,  and  na 
tural  religion.  When  a  sceptic  attacks  one  princi 
ple  of  common  sense,  he  does  in  effect  attack  all  ; 
for  if  we  are  made  distrustful  of  the  veracity  of  in 
stinctive  conviction  in  one  instance,  we  must,  or  at 
least  we  may,  become  equally  distrustful  in  every 
other.  A  little  scepticism  introduced  into  science 
will  soon  assimilate  the  whole  to  its  own  nature  ; 
the  fatal  fermentation,  once  begun,  spreads  wider 
and  wider  every  moment,  till  all  the  mass  be  trans 
formed  into  rottenness  and  poison. 

There  i*  no  exaggeration  here.  The  present  state 
.of  the  abstract  sciences  is  a  melancholy  proof,  that 
what  I  sav  is  true.  This  is  called  the  age  of  reason 
and  philosophy  ;  and  this  is  the  age  of  avowed  and 
dogmatical  atheism.  Sceptics  have  at  last  grown 
Weary  of  doubting  ;  and  have  now  discovered,  br 
the  force  of  their  great  talents,  that  one  thing  at 
least  is  certain,  namely,  that  God,  and  religion,  and 
immortality,  are  empty  sounds.  This  is  the  final 
triumph  of  our  so  much  boasted  philosophic  spirit  ; 
th  e  are  the  limits  of  the  dominion  of  error,  beyond 
which  we  can  hardly  conceive  it  possible  for  human 


CHAP.  II*.  AN    ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  31$ 

sophistry  to  penetrate.  Exult,  O  Metaphysic,  at 
the  consummation  of  thy  glories.  More  thou  canst 
xiot  hope,  more  thou  canst  not  desire.  Fall  down,  ye 
mortals,  and  acknowledge  the  stupendous  blessing : 
adore  those  men  of  great  talents,  those  daring  spi 
rits,  those  patterns  of  modesty,  gentleness,  andean- 
dour,  those  prodigies  of  genius,  those  heroes  in  be 
neficence,  who  have  thus  laboured — to  strip  you  of 
every  rational  consolation,  and  to  make  your  condK 
tion  ten  thousand  times  worse  than  that  of  the  beasts 
that  perish. 

Why  can  I  not  express  myself  with  less  warmth  ! 
Why  can  I  not  devise  an  apology  for  these  philoso 
phers,  to  screen  them  from  this  dreadful  imputation 
of  being  the  enemies  and  plagues  of  mankind  ! — Per 
haps  they  do  not  themselves  believe  their  own  te 
nets,  but  -publish  them  only  as  the  means  of  getting  a 
name  and  a  fortune.  But  I  hope  this  is  not  the 
case  ;  God  forbid  that  it  should  !  for  then  the  enor 
mity  of  their  guilt  would  surpass  all  power  of  Ian-, 
guage ;  we  could  only  gaze  at  it,  and  tremble. 
Compared  with  such  wickedness,  the  crimes  of  the 
thief,  the  robber,  the  incendiary,  would  almost  dis 
appear.  These  sacrifice  the  fortunes  or  the  lives  of 
some  of  their  fellow-creatures,  to  their  own  neces 
sity  or  outrageous  appetite  !  but  those  would  run  the 
hazard  of  sacrificing,  to  their  own  avarice  or  vanity, 
the  happiness  of  all  mankind,  both  here  and  hereaf 
ter.  No  ;  I  cannot  suppose  it :  the  heart  of  man, 
however  depraved,  is  not  capable  of  such  infernal 
malignity. — Perhaps  they  do  not  foresee  the  conse 
quences  of  their  doctrines.  BERKELEY  most  certain 
ly  did  not — But  BERKELEY  did  not  attack  the  re 
ligion  of  his  country,  did  not  seek  to  undermine  the 
foundations  of  virtue,  did  not  preach  or  recommend 
Atheism.  He  erred  ;  and  who  is  free  from  error  ? 
but  his  intention*  were  irreproachable  ;  and  his  con 
duct  as  a  man,  and  a  Christian,  did  honour  to  human 
nature. — Perhaps  our  modern  sceptics  are  ignorant? 


3 IP  AN   ESSAY  ON   TRUTH.  PART  III. 

that,  without  the  belief  of  a  God,  and  the  hope  of 
immortality,  the  miseries  of  human-  life  would  often 
be  insupportable.  But  can  1  suppose  them  in  a  state 
of  total  and  invincible  stupidity,  \itter  strangers  to 
the  human  heart,  and  to  tinman  affairs  !  Sure  they 
would  not  thank  me  for  such -a  supposition.  Yet 
-this  I  must  suppose,  or  I  must  believe  them  to  be 
the  most  cruel,  trre  most  perfidious,  and  the  most 
profligate  of  men. 

Caressed  by  those  who  call  themselves  the  great, 
ingrossed  by  the  formalities  and  fopperies  of  life,  in 
toxicated  with  vanity,  pampered  with  adulation,  dis 
sipated  in  the  tumult  of  business,  or  amidst  the  vi 
cissitudes  of  folly,  they  perhaps  have  little  need,  and 
little  relish,  for  the  consolations  of  religion .^  But 
-Jet  them  know,  that,  in  the  solitary  scenes  of  life, 
there  is  many  an  honest  and  tender  heart  pining  with 
incurable  anguish,  pierced  with  -the  sharpest  sting  of 
disappointment,  bereft  of  friends,  chilled  with  po 
verty,  racked  with  disease,  scourged  by  the  oppres 
sor  ;  whom  nothing  but  trust  in  Providence,  and  the 
-hope  of  a  future  retribution,  could  preserve  from 
the  agonies  of  despair.  And  do  they,  with  sacrile 
gious  hands,  attempt  to  violate  this  last  refuge  of 
the  miserable,  and  to  rob  them  of  the  only  comfort 
-that  had  survived  the  ravages  of  misfortune,  malice, 
and  tyranny  !  Did  it  «ver  happen,  that  the  influence 
of  their  execrable  tenets  disturbed  the  tranquillity  of 
virtuous  retirement,  deepened  the  gloom  of  human 
distress,  or  aggravated  the  horrors  of  the  grave  ?  Is 
it  possible,  that  this  may  have  happened  in  many  in 
stances?  Is  it  probable,  that  this  hath  happened,  or 
•may  happen,  in  one  single  instance  ? — Ye  traitors  to 
human  kind,  ye  murderers  of  the  human  soul,  how 
can  ye  answer  for  it  to  your  own  hearts  !  Surely  every 
spark  of  your  generosity  is  extinguished  for  ever, 
.if  this  consideration  do  not  awaken  in  you  the  keen 
est  remorse,  and  make  you  wish  in  bitterness  or 
.soul — But  I  remonstrate  iu  vain.  All  this  must 


CHAP.    II.  AN.  ESSAY   ON  TRUTH.  321 

have  often  occurred  to  you,  and  been  as  often  reject 
ed  as  utterly  frivolous.  Could  I  inforce  the  present 
topic  by  an  appeal  to  your  vanity,  I  might  possibly 
make  some  impression  :  but  to  plead  with  you  on 
the  principles  of  benevolence  or  generosity,  is  to  ad 
dress  you  in  language  ye  do  not,  or  will  not  under 
stand  ;  and  as  to  the  shame  of  being  convicted  of  ab 
surdity,  ignorance,  and  want  of  candour,  ye  have 
long  ago  proved  yourselves  superior  to  the  sense  of 
it. 

Bat  let  not  the  lovers  of  truth  be  discouraged  : 
Atheism  cannot  be  of  long  continuance,  nor  is  there 
much  danger  of  its  becoming  universal.  The  in 
fluence  of  some  conspicuous  characters  has  brought 
it  too  much  into  fashion  ;  which,  in  a  thoughtless 
and  profligate  age,  it  is  no  difficult  matter  to  accom 
plish.  But  when  men  have  retrieved  the  powers  of 
serious  reflection,,  they  will  find  it  a  frightful  phan- 
torn  ;  and  the  mind  will  return  gladly  and  eagerly  to 
its  old  endearments.  One  thing  we  certainly  know; 
the  fashion  of  sceptical  and  metaphysical  systems 
soon  passeth  away.  Those  unnatural  productions, 
the  vile  effusion  of  a  hard  and  stupid  heart,  that 
mistakes  its  own  restlessness  for  the  activity  of  ge 
nius,  and  its  own  captiousness  for  sagacity  of  under 
standing,  may,  like  other  monsters,  please  a  while 
by  their  singularity ;  but  the  charm  is  soon  over  ; 
and  the  succeeding  age  will  be  astonished  to  hear, 
that  their  forefathers  were  deluded,,  or  amused,  with 
such  fooleries.  The  measure  of  scepticism  seems 
indeed  to  be  full  ;  it  is  time  for  truth  to  vindicate 
her  rights,  and  we  trust  they  shall  yet  be  complete 
ly  vindicated.  Such  are  the  hopes  and  the  earnest 
wishes  of  one,  who  has  seldom  made  controversy  his 
study,  who  never  took  pleasure  in  argumentation, 
and  who  disclaims  all  ambition  of  being  reputed  a 
subtle  disputant ,  but  who,  as  a  friend  to  human  na 
ture,  would  account  it  his  honour  to  be  instrumental 


324  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  PART  III. 

in  promoting,  though  by  means  unpleasant  to  him 
self,  the  cause  of  virtue  and  true  science,  and  in 
bringing  to  contempt  that'  sceptical  sophistry  whieh 
is  equally  subversive  of  both. 


POSTSCRIPT. 

' 


POSTSCRIPT. 


November,  1770. 

read  and  criticise  the  modern  systems  of  scepticism 
is  so  disagreeable  a  task,  that  nothing  but  a  regard  to 
duty  could  ever  have  determined  me  to  engage  in  it.  I 
found  in  them  neither  instruction  nor  amusement  j  I  wrote 
against  them  with  all  the  disgust  that  one  feels  in  wrang 
ling  with  an  unreasonable  adversary  j  and  I  published 
what  I  had  written,  with  the  certain  prospect  of  raising 
many  enemies,  and  with  such  an  opinion  of  my  performance, 
as  allowed  me  not  to  entertain  any  sanguine  hopes  of  suc 
cess.  I  thought  it  however  possible,  nay,  and  probable 
too,  that  this  book  mightdo  good.  I  knew thatit  contained 
some  matters  of  importance,  which,  if  I  was  not  able  to 
set  them  in  the  best  light,  might  however,  by  my  means, 
be  suggested  to  others  more  capable  to  do  them  justice. 

Since  these  papers  were  first  published,  I  have  laid  my 
self  out  to  obtain  information  of  what  has  been  said  of 
them,  both  by  their  friends,  and  by  their  enemies  j  hoping 
to  profit  by  the  censures  of  the  latter,  as  well  as  by  the 
admonitions  of  the  former.  I  do  not  hear,  that  any  person 
has  accused  me  of  misconceiving  or  misrepresenting  my 
adversaries'  doctrine.  Again  and  again  have  I  requested 
it  of  those  whom  I  know  to  be  masters  of  the  whole  con 
troversy,  to  give  me  their  thoughts  freely  on  this  point  j 
and  they  have  repeatedly  told. me,  that,  in  their  judgment, 
nothing  of  this  kind  can  be  laid  to  my.  charge. 

Most  of  the  objections  that  have  been  made  I  had  fore 
seen,  and,  as  I  thought,  sufficiently  obviated  by  occasional 
remarks  in  the  course  of  the  essay.  Eat,  in  regard  to 
some  of  them,  I  fin  d  it  necessary  now  to  be  more  particu 
lar.  I  wish  to  give  the  fullest  satisfaction  to  every  can 
did  mind :  and  I  am  sure  I  do  not,  on  these  subjects,  en 
tertain  a  single  thought  which  I  need  to  be  ashamed  QE 
afraid  to  lay  be-fore  the  public. 


324  AN  ESSAT  ON  TRUTH.  J.  s» 

I  have  been  much  blamed  *  for  entering  so  warmly 
into  this  controversy.  In  order  to  prepossess  the  minds  of 
those  who  had  notread  this  performance,  with  an  unfavour 
able  opinion  of  it,  and  of  its  author,  insinuations  have  been 
made,  and  carefully  helped  about,  that  it  treats  only  of 
some  abstruse  points  of  speculative  metaphysics  j  which, 
however,  I  am  accused  of  having  discussed,  or  attempted 
to  discuss,  with  all  the  zeal  of  the  most  furious  bigot^ 
mdulging  myself  in  an  indecent  vehemence  of  language, 
and  uttering  the  most  rancorous  invectives  against  those 
who  differ  from  me  in  opinion.  Much,  on  this  occasion, 
has  been  s?Jd  in  praise  of  moderation  and  scepticism  ^  mo 
deration,  the  source  of  candour,  good-breeding,  and  good 
nature  j  and  scepticism,  the  child  of  impartiality,  and  the 
parent  of  humility.  When  men  believe  with  full  convic 
tion,  nothing,  it  seems,  is  to  be  expected  from  them  but 
'bigotry  and  bitterness  :  when  they  suffer  themselves  in 
their  niquiries  to  be  biassed  by  partiality,  or  wrarmed  with 
affection  they  are  philosophers  no  longer,  but  revilers  and 
enthusiasts  !— If  this  were  a  just  account  of  the  matter  and 
manner  of  the  Essay  on  Truth,  I  should  not  have  the  face 
fcven  to  attempt  an  apology  j  for  were  any  person  guilty 
of  the  fault  here  complained  of,  I  myself  should  certainly 
be  one  of  the  first  to  condemn  him. 

In  the  whole  circle  of  human  sciences,  real  or  pretended, 
there  is  not  any  thing  to  be  found  which  I  think  more 
perfectly  contemptible  than  the  speculative  metaphysics 
of  the  moderns.  It  is  indeed  a  most  wretched  medley  of 
ill-digested  notions,  indistinct  perceptions,  inaccurate  ob 
servations,  perverted  language,  and  sophistical  argument  j 
distinguishing  where  there  is  no  difference,  and  confounding 
Vv'here  there  is  no  similitude;  feigning  difficulties  where  it 
cannot  find  them,  and  overlooking  them  when  real.  I 
know  no  end  that  the  study  of  such  jargon  can  answer, 
except. to  harden  and  stupify  the  heart,  bewilder  the  un- 

*  In  justice  to  the  public  I  must  here  observe,  that  the  clamour 
against  me  on  account  of  this  book,  however  loud  and  alarming  at 
tirst,  appears  now  to  have  been  raised  and  propogatad  by  a  feiiu 
ficnons  of  a  particular  party  in  Scotland;  and  to  huve  owed  its  rise  to 
'prejudice,  and  its  progress  to  defamation  ;  to  engines  of  malignity 
which  an  honest  man  would  be  much  more  sorry  to  see  employed 
for  him  than  agajust  him. 


K  sv  Atf  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH;  325 

derstanding,  sour  the  temper,  and  habituate  the  mi^id  to 
irresolution,  captiousness,  and  falsehood.  For  studies  of 
this  sort  I  have  neither  time  nor  inclination,  I  have  neither 
head  nor  heart.  To  enter  into  them  at  all,  is  foolish  ;  to 
enter  into  them  with  warmth,  ridiculous  j  but  to  treat  those 
with  any  bitterness,  whose  judgments  concerning  them 
may  difter  from  ours,  is  in  a  very  high  degree  odous  and 
criminal.  Thus  far,  then,  my  adversaries  and  I  are  agreed*. 
Had  the  sceptical  philosophers  confined  themselves  to 
those  inoffensive  wranglings  that  shew  only  the  subtlety 
and  captiousness  of  the  disputant,  but  affect  not  the  prin 
ciples  of  human  conduct,  they  never  would  have  found  an 
opponent  in  me.  My  passion  for  writing  is  not 
strong  j  and  my  love  of  controversy  so  weak,  that  if 
it  could  always  be  avoided  with  a  safe  conscience,  I 
would  never  engage  in  it  at  all.  But  when  doctrines  are 
published  subversive  of  morality  and  religion  ^  dotrines,  of 
which  I  perceive  and  have  it  in  my  power  to  expose  the 
absurdity,  my  duty  to  the  public  forbids  me  to  be  silent  j 
especially  when  I  see,  that  by  the  influence  of  fashion, 
folly,  or  more  criminal  causes,  those  doctrines  spread  wider 
and  wider  every  day,  diffusing  ignorance,  misery,  and  li 
centiousness,  wherever  they  prevail.  Let  us  oppose  the 
torrent,  though  we  should  not  be  able  to  check  it.  The 
zeal  and  example  of  the  weak  have  often  roused  to  action, 
and  to  victory,  the  slumbering  virtue  of  the  strong. 
*  I  likewise  agree  with  my  adversaries  in  this,  thatscepti-- 
cism,  where  it  tends  to  make  men  well-bred  and  good- 
natured,  and  to  rid  them  of  pedantry  and  petulance,  with 
out  doing  individuals  or  society  any  harm,  is  an  excellent 
thing.  And  some  sorts  of  scepticism  there  are,  that  really 
have  this  tendency .  In  philosophy,  in  history,  in  politics, 
yea,  and  even  in  theology  itself,  there  are  many  points  of 
doubtful  disputation,  in  regard  to  which 'a  man's  judgment 
may  lean  to  either  of  the  sides,  or  hang  wavering  between 
them,  without  the  least  inconvenience  to  himself,  or  others, 
Whether  pure  space  exists  or  how  we  come  to  form  an 
idea  of  it  j  whether  all  the  objects  of  human  reason  may 
be  fairly  reduced  to  Aristotle's  ten  categories  ;  whether 
Hannibal,  when  he  passed  the  Alps,  had  any  vinegar  in 
his  camp  j  whether  Richard  III.  was  as  remarkable  for 
cruelty  and  a  hump-back,  as  is  commonly  believed 


AN    ESSAY    ON  TRUTH.  B,  Si. 

whether  Mary  Queen  of  Scotland  married  Bothwell  from 
inclination,  or   from  the  necessity  of  her  affairs  j  whether* 
the  earth  is   better  peopled  now  than  it   was  in  ancient 
times  }  whether  public  prayers  should  be  recited   from  me 
mory,  or  read  : — in  regard  to  these  and  such  like  questions, 
a  little  scepticism  may  be  very  very  safe  and  very  proper, 
and  I  will  never  think   the   worse  of  a   man  for  differing 
from  me  in  opinion.      And  if  ever  it  should  be  my  chance 
to  engage  in  controversy  on  such  questions,  I  here  pledge 
myself  to  thr  public,    (absit  invidia   verbo  !),  that   I   wrill 
conduct  the  whole  aiiair  with  the  most  exemplary  coolness 
of  blood,  ad  lenity  of  language.     I  have  always  observed 
that  strong  conviction  is  much  more  apt  to  breed   strife 
in  matters  of  little  moment,  than  in   subjects  of  high  im 
portance.     Not  to  mention  (what  I   would  willingly   for 
get)  the  scandalous  contents  that   have   prevailed  in  the 
Christian  wrorld   about  trilling   ceremonies   and   points  of 
doctrine,  I  need  only  put  the  reader  in  mind  of  those  learn 
ed  critics  and  annotators,  Salmasius,  Valla,  and    Scaliger, 
who.  in  their  squabbles  about  words,  gave  scope  to  such 
rancorous  animosity  and   virulent  abuse,  as  is   altogether 
without  example.      In  every  case,  where  dogmatical  belief 
tends  to  harden  the  heart,  or  to  breed  prejudices  incompa 
tible  with  candour,  humanity,  and  the   love   of  truth,  all 
good  men   will   be   careful    to  cultivate  moderation  and 
diffidence. 

But  there  are  other  points,  in  regard  to  which  a  strong 
conviction  produces  the  best  effects,  and  doubt  and  hesi 
tation  the  worst :  and  these  are  the  points  that  our  sceptics 
labour  to  subvert,  r»nd  I  to  establish.  That  the  human 
soul  is  a  real  and  permanent  substance,  that  God  is  infi 
nitely  wise  and  good,  that  virtue  and  vice  are  essentially 
different,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  truth,  and  that  man 
in  many  cases  is  capable  of  discovering  it,  are  some  of  the 
principles  which  this  book  is  intended  to  vindicate  from 
the  objections  of  scepticism.  Attempts  have  been  made 
to  persuade  us,  that  there  is  no  evidence  of  truth  in  any 
science  ;  that  the  human  understanding  ought  not  to  believe 
any  thing,  but  rather  to  remain  in  perpetual  suspence  be 
tween  opposite  opinions  j  that  it  is  unreasonable  to  believe 
the  Deity  to  be  perfectly  wise  and  good,  or  even  to  exist  j 


f,  S*  AN    ESSAY  ON    TRUTH.  327 

that  the  soul  of  man  has  nothing  permanent  in  its  nature, 
nor  indeed  any  kind  of  existence  distinct  from  its  present 
perceptions,  which  are  continually  changing,  and  will  soon 
be  at  an  end.',  and  that  moral  distinctions  are  ambiguous 
and  artificial,  depending  rather  on  human  caprice  and 
fashion,  than  on  the  nature  of  things,  or  the  divine  will. 
This  scepticism,,  the  reader  will  observers  totally  subver 
sive  of  science,  morality,  and  religion,  both  natural  and 
revealed.  And  this  is  the  scepticism  which  I  am  blamed 
for  having  opposed  with  warmth  and  earnestness. 

I  desire  to  know,  what  good  effects  this  scepticism  is  like 
ly  to  produce  ?  "  It  humbles,"  we  are  told,  "  our  pride 
**  of  understanding."  Indeed  !  And  are  they  to  be  con 
sidered  as  patterns  of  humility,  who  set  the  wisdom  of  all 
former  ages  at  nought,  bid  defiance  to  the  common  sense 
of  mankind,  and  say  to  the  wisest  and  best  men  that  ever 
did  honour  to  our  nature,  Ye  are  fools  or  hypocrites  j  we 
only  are  candid,  honest'  and  sagacious  ?  Is  this  humility  ! 
Should  I  be  humble,  if  I  were  to  speak  and  act  in  this 
manner  !  Every  man  of  sense  would  pronounce  me  lost  tor 
all  shame,  an  apostate  from  truth  and  virtue,  an  enemy  to 
human  kind;}  and  my  own  conscience  would  justiiy  the 
censure. 

And  so,  it  seems  that  pride  of  understanding  is  inse 
parable  from  the  disposition  of  those  who  believe  that  they 
have  a  soul,  that  there  is  a  God,  that  virtue  and  vice  are 
essentially  different,  and  that  men  are  in  some  cases  per 
mitted  to  discern  the  difference  between  truth  and  false 
hood  !  Yet  the  gospel  requires  or  supposes  the  belief  of  all 
these  points  :  the  gospel  also  Commands  us  to  be  humble  : 
and  the  spirit  and  influence  of  the  gospel  have  produced 
the  most  perfect  examples  of  that  virtue  that  ever  appeared 
among  men.  A  belieTer  may  be  proud  :  but  it  is  neither 
his  belief,  nor  what  he  believes,  that  can  make  him  so  •  for 
both  ought  to  teach  him  humility.  To  call  in  question^ 
and  labour  to  subvert,  those  first  principles  of  science,  mo 
rality  and  religion,  which  all  the  rational  part  of  mankind 
acknowledge,  is  indeed  an  indication  of  a  proud  and  pre 
sumptuous  understanding  :  but  does  the  sceptic  lay  this  to 
the  charge  of  the  believer  ?  I  have  heard  of  a  thief,  when 
dose  pursued,  turning  on  his  pursuers,  and  charging  them 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH;  P,  s, 

with  robbery  :  but  I  do  not  think  the  example  worthy  a 
philosopher's  imitation. 

The  prevention  of  bigotry  is  said  tobe  anoth  er  of  the 
blessed  effects  of  this  modern  scepticism.  And  indeed, 
if  sceptics  would  act  consistently  with  their  own  principles, 
there  would  be  ground  for  the  remark  :  for  a  man  who  be 
lieves  nothing  at  all",  cannot  be  said  to  be  blindly  attached 
to  any  opinion,  except  perhaps  to  this  one,  that  nothing  is 
to  be  believed  -?  in  which,  however,  if  he  have  any  regard 
to  uniformity  of  character,  he  will  take  care  not  to  be  dog 
matical,  iiut  it  is  well  known  to  ail  who  have  had  any 
opportunity  of  observing  his  conduct,  that  the  sceptic  re 
jects  those  opinions  only  which  the  rest  of  mankind  admit : 
for  that,  in  adhering  to  his  own  paradoxes,  the  most  devot 
ed  anchorite,  t-he  most  furious  inquisitor,  is  not  a  greater 
bigot  than  he.  An  ingenuous  author  has  therefore,  with 
very  good  reason,  made  it  one  of  the  articles  of  the  IrifidcPs 
creed,  That,  "  he  believes  in  all  unbelief  *."  Though  a 
late  writer  is  a  perfect  sceptic  in  regard  to  the  existence  of 
his  soul  and  body,  he  is  certain,  that  men  have  no  idea  of 
power  :  though  he  has  many  doubts  and  difficulties  about 
the  evidence  of  mathematical  truth,  he  is  quite  positive 
that  his  soul  is  not  the  same  thing  to  day  it  was  yesterday,. 
and  though  he  affirms  that  it  is  by  an  act  of  the  human 
understanding,  that  two  and  two  have  come  to  be  equal  to1 
four,  yet  he  cannot  allow,  that  to  steal  or  to  abstain  from 
stealing,  to  act,  or  to  cease  from  action,  is  in  the  power  o£ 
any  man.  In  reading  sceptical  books,  I  have  often  found, 
that  the  strength  of  the  author's  attachment  to  his  paradox, 
is  in  proportion  to  its  absurdity.  If  it  deviates  but  a  little 
from  common  opinion,  he  gives  himself  but  little  trouble 
about  it }  if  it  be  inconsistent  with  universal  belief,  he  con 
descends  to  argue  the  matter,  and  to- bring  what  with  him: 
passes  for  a  proof  of  it  j  if  it  be  such  as  no  man  ever  did  or- 
could  believe,  he  is  still  more  concerted  of  hi?  proof,  and 
calls  it  a  demonstration  j,  but  if  it  is  inconceivable,  it  is  a' 
wonder  if  he  does  not  take  it  for  granted.  Thus,  that  our 
idea  of  extension  is  extended,  is  inconceivable,  and  in  the 
Treatise  of  Human  Nature  is  taken  for  granted  :  that  mat 
ter  exists  only  in  the  mind  that  perceives  it,  is  what  no 
ever  did  or  could  believe  'r  and  the  author  of  the 

*  Connoisseur,  No.  9, 


F.  S.  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  329 

Treatise  concerning  the  Principles  of  Human  Knowledge ,  has 
favoured  the  world  with  what  passes  among  the  fashionable 
metaphysicians  for  a  demonstration  of  it :  that  moral,  in 
tellectual,  and  corporeal  virtues,  are  all  upon  the  same 
footing,  is  inconsistent  with  universal  belief  j  avid  a  famous 
Essayist  has  argued  the  matter  at  large,  and  would  fain  per 
suade  us,  that  he  has  proved  it  •,  though  I  do  not  recollect, 
that  he  triumphs  in  .this  proof  as  so  perfectly  irresistible,  as 
those  by  which  he  conceives  himself  to  have  annihilated 
the  idea  of  power,  and  exploded  the  existence  and  perma 
nency  of  percipient  substances.  I  will  not  say,  however, 
that  this  gradation  holds  universally.  Sceptics,  it  must  be 
owned,  bear  a  right  zealous  attachment  to  all  their  absur 
dities,  both  greater  and  less.  If  they  are  most  warmly  in 
terested  in  behalf  of  the  former,  it  is,  I  suppose,  because 
they  have  had  the  sagacity  to  foresee,  that  those  would 
stand  most  in  need  of  their  countenance  and  protection. 

We  see  how  far  scepticism  may  be  said  to  prevent  bi« 
gotry.  It  prevents  all  bigotry,  and  all  strong  attachment 
on  the  side  of  truth  and  common  sense  j  but  in  behalf  of 
its  own  paradoxes,  it  establishes  bigotry  the  most  implicit 
and  the  most  obstinate.  It  is  true,  that  sceptics  sometimes 
tell  us,  that,  however  positively  they  may  assert  their  doc 
trines,  they  would  not  have  us  think  them  positive  assertors 
of  any  doctrine.  Sextus  Empiricus  has  done  this  j  and 
some  too,  if  I  mistake  not,  of  our  modem  Pyrrhonists. 
But  common  readers  are  not  capable  of  such  exquisite  re 
finement,  as  to  believe,  their  author  to  be  in  earnest,  and  at 
the  same  time  not  in  earnest  j  as  to  believe,  that  when  he 
asserts  some  points  with  diffidence,  and  others  with  the  ut 
most  confidence,  he  holds  himself  to  be  equally  difndeat 
of  all. 

There  is  but  one  way  in  which  it  is  possible  for  a  sceptic 
to  satisfy  us,  that  he  is  equally  doubtful  of  all  doctrines. 
He  must  assert  nothing,  lay  down  no  principles,  contradict 
none  of  the  opinions  of  other  people,  and  advance  none  of 
his  own  :  in  a  word,  he  must  confine  his  doubts  to  his  own 
breast,  at  least  the  grounds  of  his  doubts  ;  or  propose  them 
modestly  and  privately,  not  with  a  view  tc  make  us  change 
our  mind,  but  only  to  shew  his  ov  n  diffidence.  For  from 
the  moment  that  he  attempts  to  obtrude  them  on  the  pub 
lic,  or  on  any  individual,  or  even  to  represent  the  opinion 


S30  AN    ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  ,p.  S< 

of  others  as  less  probable  than  his  own,  he  commences  a 
dogmatist ;  and  is  to  be  accounted  more  or  less  presumptuous, 
according  as  his  doctrine  is  more  or  less  repugnant  to  com 
mon  sense,  and  himself  more  or  less  industrious  to  recom 
mend  it. 

Though  he   were  to  content  himself  with  urging  objec 
tions,  without  seeking  to  lay  down  any  principle  of  his  own, 
which  however  is  a  degree  of  moderation  that  no  sceptic 
ever  yet  arrived  at,  we  would  not  on  that  account  pronounce 
him  an  inoffensive  man.     If  his  objections  have  ever  weak 
ened  the  moral  or  religious  belief  of  any  one  person,  he  has 
injured  that  person  in  his  dearest  and  most  important  con 
cerns.     They  who  know  the  value  of  true  religion,  and 
have  had  any  opportunity  of  observing  its  effects  on  them 
selves  or  others,  need  not  be  told,  how  dreadful  to  a  sen 
sible  mind  it  is,   to  be  staggered  in  its  faith  by  the  cavils 
of  the  infidel.     Every  person  of  common  humanity,  who 
knows  any  thing  of  the  heart  of  man,  would  shudder  at  the 
thought  of  infusing  scepticism  into  the  pious  Christian. 
Suppose  the  Christian  to  retain  his  faith  in  spite  of  all  ob 
jections  *,  yet  the  confutation  of  these  cannot  fail  to  distress 
him  *?   and  a    habit    of   doubting,  once   begun,  may,   to 
the    latess  hour  of  his  life,  prove  fatal  to  his   peace   of 
mind.     Let  no  one  mistake  or  misrepresent  me  :  I  am  not 
speaking  of  those  points  of  doctrine  which  rational  believers 
allow-  to   be   indifferent :   I  speak  of  those  great  and  most 
essential  articles  of  faith  j  the  existence  of  a  Deity,  infinitely- 
wise,  beneficitmt,  and  powerful ;  the  certainty  of  a  future 
state  of  retribution  ;  and  the   divine  authority  of  the  gospel. 
These  are  the  articles  which  some  late  authors  labour  with 
all  their  might  to  overturn  -9  and  these  are  the  articles  which 
every  person  xvho  loves  virtue  and  mankind,  would  wish 
to  see  ardently  and  zealously  defended.     Is  it  bigotry  to 
believe  these  sublime  truths  with  full  assurance  of  faith  ? 
I  glory  in   such  bigotry :    I   would  not  part  with  it  for  a 
thousand  worlds  :  I  congratulate  the  man  who  is  possessed 
of  it ;  for,  amidst  all  the  vicissitudes  and  calamities  of  the 
present  state,  that  man  enjoys  an  inexhaustible  fund  of  con 
solation,  of  wliich  it  is  not  m  the  power  of  fortune  to  de 
prive  him.     Calamities,   did   I  say  ?   The  evils  of  a  very 
short  life  will  not  be  accounted  such  by  him  who  has  * 


F.  S.  AN  ESSAY  0*    TRtlTH. 

near  and  certain  prospect  of  a  happy  eternity; — 'Will  it  be 
said,  that  the  firm  belief  of  these  divine  truths  did  ever  give 
rise  to  ill-nature  or  persecution  ?  It  will  not  be  said,  by  any 
person  who  is  at  all  acquainted  with  history,  or  the  human, 
mind.  Of  such  belief,  when,  sincere,  and  undebased  by 
criminal  passions,  meekness,  benevolence,  and  forgiveness, 
are  the  natural  and  necessary  effects.  There  is  not  a  book 
on  earth  so  favourable  to  all  the  kind,  and  all  the  sublime 
affections,  or  so  unfriendly  to  hatred  and  persecution,  to 
tyranny,  injustice,  and  every  sort  of  malevolence,  as  that 
very  gospel  against  which  our  sceptics  entertain  such  a 
rancorous  antipathy.  Of  this  they  cannot  be  ignorant,  if 
they  have  ever  read  it ;  for  it  breathes  nothing  throughout 
but  mercy,  benevolence,  and  peace.  If  they  have  not  read 
it,  they  and  their  prejudices  are  as  far  below  our  contempt 
as  any  thing  so  hateful  can  be  :  if  they  have,  their  pre 
tended  concern  for  the  rights  -of  mankind  is  all  hypocrisy 
-and  a  lie.  Nor  need  they  attempt  to  frame  an  answer  to 
this  accusation,  till  they  have  proved,  that  the  morality  of 
the  gospel  is  faulty  or  imperfect  ?  that  virtue  is  not  useful 
to  individuals,  nor  beneficial  to  society  3  that  the  evils  of 
life  are  most  effectually  alleviated  by  the  extinction  of  all 
hope  •,  that  annihilation  is  a  much  more  encouraging  pros 
pect  to  virtue,  than  the  certain  view  of  eternal  happiness  j 
that  nothing  is  a  greater  check  to  vice,  than  a  firm  per 
suasion  that  no  punishment  awaits  it ;  and  that  it  is  a  con 
sideration  full  of  misery  to  a  good  man,  when  weeping  on 
the  grave  of  a  beloved  friend,  to  reflect,  that  they  shall 
soon  meet  again  in  a  better  state,  never  to  part  any  more. 
Till  the  teachers  and  abettors  of  infidelity  have  proved 
these  points  or  renounced  their  pretensions  to  universal  pa 
triotism,  their  character  is  polluted  with  all  the  infamy  that 
can  be  implied  in  the  appellation  of  Her  and  hypocrite. 

I  wonder  at  those  men  who  charge  upon  Christianity 
all  the  evils  that  superstition,  avarice,  sensuality,  and  the 
love  of  power,  have  introduced  into  the  Christian  world ; 
and  then  suppose,  that  these  evils  are  to  be  prevented,  not 
by  suppressing  criminal  passions,  but  by  extirpating  Chris 
tianity,  or  weakening  its  influence.  In  fact,  our  religiom 
supplies  the  only  effectual  means  of  suppressing  these  pa» 
sions,  and  so  preventing  the  mischief  complained  of  £ 

Ee 


33 ^  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  P.  S. 

and  tills  it  will  ever  be  more  or  less  powerful  to  accomplish, 
according  as  its  influence  over  the  minds  of  men  is  greater 
or  less  j  and  greater  or  less  will  its  influence  be,  according 
as  its  doctrines  are  more  or  less  firmly  believed.  It  was 
not,  because  they  were  Christians,  but  because  they  chose 
to  be  the  avaricious  and  blood-thirsty  slaves  of  an  avari 
cious  and  blood-thirsty  tyrant,  that  Cortez  and  Pizzaro 
perpetrated  those  diabolical  cruelties  in  Peru  and  Mexico, 
the  narrative  of  which  is  insupportable  to  humanity.  Had 
they  been  Christians  in  anything  but  in  name,  they  would 
have  loved  their  neighbour  as  themselves  j  and  no  man  who 
loves  his  neighbour  as  himself,  will  ever  cut  his  throat  or 
roast  him  alive,  in  order  to  get  at  his  money. 

If  zeal  be  warrantable  on  any  occasion,  it  must  be  so  in 
the  present  controversy  •:  for  I  know  of  no  doctrines  more 
important  in  themselves,  or  more  affecting  to  a  sensible 
mind,  than  those  which  the  scepticism  confuted  in  this  book 
tends  to  subvert.  Bat  why,  it  may  be  said,  should  zeal  be 
warrantable  on  any  occasion  ?  The  answer  is  easy  :  Be 
cause  on  some  occasions  it  is  decent  and  natural.  When  a 
man  is  deeply  interested  in  his  subject,  it  is  not  natural  for 
him  to  keep  up -the  appearance  of  as  much  coolness,  as  if 
he  were  disputing  about  an  indifferent  matter  :  and  what 
ever  is  not  natural  is  always  offensive.  Were  he  to  hear 
his  dearest  friends  branded  with  the  appellation  of  knaves 
and  ruffians,  would  it  be  natural,  would  it  be  decent,  for 
him  to  preserve  the  same  indifference  in  his  look,  and  soft 
ness  in  his  manner,  as  if  he  were  investigating  a  truth  in 
conic  sections,  arguing  about  the  cause  of  the  Aurora 
Borealis,  or  settling  a  point  of  ancient  history  ?  Ought  he 
not  to  shew,  by  the  sharpness  as  well  as  by  the  solidity  of 
his  reply,  that  he  -not  only  disavows,  but  detests  the  accu 
sation  ?  Is  there  a  man  w  hose  indignation  would  not  -kindle 
ut  such  an  insult  ?  Is  there  a  man  -who  would  be  so  much 
overawed  by  any  antagonist,  as  to  conceal  his  indignation  ? 
Of  such  a  man  I  shall  only  say,  that  I  would  not  chuse 
him  for  my  friend.  When  our  subject  lies  near  our  heart 
cur  language  must  be  animated,  or  it  will  be  worse  than 
lifeless  j  it  will  be  affected  and  hypocritical.  Now  what 
subject  can  He  nearer  the  heart  of  a  Christian,  or  of  a  man 
than  the  existence  and  perfections  of  God,  ajid  the  immor- 


P.  ».  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  333 

tality  of  tlie  Human  soul  ?  If  he  can  not,  if  he  ought  not 
to  hear  with  patience  the  blasphemies  belched  by  unthink 
ing  profligates  in  their  common  conversation,  with  what 
temper  ot  mind  will  he  listen  or  reply  to  the  cool,  insidu- 
ous,  and  envenomed  impieties  of  the  deliberate  Atheist  ! — 
Fy  on  it  !  that  I  should  need  to  write  so  long  an  apology 
for  being  an  enemy  to  Atheism  and  nonsense  ! 

"  But  why  engage  in  the  controversy  at  all  ?  Let  the 
<{  infidel  do  his  worst,  and  heap  sophism  on  sophism,  anil 
44  rail,  and  blaspheme  as  long  as  he  pleases  j  if  your  ich- 
u  gion  be  from  God,  or  founded  in  reason,  it  cannot  be 
"  overthrown.  Why  then  give  yourself'  or  others  any 
"  trouble  with  your  attempts  to  support  a  cause,  against 
'.'  which  it  is  said  that  hell  itself  shall  not  prevail  ?" — This 
objection  has  been  made,  and  urged  too  with  confidence. 
It  has  just  as  much  weight  as  the  following.  Why  enact 
laws  against,  or  inflict  punishment  upon  murderers  ?  Let 
them  do  their  worst,  and  stab,  and  strangle,  and  poison, 
as  much-.as  they  please,  they  will  never  be  able  to  accom 
plish  the  iinal  extermination  of  the  human  species,  no? 
perhaps  to  depopulate  a  single  province. — Such  idle  talk 
deserves  no  answer,  or  but  a  very  short  one.  We  do  be 
lieve,  and  therefore  we  rejoice,  that  our  religion  shall 
flourish  in  spite  of  all  the  sophistry  of  malevolent  men; 
But  is  their  sophistry  the  less  wicked  on  that  account  ? 
Does  it  not  deserve  to  be  punished  with  ridicule  and  con 
futation  ?  Hsve  we  reason  to  hope,  that  a  miracle  will  be 
wrought  to;  save  any- 1  individual  f*om  m-ndelity,  .or  even  any. 
believer  frem  those  doubts  and  apprehensions  which  th© 
writings  of  infidels  are  intended  to  rai  e  ? ,  And  is  it  not 
worth  our,  while,  is  it  not  our  duty,  ought  it  not  to  be  our 
inclination,  to  endeavour  to  prevent  such  a  calamity  ?  Nor 
let  us  imagine  that  this  is  the  business  of  the-  clergy  alone. 
They,  no  doubt  are  best  qualified  for  this  service  ;  but  we 
of  the  laity  who  believe  the  gospel,  are  under  the  same  ob 
ligation  to  wish  well,  and  according  to' our  ability,  to  do 
good  to  our  fellow-creatures.  For  my  own  part,  tho'  the 
writing  of  this  book  had  been  a  work  of  much  greater  dif 
ficulty  and  labour  than  I  found  it  to  be,  I  would  have 
chearfully  undertaken  it,  in  the  hope  of  being  instrumental 
in  reclaiming  even  a  single  sceptic  from  his  unhappy  pre- 

Ee  2 


334  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  P.  s. 

j-udices,  or  in  preserving  even  a  single  believer  from  the 
horrors  oi  scepticism.  Tell  me  not,  that  those  horrors  have 
EC  existence.  I  know  the  contrary.  Tell  me  not,  that? 
the  good  ends  proposed  can  never  in  any  degree  be  accom 
plished  by  performances  of  this  kind.  Of  this  too  I  know 
the  contrary. 

Suppose  a  set  of  men,  subjects  of  the  British  government, 
to  publish  books  setting  forth,  That  liberty,  both  civil  and 
religious,  is  an  absurdity  j  that  trial  by  juries,  the  Habeas 
Corpus  act,  Magna  Charta,  and  the  Protestant  religion,  ar$ 
intolerable  nuisances  j  and  that  Popery,  despotism,  and  the 
inquisition,  ought  immediately  to  be  established  through 
out  the  whole  British  empire  j  suppose  them  to  exhort  their 
countrymen  to  overturn,  or  at  least  to  disregard  our  ex 
cellent  laws  and  constitution,  and  make  a  tender  of  their 
souls  and  consciences  to  the  Pope,  and  of  their  lives  and 
fortunes  to  the  Grand  Seignior  y — and  suppose  them  to 
write  so  cautiously  as  to  escape  the  censure  of  the  law,  and 
yet  with  plausibility  sufficient  to  seduce  many,  and  give 
rise  to  much  dissatisfaction,  discord,  and  licentious  practice, 
equally  fatal  to  the  happiness  of  individuals  and  to  the 
public  peace  : — With  what  temper  would  an  Englishman 
ot"  sense  and  spirit  set  about  confuting  their  principles  ? 
Would  it  be  decent,  or  even  pardonable,  to  handle  such  a 
subject  with  coolness,  or  to  behave  with  complaisance  to 
wards  such  adversaries  ?  jSuppose  them  to  have  specious 
qualities,  and  to  pass  \vith  their  own  party  for  men  of  can 
dour,  genius,  and  learning  :  yet  the  lover  of  liberty  and 
mankind  would  not,  I  presume,  be  disposed  to  pay  them 
any  excessive  compliments  on  that  account,  or  on  any  other. 
But  suppose  these  political  apostates  to  appear,  in  the 
course  of  the  controversy,  chargeable  with  ignorance  and 
sophistical  reasoning,  with  evasive  and  quibbling  refine 
ments,  with  misrepresentation  of  common  facts,  and  mis 
apprehension  of  common  language,  more  attached  to  hy 
pothesis  thsn  to  the  truth,  preferring  their  own  conceits  to 
the  common  sense  of  mankind,  and  seeking  to  gratify  their 
own  exorbitant  vanity  and  lust  of  paradox,  though  at  the 
expence  of  the  happiness  of  millions  :— with  what  face 
could  their  most  abject  flatterers,  and  most  implicit  ad- 
juirers,  cc-inplain  of  the  severity  of  that  antagonist  who 


P.    S.  AN  ESSAY  ON. TRUTH.  335 

should  treat  both  them  and  their  principles  with  contempt 
and  indignation  ?  with  what  face  urge  in  their  defence,  that, 
though  perhaps  somewhat  blameable  on  the  present  occa 
sion,  they  and  their  works  were  notwithstanding  intitled  to 
universal  esteem,  and  the  most  respectful  usage  on  account 
of  their  skill  in  music,  architecture,  geometry,  and  the 
Greek  and  Latin  tongues  !  On  this  account,  would  they 
be  in  any  lesa  degree  the  pests  of  society,  or  the  enemies 
of  mankind  ?  would  their  false  reasoning  be  less  sophistical, 
their  presumption  less  arrogant,  or  their  malevolence  less 
atrocious  ?  Do  not  the  men  who,  like  Alexander,  Mar- 
chiavel,  and  the  author  of  La  Pucelle  d'Orleans,  employ 
their  great  talents  in  destroying  and  corrupting  mankind, 
aggravate  ail  their  other  crimes  by  the  dreadful  addition, 
of  ingratitude  and  breach  of  trust  ?  And  are  not  their  cha 
racters,  for  this  very  reason,  the  more  obnoxious  to  univer 
sal  abhorrence  ?  An  illiterate  blockhead  in  the  Robinhood. 
tavern,  blaspheming  the  Saviour  of  mankind,  or  labouring 
to  confound  the  distinctions  of  vice  and  virtue,  is  a  wicked 
wretch,  no  doubt  :  but  his  wickedness  admits  of  some  sha 
dow  of  excuse  ',  he  might  plead  his  ignorance,  his  stupidi 
ty,  and  the  still  moxe  profligate  lives  and  principles  of  those 
whom  the  world,  by  a  preposterous  fig  ve  of  speech,  is 
pleased  to  call  his  betters  :  but  the  men  of  parts  and  learn 
ing,  who  join  in  the  same  infernal  cry,  are  criminals  of  a 
much  higher  order  j  for  in  their  defence  nothing  can  be 
pleaded  that  will  not  aggravate  their  guilt. 

My  design  in  this  book  was,  to  give  others  the  very 
same  notions  of  the  sceptical  philosophy  that  I  myself  en 
tertain  ;  which  I  could  riot  possibly  have  done,  if  I  had  not 
taken  the  liberty  to  deliver  my  thoughts  plainly  and  with 
out  reserve.  And  truly  I  saw  no  reason- for  being  more 
indulgent  to  the  writings  of  sceptics,  than  to-  those  of  other- 
men.  The  taste  of  the  public  requires  not  any  such  extra 
ordinary  condescension.  Jf  ever  it  should,  which  is  not 
probable,  we  may  then  think  it  prudent  to  comply  ;  but, 
as  we  scorn,  in  matters  of  such  moment,  to  express  our 
selves  by  halves,  we  will  then  also  throw  pen  and  ink  asidey 
never  to  be  resumed  until  we  again  find,  that  we  may  with, 
safety  write,  and  be  honest  at  the  &.one  time. 

£&&* 


336  AN  ESS/iY  ON  TJIUTH.  J.  S. 

Infidels  take  it  upon  them  to  treat  religion  and  its 
friends  with  opprobrious  language,  misrepresentation,  un 
deserved  ridicule,  and  divers  other  sorts  of  abuse.  Some 
of  them  assert,  with  the  most  dogmatical  assurance,  what 
they  know  to  be  contrary  to  the  common  sense  of  man 
kind.  All  this  passes  for  wit,  and  eloquence,  and  liberal 
inquiry,  and  a  manly  spirit.  But  whenever  the  friends  of 
truth  espouse,  with  warmth,  that  cause  which  they  know 
to  be  agreeable  to  common  sense  and  universal  opinion,, 
this  is  called  bigotry  :  and  whenever  the  Christian  vindi 
cates,  with  earnestness,  those  principles  which  he  believes 
to  be  of  the  highest  importance,  and  which  he  knows  to  be 
rssential  to  tlie  happiness  of  man,  immeuiately  he  is  charged 
•vvith  want  of  moderation,  want  of  temper,  enthusiasm,  and 
the  spirit  of  persecution.  Far  be  it  from  the  lover  of  truth 
to  imitate  those  authors  in  misrepresentation,  or  in  en 
deavouring  to  expose  their  adversaries  to  unmerited  ridicule. 
But  if  a  man  were  to  obtain  a  patent  for  vending  poison ,» 
it  would  be  very  hard  to  deny  his  neighbour  the  privilege 
of  selling  the  antidote.  If  their  zeal  in  spreading  and  re 
commending  their  doctrines  be  suffered  to  pass  without 
censure,  our  zeal  in  vindicating  ours  has  at  least  as  good  a 
title  to  pass  uncensured.  If  this  is  not  allowed,  I  must 
suppose,  that  the  present  race  of  iniidels,  like  the  jure  di- 
vino  kings,  imagine  themselves  invested  with  some  pecu 
liar  sanctity  of  character  j  that  whatever  they  are  pleased 
to  say  is  to  be  received  as  law'  and  the  fashion  •,  and  that 
to  contradict  their  will,  or  even  address  them  without  pro 
stration,  is  indecent  and  criminal.  I  know  not  whence  it 
is  that  they  assume  these  airs  of  superiority.  Is  it  from 
the  high  rank  some  of  them  hold  in  the  world  of  letters  ? 
I  would  have  them  to  know,  that  it  is  but  a  short  time 
rnce  that  high  rank  was  either  yielded  to,  or  claimed  by 
such  persons.  Spinoza,  Hobbes,  Collins,  Woolston,  snd 
the  rest  of  that  tribe,  were  within  these  forty  or  fifty  years 
accounted  a  very  contemptible  brotherhood.  The  great 
geniuses  of  the  last  age  treated  them  with  little  ceremony  ; 
and  would  not,  I  suppose,  were  they  now  alive,  pay  more 
respect  to  imitators,  copiers,  and  plagiaries,  than  they  did 
to  the  oiiginal  authors.  If  the  enemies  of  our  religion 
\VQuld  profit  by  experience,  they  might  learn,  from  the 


?.  s.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  337 

fate  of  some  of  their  most  renowned  brethren,  that  infi 
delity,  however  fashionable  and  lucrative,  is  not  the  most 
convenient  field  for  a  successful  display  of  genius.  Kver 
since  Voltaire,  stimulated  by  avarice,  and  other  dotages 
incident  to  unprincipled  old  age,  formed  the  scheme  of 
turning  a  penny  by  WTiting  three  or  four  volumes  yearly 
against  the  Christian  religion,  he  has  dwindled  from  a  ge 
nius  of  no  common  magnitude  into  a  paltry  book-maker  j 
and  now  thinks  he  does  great  and  terrible  things,  by  re 
tailing  the  crude  and  long  exploded  notions  of  the  free 
thinkers  of  the  last  age,  which,  when  seasoned  with  a  few 
mistakes,  misrepresentations,  and  ribaldries  of  his  own, 
form  such  a  mess  of  falsehood,  impiety,  obscenity,  and  other 
abominable  ingredients,  as  nothing  but  the  monstrous  maw 
of  an  illiterate  infidel  can  either  digest  or  endure.  Several 
of  our  famous  sceptics  have  lived  to  see  the  greatest  part 
of  their  profane  tenets  confuted.  I  hope,  and  earnestly 
wish,  that  they  may  live  to  make  a  full  recantation.  Some 
of  them  must  have  known,  and  many  of  them  might  have- 
known,  that  their  tenets  were  confuted  before  they  adopt 
ed  them  :  yet  did  they  adopt  them  notwithstanding,  and. 
display  them  to  the  world  with  as  much  confidence  as  if 
nothing  had  ever  been  advanced  on  the  other  side.  So 
have  I  seen  a  testy  and  stubborn  dogmatist,  when  all  his 
arguments  were  answered,  and  all.  his  invention  exhausted^ 
comfort  himself  at  last  with  simply  repeating  his  former 
positions  at  the  end  of  each  new  remonstrance  from  the  ad 
versary. 

They  who  are  conversant  in  the  works  of  tne  sceptical 
philosophers,  know7  very  well,  that  those  gentlemen  do  not 
always  maintain  that  moderation  of  style  which  might  be 
expected  from  persons  of  their  profession  j  and  if  I  thought 
my  conduct  in  this  respect  needed  to  be  or  could  be,  jus 
tified  by  such  a  precedent,  I  might  plead  even  their  ex 
ample  as  my  apology.  But  I  disclaim  every  plea  that 
such  a  precedent  could  afford  me  :  I  write  not  in  the  spirit 
of  retaliation  ;  and  when  I  find  myself  inclined  to  be  an 
imitator,  I  will  look  out  for  other  models.  Indeed  it  is 
hardly  to  be  supposed,  that  I  would  take  those  for  my  pat 
tern,  whose  talents  I  despise,  whose  writings  I  detest,  and 
whose  principles  and  projects  are  so  directly  opposite  to 


AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  F.  S* 

mine.  Their  writings  tend  to  subvert  the  foundations  of 
human  knowledge,  to  poison  the  sources  of  human  happi 
ness,  and  to  overturn  that  religion  which  the  best  and 
wisest  of  men  have  believed  to  be  of  divine  original,  and 
which  every  good  man,  who  understands  it,  must  reverence 
as  the  greatest  blessing  ever  conferred  upon  the  human; 
race.  I  write  with  ?.<.  view  to  counteract  those  tendencies,. 
by  vindicating  some  fundamental  articles  of  religion  and 
science  from  the  sceptical  objections,  and  by  shewing,  that 
no  man  can  attempt  to  disprove  the  first  principles  of  know 
ledge  without  contradicting  himself.  To  the  common 
sense  of  mankind,  they  scruple  not  to  oppose  their  own 
conceits,  as  if  they  judged  these  to  be  more  worthy  of 
eredit  than  any  other  authority,  human  or  divine.  I  urge 
nothing  with  any  degree  of  confidence  or  fervour,  in  which 
I  have  not  good  reason  to  think  myself  warranted  by  the 
common  sense  of  mankind.  Does  their  cause,  then,  or. 
does  mine,  deserve  the  warmest  attachment  ?  Have  they, 
or  have  I,  the  most  need  to  guard  -against  vehemence  of 
expression  *  ?  As  certainly  as  the  happiness  of  mankind 
is  a  desirable  object,  so  certainly  is  my  cause  good,  and 
theirs  evil. 

To  conclude  :  Liberty  of  speech  and  writing  is  one  of 
those  high  privileges  that  distinguish  Great  Britain  from 
all  other  nations.  Every  good  subject  wishes, "that  it  may 
be  preserved  to  the  latest  posterity  j  and  would  be  sorry 
to  see  the  civil  power  interpose  to  check  the  progress  of 
rational  inquiry.  Nay,  when  inquiry  ceases  to  be  rational, 
and  becomes  both  whimsical  and  pernicious,  advancing  as 
far  as  some  late  authors  have  carried  k,  to  controvert  the 
first  principles  of  knowledge,  morality  and  religion,  and 

*  "  There  is  no  satisfying  the  demands  of  false  delicacy,"  says  an 
elegant  and  pious  author,  •'  because  they  are  rot  regulated  by  any 
'  fixed  standard.  But  a  man  of  candour  and  judgment  will  allow, 
'  that  the  bashful  timidity  practised  by  those  who  put  themselves  on 
'  a  level  with  the  adversaries  of  religion,  would  ill  become  one  who, 
'  declining  all  disputes,  asserts  primary  truths  on  the  authority  of 
'  common  sense  ;  and  that  whoever  pleads  the  caute  of  religion  in 
(  this  way,  has  a  right  to  assume  a  firmer  tone,  and  to  pronounce 
1  with  a  more  decisive  air,  not  upon  the  strength  of  his  own  juclg- 
*•  ment,  but  on  the  reverence,  due  from  all  mankind  to  the  tribunal 
"  to  which  he  appeals." 

Appeal  In  bcbatf  of  rclig'on,  f>.  14. 


f  •  s*  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH. 

consequently  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  British  govern 
ment,  and  of  all  well-regulated  society  •,  even  then,  it  must 
do  more  hurt  than  good  to  oppose  it  with  the  arm  of  flesh. 
I1  or  persecution  and.  punishment  for  the  sake  of  opinion,. 
seldom  fail  to  strengthen  the  party  they  are  intended  to 
suppress  j  and  when  opinions  are  combated  by  such  wea 
pons  only,  (which  would  probably  be  the  case  if  the  law 
were  to  interpose),  a  suspicion  arises  in  the  minds  of  men, 
that  no  other  weapons  are  to  be  had  j  and  therefore  that 
the  sectary,  though  destitute  of  power,  is  not  wanting  in 
argument.  Let  opinions  then  be  combated  by  reason,  and 
let  ridicule  be  employed  to  expose  nonsense.  And  to  keep 
our  licentious  authors  in  awe,  and  to  make  it  their  interest 
to  think  before  they  write,  to  examine  facts  before  they 
draw  inferences,  to  read  books  before  they  criticise  them,, 
and  to  study  both  sides  of  a  question  before  they  take  it , 
upon  them  to  give  judgment,  it  would  not  be  amiss,  if 
their  vices  and  follies,  as  authors,  were  sometimes  chastised 
by  a  satirical  seventy  of  expression.  This  is  a  proper  pu 
nishment  for  their  fault  j  this  punishment  they  certainly 
deserve  j  and  this  it  is  not  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  philo 
sopher,  or  divine,  or  any  man  who  loves  God  and  his  fel 
low-creatures,  to  inflict.  Milton,  Locke,  Cudworth,  Sid 
ney,  Tillotson,  and  several  of  the  greatest  and  best  writers 
of  the  present  age,  have  set  the  example  j  and  have,  I 
doubt  not,  done  good  by  their  nervous  and  animated  ex 
pression,  as  well  as  by  the  solidity  of  their  arguments. 
This  punishment,  if  inflicted  with  discretion,  might  teach 
our  licentious  authors  something  of.  modesty,  and  of  de 
ference  to  the  judgment  of  mankind  ;  and,  it  is  to  be  hoped,, 
would  in  time  bring  down  that  spirit  of  presumption,  and 
affected  superiority,  which  hath  of  late  distinguished  their 
writings,  and  contributed,  more  perhaps  than  all  their  sub 
tlety  and  sophistry,  to  the  seduction  of  the  ignorant,  the 
unwary,  and  the  fashionable.  It  is  true,  the  best  of  causes 
may  be  pleaded  with  an  excess  of  warmth  ;  as  when  the 
advocate  is  so  blinded  by  his  zeal  as  to  lose  sight  of  his 
argument  j  or  as  when,  in  order  to  render  his  adversaries 
odious,  he  alludes  to  such  particulars  of  their  character  or 
private  history  as  are  not  to  be  gathered  from  their  writ 
ings.  The  former  fault  never  fails  to  injure  the  cause 


34°  AW    ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  P.  S. 

which  the  writer  means  to  defend  :  the  latter,  xvhich  is 
properly  termed  personal  abuse,  is  in  itself  so  hateful,  that 
every  person  of  common  prudence  would  be  inclined  to  a- 
void  it  for  his  own  sake,  even  though  he  were  not  restrained 
by  more  weighty  motives.  If  an  author's  writings  be  sub 
versive  of  virtue,  and  dangerous  to  private  happiness,  and 
the  public  good,  we  ought  to  hold  them  in  detestation,  and, 
in  order  to  counteract  their  baneful  tendency,  to  endeavour 
to  render  them  detestable  in  the  eyes  of  others  -?  thus  far 
\ve  act  the  part  of  honest  men,  and  good  citizens  :  but 
with  his  private  history  we  have  r.o  concern  j.  nor  with  his 
character,  except  in  so  far  as  he  has  thought  proper  to  sub 
mit  it  to  the.  public  judgment,  by  displaying  it  in  hi» 
works.  When  these  are  of  that  peculiar  sort,  that  we 
cannot  expose  them  in  their  proper  colours,  without  reflec 
ting  on  his  abilities  and  moral  character,  we  ought  by  no 
means  to  sacrifice  our  lore  of  truth  and  mankind  to  a  com 
plaisance  which,  if  we  are  what  we  pretend  to  be,  andoughfc 
to  be,  would  be  hypocritical  at  best,  as  well  as  mocker/ 
of  the  public,  and  treichery  to  our  cause.  The  good  of 
society  is  always  to  be  considered  as  a  matter  of  higher 
importance  than  the  gratification  of  an  author's  vanity.  If 
he  does  not  think  of  this  in  time,  and  take  care  that  the 
latter  be  consistent  with  the  former,  he  has  himself  to 
blame  for  all  the  consequences.  Trie  severity  of  Collier's 
attack  upon  the  stage,  in  the  end  of  the  last  century,  was^ 
even  in  the  judgment  of  one  *  who  thought  it  excessive, 
and  who  will  not  be  suspected  of  partiality  to  that  author's 
doctrine,  productive  of  very  good  effects  ;  as  it  obliged  the 
succeeding  dramatic  poets  to  curb  that  propension  to  in 
decency,  which  had  carried  some  of  their  predecessors  so 
far  beyond  the  bounds  of  good  taste  and  good  manners; 
If  xre  are  not  permitted  to  answer  the  objections  of  the  in 
fidel  as  plainly,  and  with  as  little  reserve  as  he  makes 
them,  we  engage  him  on  unequal  terms.  And  many  will 
be  disposed  to  think  most  favourably-  of  that  cause,  whose 
adherents  display  the  greatest  ardour  ;  and  some,  perhaps; 
may  be  tempted  to  impute  to  timidity,  or  to  a  secret  dif 
fidence  or  our  principles,  what  might  have  been  owing  to 
a  much  more  pardonable  weakness.  Nay,  if  we  pay  our 
*  Colley  Gibber,  See  his  Apology,' vol.  i.-p.-2oi. 


f.  «.  AN  ESSAY  ON  TRUTH.  34,1 

sceptical  adversaries  their  full  demand  of  compliment  and 
adulation  ;  and  magnify  their  genius  and  virtue,  while  we 
confute  their  atheistical  and  nonsensical  sophisms  ;  and 
speak  with  as  much  respect  of  their  pitiful  conceits  and 
•flimsy  wrangli.ngs,  as  of  the  sublimest  discoveries  in  phi 
losophy  j  is  there  not  reason  to  fear  that  our  writings  will 
do  little  or  no  service  ?  For,  may  not  some  of  our  readers 
question  our  sincerity  ?  May  not  many  of  them  continue 
the  admirers  and  dupes  of  the  authors  whom  we  seem  so 
passionately  to  admire,  and  whose  merit  will  not  appear 
to  them  the  less  conspicuous  that  it  is  acknowledged  by  an 
avowed  antagonist  ?  And,  lastly,  will  not  the  adversaries 
themselves,  more  gratified  than  hurt  by  such  a  confutation, 
because  more  ambitious  of  applause,  than  concerned  for 
truth,  rejoice  in  their  fancied  superiority  j  and,  finding 
their  books  become  every  day  more  popular  and  marketable 
by  the  consequence  we  give  them,  be  encouraged  to  per 
sist  in  their  malevolent  and  impious  career  ? 

For  my  own  part,  though  I  have  always  been,  and  shall 
always  be,  happy  in  applauding  excellence  wherever  I 
find  it  j  yet  neither  the  pomp  of  wealth  nor  the  dignity  of 
office,  neither  the  frown  of  the  great  nor  the  sneer  of  the  fa 
shionable,  neither  the  sciolist's  clamour  nor  the  profligate's 
resentment,  shall  ever  sooth  or  frighten  me  into  an  admi 
ration,  real  or  pretended,  of  impious  tenets,  sophistical  rea 
soning,  or  that  paltry  metaphysic  with  which  literature  has 
been  so  disgraced  and  pestered  of  late  years,  I  am  not 
so  much  addicted  to  controversy,  as  ever  to  enter  into  any 
but  what  I  judge  to  be  of  very  great  importance  :  and  in 
to  such  controversy  I  cannot,  I  will  not  enter  with  cold 
ness  and  unconcern.  If  I  should,  I  might  please  a  party, 
but  I  must  offend  the  public  j  I  might  escape  the  censure 
of  those  whose  praise  I  would  not  value  j  but  I  should 
justly  forfeit  the  esteem  of  good  men,  and  incur  the  disap 
probation  of  my  own  conscience. 


THE    END. 


Thomas  Turnbull,  Printer, 
Edinburgh. 