
Of the origin and progress of language. |...
OF TH E PRIGIN AND PROGRESS,o F L A N G U A G E Miutum ac turpe pecus Donec verba, quibus vocesfenfufJue notarent, NJominaque invenere. B HOR,,V 0 L. I. EDI N B U R G H: Printed for A. KINCAID & W. CREECH, Edinburgh;,and T. CADELL, in the Strand, London.,MDCCLXXIII.
The CONTENTS,,P A R T I.,B OO K I.,Pag; That Language is not natural to man,,proved, first, from the origin and nature of the IDEAS expressed by Language; and, secondly, from the nature of ARTI CULATi ON; Ch.,Introduction - I. Definition of the subjed. - vWhether,language be from natire, 01 acqui- red habit, - i. Of capacities, --powers, -habits,,and faculties in general, - 3. Of the powers and faculties of human,nature, - 17,a 2 3 That
Ch. Pagd 4. That man does not by nature form i-,deas. - Division of the conceptions of the mind. - Nature of ideas, 43 5. Of Mr Locke's division of ideas into,those of sensation and refle ion, 48 6. Of the formation of ideas, - 4 7. Of abstract ideas. - That there are i-,deas which are not abflract. - Of the three ways in which ideas exist, 79' 8. Of perfed and imperfet ideas.--Of,the ideas of Plato. - Offcience and opinion; and the difference betwixt these two, - - 8 9. Of Plato's peculiar notion concerning,the exigfence of ideas.-lThe opinion of some modern philosophers upon that fiubjeCt - - 162' Io. That ideas are formed by the mind, not,naturally, but in consequence of ac- quired habit. - General refleCtions upon the fiubject,. - I a2 It. Continuation of the subjed. -Ideas of,refletion not from nature, - I40',12. That
Ch. Pag. 12. that ideas of external objects are not,from nature - - 146 13. Conclusion of the subjeCt of ideas.-,General view of human nature, and the rank it pojfefes in the scale of being,-compared with fitperior na- tures, - ' - i6 14. that articulation is not natural to,man, - - 171,B O O K II. That the Political State was necessary,for the invention of Language.-- That such state is not natural to man, any more than Language, to which it gave birth. Ch.,Introduaion, , - 189 i. Of the connection betwixt society and,language.- Al inquiry into the ori- gin of Jbciety neceffiry, - 19,a. Division
Ch. Ptag; 2. Division of animals into solitary and,gregarious, political and not politi- cal. - Man to be ranked in neither of those divijions, but in the middle of each of them. -- Other animals of the fame amphibious kind, - 198 3. Examples from antient and modern,hifiory of men living in the brutiJh state, without arts or civility, 217 4. Of the progress of civil society.- That,this progreJf fl)ews it is not from nature, - - 240 5. Of the cdufes which gave rife to civil,society, - - - 6. Continuation of the fame JfibjeCd.,Some countries not fit to maintain men in the natural slate. -k'i countries may be overflocked with men, as well as with other animals. - The remedies in fitch a cafe, 25i j. What dangers made men afociate for,the Jake of elfdefence, .- 26 8. An/ifer to the objetion, That infiind,was fifficient to provide men with,all
,.h. Pag.,all the necessaries of life, and to de- fend them againfl their enemies, 268 9. Objection anfivered, That there could,be no Jociety without language.- Inflances of such societies, - 279 io. Objetion, That the law of nature, as,it is treated of by modern writers, fitppofes men to have been originally rational and political. - Afwer to that objeCtion, - 290,B 0 K III. ^te~ first beginning of Language, and from whence it arose. - Of the nature of the firlt Languages.- W\hether there is, or ever was, any univerlal language. C1,. I. l/hat was required for the invention,of language, besides the confJitution of Jociety, - - 3°O,2. Of
Ch. Pago 2. Of the several methods of communica-,tion in use among men before the in- vention of language, 305 3. lWhether there might not be a lan-,guage of music singly, without any articulation, - ' 313 4. That language arose from natural in-,articulate cries, - - 318 5. General observations upon the fifl,languages.- DiviJion of them into the matter and the form. - The na- ture of articulation, and the divi- Jion of elemental founds into vowels and coinfnants, - - 326,3-<' 6. Of the matter of the firfi languages.,- hat the words of them are long, and full of vowels. - Aifwcer to ob- jeclio)n, 333 7. Of the formal part of barbarous lan-,guages. - An account of it from theory, - -347 8. The preceding theory illutjrated by ex-,amples from the barbarous langua- ges, - - 364,9. Progress
Ch. Pag. 9. Progr.fs of the barbarous languages,towards improvemenet. - ccount of languages that are not barbarous Jtjoken by barbarous nations ;--Jich as that of the Garani,- of the Al- gonkins, - of the Goths, - of the llbinaquois. - This last too artifi. cial, - - 37I o0. Several que/lions concerning the .sis/,langoiaes. - What words of them were fijf invented, or what namnes of things. - Whether they have a- ny radical words. - Ih.ether there be only one primitive langtuage, 39S 1. Of the duration of Language, and the,facility of its propagatioln.-Of the Celtic, and the great extent of coun. try over which it is]fpread. - Of the 'ezttonic, and its propagation.- Of the Creek and Latin, and their con- ne/lion with the Teultonic.- That the Latin is the fame language with the antient PelaJgic; and of the as- finity betwixt the Latin and He- brew ;- alo betwixt the Latin and Hctrzfc-an, - - 400,b 12. Of
Ch. Pag; 2. Of the antiquity of the Eryp)tians.-,That the Pelafgi got their language from Egypt, and bronght it into Greece.-That the Athenians were a colony of the Egyptians. - That Egypt was a countly very proper for propagating or for inventing a language. -No univelfal language now existing, - - 442 13. Changes to which language is liable;,- especially in its pafage from one people to another. - Examples of that kind. - General observations upon etymology, and the derivation of one language from another. - Conchlfion and recapitulation, 47
OF TH E ORIGIN AND PROGRESS,O F LAN G UAG E.,INT R ODUCTIO N.,S the use of speech is supposed to be that which chiefly diftinguifl- es us from the brute creation; and is truly so, if by )Prech we undertand, not only the mere words or founds of a language, but the conceptions of the mind that are signified by those founds; it is a matter of curious inquiry, from whence we have derived this diftin- guifling prerogative of our nature; how it first began; and by what degrees it arri- ved to that state of perfedion to which it * has been brouight, if not among us, at,least in other ages and nations of the world. This inquiry becomes the more,VOL. I. A interesting,
interesting, as well as of greater curiosity, when we confider, that it leads us back to what may be called the oriin of the htman race; since without the ute of reason and fpecch we have no pretensions to humanity, nor can with any propriety be called imen; but muff be contented to rank with the o- ther animals here below, over whom we as- fume so much superiority, and exercise do- minion chiefly by means of the advantages that the use of language gives us. From this bith of human nature, as it may be call- ed, we will endcavour to trace its progress to its state of maturity. This progress, in the individual, is very well known; but we propose here to exhibit the species it- seif in its ifnacl,,-- irft mute; then lisp- ing and iHammering; next by flow de- grees learning to speak, very lamely and imperfe:ly at firIt; but. at last, from fi.ch rude cfitys, forming an art the most curious, as well as most useful among men. The fubje( is, so far as I know, entirely new;' no author, antient or mo- dern, that has fallen into my hands, ha- ving prrofelcii cy treated of it. And though TI have met with hints concerning it in the course of my reading, they are such as,have,
have rather excited than iftisficd my cu- riofity.,These reasons have induced me to set down, and give to the public, my thoughts upon this fubjedi, which are the fruit of much fludy and inquiry, conti- nued with fbme interruptions for several years, and of many materials colleced du- ring that time. But if, iotrwithftanding, in this undiscovered country, where I am guided by no light or track, I have loft my way, I hope to be forgiven by every reader of Ienfe and candour, who will allow at least this merit to my work, that I have o- pened a new field of speculation, in wlhich even my errors may be of use, by serving as beacons to direc into the right courle men of greater learning and abilities.,The work will. be divided into three parts. The Jili will treat of the origin of language, and of the nature of the Jii languages; or, as they may be more pro- perly called, rude cffays towards language, whichl were pratifed before the art was invented.- lThe fecomd will explain the nature of the art, Ihewing in what it chiefly consists, and how it differs from thoic first untaught attempts to speak. In,A z this
this part of my work, I will give an ac- count of thofie parts of language which appear to me the most artificial, and of mcfl difficult invention. I will alfb treat of fJylc, or composition in words, as be- longing to the art of language; and I think it will not appear foreign to my iihb- jea to fay fomenching likewise of poetry and rhetoric, being arts of which lan- guage furniihcs the materials. -The sub- ject of the third and lajf part will be the cor- ruption of language; of which I ihall endea- vour to aflign the caufcs, and trace the pro- grefs. -The first part will be chiefly philo- fophical, mixed however with a good deal of history, and fadts, by which I ihall en- deavour to support my theories, and philo- fophical speculations. The two last parts will be grammatical and critical. The style will be plain and didaCtic, such as is suit- able to a fiubjec that is to be treated as a matter of science. It will not therefore have that mixture of the rhetorical and poetical, that is .so common in the fashionable wri- tings of this age, upon whatever fibject, and which pleases the vulgar so much: for as I do not write for the vulgar, I will not adapt my style, any more than my matter, to their taste.
p A R T I.,B O O K I. C H A P T E R I. Definition of the fiubjet.-Whether language,be friom nature, or acquired habit. B Y language I mean the exprefion of Ch. r.,the conceptions of the mind by articulate ' founds. These conceptions are either of particulars, i. e. individual things, or of ge- nerals. No language ever exitsed, or can be conceived, consisting only of the ex- pression of individuals, or what is com- monly called proper inames: and the truth is, that these make but a very inconfider- able part of every language. What there- fore constitutes the essential part of lan- guage, and makes it truly deserve that name, is the expreflion of generals, or ideas, according to the language of the philofo- phy that I have learned. For as to the name of general ideast by which they are,commonly
Ch. i. commonly known, it supposes, that the,conceptions of individuals, that is, the perceptions of sense, are likewise ideas; from which it is necelahry to diilinguilh the conceptions of generals by the name of general ideas. But I cannot approve of introducing into philosophy a language which confounds under one name two things so different in their natures, as the operations of fe'e and of intelletl; a con- fusion which, in my apprehension, has gi- ven rife to very great errors in philosophy, and to some extravagant paradoxes, that have been advanced of late years, as re- pugnant to the common sense of mankind as to found philosophy. The definition so understood I hold to be what is properly called language. For though we sav, the language of looks, and of gefures, or signs, such as our dumb persons use; also the language of inarticulate cries, by which the brutes signify their appetites and desires; yet in all those senses. the word is used metaphorically, and not as it ought to be used in the style of science. And thus much may fufficc at present for the defini- tion of our fubjest. We fiall endeavour, in the fccquel, to make it fuller; and par-,ticularly
ticularly we llall explain in what way Ch. I. language cxlre/fes, whether by signs natiu- rti or artificial .,From * In this fcnfe which I have given to language tile Greek word 0cyo; is commonly used, denoting both the ideas, and the founds ured to express them; that is, fn:ds Ji nifcant. But it may be obfcrvcd, that it is often uscd to denote only the principal part of pceech; namely, the id'as, and that combination of them we call rceafn, which muf nece(ffrily precede the use of fpecch. This ambiguous signification of the word has given oc- cafion to the diftinatin made in the Peripatetick school bctwixt no;ds i;voSro , andl toyoc 7Fcss'.;r; that is, the in- ward operations of the mind, and thole operations enun- ciated by fpcech. The not attending to this diaincaion has led tranfi.ltors into great milltkes, and even the translators of our sacred writings. For in that famous pafTage in the beginning of St John's gofplel, which con- tains one of the sublimes mysterics of the Chrillian theology, the Latin translator has rendered uo),, by verbum. And, in like manner, our Englifll translators have rendered it by v'ord, and have made St John fay, that the 'word was God, which, to me at lealt, does not convey any meaning at all: For how can I underRand, that qvord, that is to fay, fpeecl, or ideas expressed by articulate voice, is God? But ?ao;c, in this palfage, is not xtyo; =t0,oI.r, or rcafen enunciated; but it is Aoyr mix;,=5,, i. . rerfci in the m2ind of the Dei)t, according to which every thing was made. This reason is the second person of the Ch-ifian Trinity, by whom we are told the visible wdrld was created, and answers to tile eo,-; irlvp;or of Plato, wlho is also the second person of his Trinity. For that Plato knew the docfrine of the Trinity (however he came by that knowledge) is evident: but he kept it,i;'
Ch. i. From this definition it appears, that 'Y-J language consists of two things; namely,,founds, and the conceptions of the mind signified by those founds. The sirs is, in the truly philosophical language of my worthy and learned friend Mr Harris *, called the material part of language, and the other the formal part; a manner of speaking taken from the antient philofo- phy; according to which, every corpo- I' rpororma, not to be revealed but to those who were in- itiated in his philosophy. And the other two persons in his Trinity correspond likewise with the fame persons in the Christian Trinity: for he has the supreme God, or God the Father, and also the .uxT ,- xo0.w, which an- fwcrs to the Holy Ghot. See Eujfebii Propar. Evangel. lib. iT. cap. 14.-20.: from which paffige it appears, that Eitfeliur underltands x^yor in this passage of St John as I do; and he quotes a Platonic writer, one 4Amelius, who underltands it so also, and wonders where that Barbarian (so he calls the Evangelill) had learned so fu- blime a theology, not knowing that this was the theo. logy of the Jews many hundred years before his mafler Plato was born. This error in the Latin and' English translations of St John's gospel has, I doubt not, been taken notice of by some of our learned divines. But as I am not so much conversant in their writings as I would wish to be, I cannot with certainty fay that it is so. * The Author of Hermes, a work that will be read and admired as long as there is any tate for philosophy and fine writing in Britain,,real
real substance is composed of matter and Ch. i. form. The matter is supposed to be com- mon to all bodies; but the fo;rm is pecu- liar to each, making it that which it is, in contradiftintion to every thing cli : as in this cafe, the human voice, which makes the material part of language, is a matter common to other things, as, e. g. to mu- sic, and to inarticulate cries of (different kinds; whereas the formal part, that is, the significancy of ideas, is peculiar to language, constituting what we call a 'word; which, though it had the matter, that is, the voice, and modified too by articulation, yet if it signified nothing, woull not dcfervc that name. Of theei two parts of language, it is evident, that the formal is by far the more excellent, by how much the thing fignefic is more excellent than thle sign, and the mind than the body: for this part of language be- longs altogether to the mindl; whereas the other is no more than the operation of certain organs of the body.,The firr thing to be confidered in this matter is, wxether language bi at all a v'work of art, or acq!ti. e hbit ? ? o whe- ther, according to the opinion of some,,o,. GL ] V we
Ch. i. we do not speak by nature, without use or ' ,J' infiruWion, in the inme manner as we per-,form many ftuncions of the animal na- ture ? If this last be the cafe, it is in vain to inquire concerning the origin of lan- guage, which, according to this hypothe- sis, must be coeval with the animal. This, therefore, is a preliminary question that nmuf be decided before we.go farther; but in order to decide it, we mvft fairly state it.,And, in thcfrf, place, Those who hold this opinion, will not, I suppose, carry it so far as to maintain, that men, without uie or cuflom, without imitation or in- fhlncuion, would Jpeak a formed regular language, such as is spoken by civilized nations; and which, it is well known to every one that has the least knowledge of grammar, is an art, and a very great art too. But their opinion, when fairly fta- ted, is, as I conceive, this, That men do naturally us; articulate founds to express the conceptions of their mind; very rude- ly and imperfe&ly, no doubt, at firfc, till by art they are improved, and acquire the form of a regular language.,But,
But even such a language, they ccrtain- Ch. I. ly do not maintain, that men fleak. fr'oiN the time of their birth, in the lame man- ner that they perform the natural opera- tions of breathing, digeiting, or til ac- tion of filcking, by which an infilnt takes in the nourinlhnent that is ncceffary to it. But they will fay, that a man, when lle comes to be of perlfed age, will ulfe arti- culate founds to express his conceptions, without art or inflitution, and as natu- rally as he will perform. many other ac- tions, for the prcfirvation of the indivi- dual, or the propagation of the kind. And some, perhaps, of those who hold this opinion, may require further, in or- der to produce a language, some society and mutual intercourfl, not conceiving how a solitary savage fliould invent a me- thod of communication for which he has no use. And this last, I find, is the opi- nion of a late French writer upon the ec- chan/ifl of language ', and who pretends to have confidered the subjed philofophi-,* This'book is intilltd, Tr.:itde d la formtiinli mieca- nique de laiirgues, 'l &ds 'rincips pli/'ft :es dc l'cI'mc l gie, printed at Paris 1765, in 2 vols nl2o.,B. z cally;
Ch. i. cally; for lhe requires, that men should "'V- have lved some time together: but he is,persuaded, that a parcel of children living so, would, by the time they came to be of age, have formed some kind of lan- guage. On the other hand, I maintain, that the faculty of speech is not the gift of nature to man, but, like many others, is acquired by him; that not only there mufl have been society before language was invented, but that it must have sub- sifted a considerable time, and other arts have been invented, before this most dif- ficult one was found out; which appears to me of so difficult invention, that it is not cafi to account how it could at all have been invented.,C I- A P. II. Of Capacit:ies, - Pozwees, - Iabits, -and,.Facilties in generaC. t1-I queflion stated in the preceding,chapter never has been fully confi- dered, so far as I know, though it ap- pears to me curious and interefling. I,will
will therefore endeavour to examine it to Ch. 2. the bottom; and as it concerns powers and '~,- faculties, before I come to speak of the faculty of speech in particular, I think it wil be neceflary, for the better under- standing the argument, to premise some observations concerning powers and facul- ties in general.,With refpecd to which, there are four things that deserve to be ditinlcly confi- dered: Js?, The energics, or operations of such faculties. With these I begin; be- cause they are firfl in the order of our conceptions, being perceived by the sense; whereas powers and faculties are latent things, and an object of intellecT, not of fefe. 2d/ly, There is the faculty which is the immediate cause of those energies, and without which we cannot conceive them to be produced. 3dly, The habit - or dif- position which is productive of the faculty; for every faculty is the result of a previous habit or diflpofiion, without which it can-,* The word labit I use in thi sense of the Greek word ;,f. This, I think proper to observe; becaufc the word in Englifi is frequently uscd to denote that cuflom or use by which any habit is formed, by a metonymy, not unusual in language, from the cff to tl:e cafe.,not
Ch. 2. not exifi. And, lafjtl, The mlere power, or ,-- capacity of acquiring such habit. These,two last are both, in the lalguage of an- ticnt philosophy, called by the name of power 'l: but the difrinction is made be- twixt that power which immediately pro- duces the anc, and that which is remoter, and may be fiidt to be only the power of power -f. And I would chufe to diltin- guifh them by different names, calling the one faculty, and the other capacity. And as ,ficultt' and habit, though in their natures diftin&l, arc so necessarily conjoined, that the one can never exist without the other, however necefiary it may be in other ar-,* Av .tlt¢. i- See thi:; dilslinciion made by ,'riflole, in his 8th book, Dc PI' ). h adt.i:r, ali explained at length by his com- mentator Simpliciui, ftl. 28r. The example Arij'ltle gives, is that of a man who has not learned any art, but has the capacity to learn; and one who has learned it, but is not auAually performing its energies. Both are said to be artists avx,,,: , but in different senses ; which therefore I have chosen to diltinguifli by different appel- lations. S'mpiliciur very well oblcrvcs, that this second :ind of power, or faculty, as I chufe to call it, lies in the middle betwixt micre i;s er, or capacity alone, and ercrgy, participating of each; that is, betwvixt what is mnoll imperfela in nature, and what is mo!l perfect; for mere capacity is moRP imperfec, pure energy mort per- fesA. - See the following note.,guments
guments to diftinguilh them, I do not Ch. 2. think it is so in this; and therefore I flall, ,. ' for the grcater part, speak of them indif- criminately, under the name of cithcrfa- cultv or habit as it happens. But as there is no such necessary conneLion betwixt theficulty and the energy, or betwixt the capacity and the Jaczl,', (for the Jalclty may not operate, nor the capacity be carried the length of faculty), these two muff be confi- dered and treated of as diflint from ener- gy, and fiomn one another.,It will be neccfiary, for the fake of those who arc unacquainted with the antient philosophy, to illufirate my meaning by Ibme cxamples, both from inature and from art. Every animal, and vegetable too, when it is fire produced, has no more than the i;cre capacity of ,gnerating, io prodrucing its like; but in process of time, this ca-- ;pcity grows into habit, and the confcque;n- tial\fjlc!!i'; and when oppor'urnity osiers, the faculty is cxerciled, and produces ac's and enegics. And with reflcd to art, a man whenl he is born, has, froml naturc, the ca7ipaity, of' bei-ng a :,f:cii:n, e.g.; after- wards lhe forms the habit, and acquires thefc: tH,; and ihen hie 7r..l.. pcelirms,.hen
Ch. 2. when he thinks it proper. These examples,will be sufficient to shew what I mean by the terms I have used; and these differen- ces may be observed betwixt art and na- ture in this matter. In the IJ place, Ca- pacity merely is all from nature; for e- ven in matters of art, the capacity that any man has to become an artill, or that any fubje has to be operated upon by art, is from nature singly. 2dly, Habit or faculty is, in matters of art, acquired by use, imitation, or inftruaion ; where- as in natural things, it is the produclion of nature singly, without any preceding use, exercise, or inftrudtion. And, lajly, The energies in natural things proceed ci- ther from certain laws of nature, which is the cafe with refpecd to inanimate things, or from a certain inward principle, com- monly known by the name of iintii, as in the cafe of brute animals: but in mat- ters of art, they proceed from that im- pulse, moving the rational mind to ac- tion, which we call will .,C H- A P. " What is said here of p.ucsrs and ca/acitii, is, I think, fuflicient for the present purpose. Who would know more of this matter, may read what follows, taken from the abarule or efiteric philosophy, as .i'ificti: cails,it,
C H A P. HI. Of the Powers and Faculties of ZHum;an Na-,ture. I Hus far of powers and faculties in ge- Ch. 3.,neral. Buc before we come to speak of the faculty of 1Cieech in particular, it,may it, contained in his books of Pkficx and Mcftaplfics. All things in nature exile either in capacity merely, or act;al- ly and really; tliat is, as it is expressed by Arillotle, ei- ther Ju,lu, or ls,,l . Betwixt these two there is a pro- grcjeioii both in nature and in art, and which is the cause of all the produAions of either; for every thing that is ge- nerated, or produced, proceeds from a slate of nothing more than capacity, to a state of adual cxilience. Thus plants and animals are produced from feeds and em- bryos, which are no more than plants and animals in capacity : and with respect to works of art, the flatue is in the block of marble ju.ew,, but it does not actually ex- ilt till it gets its form from the artist; and the artist him- felfwas at firfl only an artist in capacity. This progress, by which every thing in nature or art is produced, is what is commonly called action : which is therefore some- thing more than mere capacity, but less than energy or actual existence ; for it cannot be said to have any fixed or permanent exilence of any kind, nor to be in any state, being truly a pailage betwixt two tates; so that it exills only in fucceflion, and not any two parts of it toge- ther. This so fliadowy being, and so difficult to be ap- prehended, Aristotle has, with wonderful acuteness and Vo.. I. C subtlety,
Ch. 3. may not be improper, first, to take a ge-,neral view of the powers of human nature, beginning with those that are from nature immnediately, and next confidering such,as subtlety,. defined and made an object of intellelt: and as it lies betwixt two extremities, ca/pacit, and. energy, or ac- tual exiltence, le has given us a twofold definition of it, the one taken from the one extreme, and the other from the other. The firlt is taken from the hate of capacity, from which it proceeds: and in this way it is defined to be, NiTxx rY ;v Svxt bV v H !SumVc.; which may he tranfla- ted thus, the perfe/ciO of ulhat is in capacity, canidered merely as in capacity. The meaning of the lat words is, that nothing is confidered in the thing that is moved, but merely its capacity: so that- motion is the perfection of that capacity, but not of the thing itself. This definir tion he makes more explicit and determinate, by alcer- taining of what nature the capacity is, and exprefling it to be the capacity of motion; which is dcne by the Greek word x,,nrov. In this way conceived, the definition runs thus: m iYxrw SC l,7Us sip XI.nTY, i. e. Ite perfetiion of ;bhat ii capable cf being inoved, confiered merely as having that capaci.t.. The rearon why it is said tobe the perfec- tion of this capacity is already hinted at, namely, that it is tnmething more than mere capacity; for it is capacity exerted, which, when it has attained its end, so that the thing has arrived at that (late to which it is deftinedby nlature or art, ccafes, and the thing begins to exist ;ltuY ; And therefore Aristotle has very properly called this ex- ertion tie perfe'lio of capacilt, since capacity can go no further. - The other definition is taken, as I have slid, fron the other extreme, namely, the Rfate to which the progrcflion is, that is, energr, or aclual exitence. And,in
as are acquired. The firt operate without Ch. 3. any previous use, exercise, or inftrudion: the other are the fruit of our own indu- firy; and before they can be exercised,,the in this way it is defined to he ;IlPir arixn, or imperfelt e- nerg)'; for as it is the perfeAion of c;pacity, so it is the imperfeAion of energy. It is capacity carried its utmost length, but it flops on this fide energy. This is the account given by /riJlotle, in his books of General P/fJics, (commonly intitled De Phvfica .4udtioine), of the nature of motion, taken, as we fee, from a com- prehenfive view of nature and art, and of every kind of generation and produaion. None of our modern phi- lofophers, so far as I know, have given a general defini- tion of it that is in the least fatisfaaoryj though they must all confers, that it is the grand agent in all natural ope- rations; and therefore the knowledge of its nature must be the foundation of all natural knowledge. Mr LUcle has saved himself the trouble of seeking for a definition of it, by telling us, that it is undefineable, because it is it sensation, or perception of fenlc ; and he has endeavoured to ridicule AIrifltkic's definition of it in a barbarous tranr- lation, not understanding, as I suppose, A.rijl7le in his own language. The reason that he gives for its being Indefineable, will apply equally to every perception of sense of whatever kind: And to be sure it is true, that ho individual sensation, or perception of sense, can be de- fined; for this very teafon, that it is a perception of sense, and not an object of intelect. But Mr Locke ought to, have confidered, that from those perceptions of fnfie, the mind forms idear, which are tie proper objeas of i;elelef ; aind therefore capable of definition ; and of 'science, which cannot be without definition. And all those perceptions of sense .which lhe cal!sfip/e idiad of,C 2 finf;tin.,
Ch. 3. the habit mult be first formed, by art, ex-,J pericnce, or cufrom. Of the first kind,,imot certainly, are those with which wc ferfali)i, might, when generalired by the intellea, be defined, as well as the perception of motion, by a genius as acute as Ariflot1e's, ailifled by proper obfcrvations and experiments. But the great defea of Mr Locke's philo- sophy is, thatt having, in the very outfetting, confound- ed the operations of jfnfe and intellecT, under the common nlame of idera, he never afterwards sufficiently diftinguill- es them. Other modern philosophers have attempted to define motion by change of place orfitualion. But that is no more than the esec7 of motion; and it still remains to be inquired, what fort of thing it is that produces this es- sec. Besides, ifit were a good definition, it is not gene- ral enough, comprehending only one kind of motion, viz, that fiom place to place; whereas Ariltotle's defini- tion comprehends every kind of change or alteration in body, whether with refpcef to place, magnitude, or quality. This is the general doctrine of capacities and energicl, and the transition from the one to the other, according to the notions of the Peripatetick school: but there is fiil a higher philosophy upon this fubjeft, which teaches us, that this diltinlion betwixt capacity and enrgy tatkes place only in inj.erir beings ; and that there is a higher order of being, in which there is ho progrcfi, aaotion, or change of any kind, and in which there is not the imperferion of mere capacity, but all is habit and fiaculty, not produceive of energies ccaj;ionally, as with us, but coinJantil enetgi- Jfg. See zri'Jt. Aletaph. lib, 9. cap. 8. But this belongs . to a philosophy far beyondfe,.fe and nature; and which, for that reason, is very properly described to be p.mr r7, Il..ix., that is, with refpcet to our capacities, and the or- der of teaching. after phficsl; but with respect to6 lhe na- ture of things, the frJ/ lkilfiplj.,are
are born; and with them therefore we Ch. 3. flall begin.,They are but few in number: one of the most remarkable of them is the power of imotion, and that natural impulse above mentioned, well known by the name of iftinit, which direcs an infant to apply that power of motion to the drawing its nourilhment from the breast of the mo- ther by the action of fucking. Besides this, we have that habit of body which makes us susceptible of nourihnment, of growth, and all the vital functions. Whe- ther we have diftint perceptions of fenie, such as of feeing and hearing, I think may justly be doubted ; and I will endea- vour to lhew, in the following part of this book, that we have them not in any the least degree of perfection, till in pro- cess of time the organs have acquired a certain degree of firmnnefs, and we by experience have learned the proper use of them.,These seem to be all thefaculties which wie arc aglually in possession of when we first come into the world. The reft of our nature at that time is made up of capaci- ties merely, or, to ufc the faflionable word,,which
Chi 3. which I think not improper, of capabilities; "" for it is with us, as with other animals,,at the time of our birth, almost all the powers of our nature lie concealed, and, as it were, folded up, till time and op- portunity display them, and bring them into exertion: and indeed in that slate, I cannot discover, that with rcfnec. to ac- tual powers, either of mind or body, there is any difference betwixt us and thole orher animals; or if there be any, the advan- tage seems to be on the fide of the brute; for his body then is commonly more vi- gorous, and his inftincs stronger and more active.,But with refped to latent powers and capabilities, there appears to be a wonder- ful difference, insomuch that it is difficult to fay, even at this day, after so, much observation and experience, what the: ca- pabilities of a nature so various and so ex- cellent as ours are. Only this we know certainly, that men have actually exerted wonderful powers both of body and mind; nor is it possible to determine how much farther they might have been carried by constant exercise and inftruAion, carried on through the course of a long lie. It,is
is even difficult to determine, how far the Ch. 3. natural capacities of the brutes might go with proper culture; but man, we know, may, by education and culture continued for many years, be transformed almost into an animal of another species. Thus, with respect to his body, though he is undoubtedly by nature a terrestrial ani- mal, yet he may. be so accufiomed to the wvater, as to become as perfectly amphi- bious as a feal or an otter.-And with re- fpec:to the mind, it is impofible to fay what science and philosophy may bring it to. The Stoics pretended, in that way, to make a god of a aan ; and there is no doubt but the human nature may, by such culture, be so exalted, as to come near to what we conceive of superior natures, and perhaps even to poTfefs the rank of fucl as arc immediately above us in the chain of being.,The next thing to be confidered is, what natural powers we are possessed of when we have attained to perfet age. And thcfe I think may be reduced to. the following heads.: ' I:/, The perfect use of all theifive fenles; 2dly, Greater, strength of body, and power..of bodily.motion; 3dly,:Thli,faculty
Ch. 3. faculty of propagating the kind.; and,,la Iftly, with rfpeled to the mind, Iiin, , at that time of life, is more perfed', and less liable to error, direding us not only to the preservation of the individual, but to the continuation of the species. This last inftinc frill remains; and also another, which makes us abhor deftrudion, and fly from danger and pain: but I am perfua- dcd, that before we were so much under the guidance of reason, or rather that ba- ftard kind of reason commonly called opi- vion,. we had many more infiints,, direc- ing us to the means of prefcrving and pro- viding for both the individual and the off- fprinng; for I cannot suppose that nature 'left us unprovidcd in this rcfped,,: more than other animals; cfpecially if it be true, as I fiall endeavour, to lhew, that inftinci was as needful to us at first as to other a- nimals, as we had not then the exercise of reason, but only in process of time: but after we had formred opinions concerning what was good orill, profitable.or other- wife, in human life, and forsaking :,the guidance of nature and inftindc , ,,hlad re- signed ourselves to.the government ..of e thoe opinions, and become the artisicil crea,-,;:'. :i. ,i. tures
tures we now are, we loft those inftints Ch. 3. by degrees, and nature yielded to artifi- J cial habit.,These are the natural powers belonging to our species at present; and we are next to speak of the acquired -or adventitious powers, which we have added to our na- tures by our own industry and sagacity. Of this kind are all the sciences, all the arts liberal and mechanic, all the commo- dities and pleasures of life, even civil so- ciety itself, and almost every thing belong- ing to it: and if we rightly confider the matter, we {hall find, that our nature is chiefly constituted of acquired habits, and that we are much more creatures of custom and art than of nature. It is a common faying, that habit (meaning custom) is a second nature. I add, that it is more powerful than the first, and in a great measure destroys and absorbs the original nature: for it is the capital and diftin- guifhing charaderiftic of our species; that we can make ourselves, as it were, over a- gain, of that the original nature in us can hardly be seen; and it is with the greatest difficulty that we can distinguish it from the acquired.,VOL. I, D What
Ch. 3. What chiefly makes this difficulty, is,the facility with which we perform the o- perations that proceed from those acquired habits, and which makes us think them natural. cThen many of them are acqui- red by such inlenlibie degrees, and in our earliest years, that we do not perceive the progress that has been fiom capacity to ha- bit; and finding ourselves pocffffed of them, without knowing how, we raflfly conclude them to be the gift of nature.,Before I come to apply this observation to language, I will give some other inflan- ces of our mistaking acquired habits for natural; and for the fame reason, name- ly, the facility of their operations. The perceptions of fenfc.are undoubtedly na- tural; but fromthefe we learn by obfer- vation and experience, to draw conclusions of rcafoning so readily and easily, that we niftake them for the original perceptions of fcnfe ; e. g. by the fcinf of secing, we perceive nothing but the colour, figure, magnitude, and motion of the objec *.,* Colour is the primary perception of tlis sense; the others are only confequcntial. Figure, e.g. and migni- tude, :re nothing else but colour of a certain extent, or lerminated in a certain r.ar.ner.,Thcfe
Tlefe are all that are painted upon the re- Ch. 3. tina of the eye ; and it is only through the medium of the pictures there that we per- ceive any thing by this ilnfe*: yet the vulgar all believe, and even luch philofb- phers as have not studied- optics, that by this sense we also perceive distances; and it is common language to fay, that we fee a thing at such or such a distance: but the truth is, that we fee all objects at the fame diflance, that is, very near, and almost in contact with the eye; and it is only by observation and experience that we learn to judge of the different distances of ob- jcds, either from their magnitude;, as painted upon the retina of the eye, fiom the clearness and diftindnefs of the pic-,* It is worth observing, though I think it has not been observed, that, in this ifnfe, the progress from the inm- prcllion made by the cxternal objce upon the organ to the mind, is better marked than in any other fefe: for with refpea to the other senses, all we know of the mat- ter is, that the impuli:e upon the organ is propagated to the brain by certain nerves, and so perceived by the rnind. But here there is a 1Itge of the progreflion diftinfaly mark- ed, and now wel' known to all opticians, namely, the picure upon the reti:a of the eye, which was first disco- vered by Klelt.r, and is, I think, the greatclt discovery in the mater offinjjio. that ever was made.,D z ture
Ch. 3. ture there, or from its dimness and ob-,"N- ifcurity, from the intervening. objecs ,be-,twixt us and the object we look at, or from certain other causes that have been observed by opticians. So that whatever vye know of distance, is not from sense, but an inference of reason from the pre- miffes just now mentioned. Thus, e. g. if I have been accustomed to fee any known objet at different distances, and consequently of different magnitudes,' up- on the retina of my eye, if the picture there is finall, I from thence infer,' that the ob- ject is at a distance; and I make the fame inference if the picture of it in my eye be dim and obscure, as the picture of objeAs at a great distance must be; or if I fee be- twixt it and me intervening objects, of the size of which, and the space they oc- cupy, I have tome notion.,Of the magnitde 6f obje&cs,i: wehave no doubt a perception by the sense of fight; but it is so various and undetermi- ned, that without the judgement of the mind, it would be impossible to fay pofi- tively what the magnitude' of any' objeca iS for the perception of the sensel depends 'entrely upon th'cJangle of vision, that is,,the
the angle under which we fee the objec; Ch. 3. and that is greater when the objec is near- er, and less when it is at a diftancc: so that the fame objec appears ten times bigger when seen at the distance of a yard than at the distance of ten yards; and yet we think a man no bigger at the distance of one yard than at the distance of ten. And even when I fee a man, or any other known objec, through a telescope, which magnifies perhaps twenty times beyond the appear- ance to the naked eye, he does not teem big- ger, but only nearer. How is it then thatwe fix and ascertain the magnitude of objects, which otherwise would be so various and uncertain, and in that way make a sense osso great use, which would else be of very little ? My answer is, That it is, i, by the use of another fenie, viz. that of touch, by which we learn to know the true dimensions of things; and, 2dly, by two acquired habits of judging: the first,. the habit of judging of distances a- bove mentioned; the econd, another ha- :bit of judging founded upon this, by which we correc the perception of sense, and,, notwithstanding the greater image Upon the retina, conclude the object,not,t,
Ch. 3. to be greater, or perhaps less, aid vice,v versa.,That this last judgement is founded up- on the first, is evident fiom this; that though the objca be a known objec, yet if I have not been accustomed to fee it at different distances, or, what is the fame thing, at different perceptible distantes, as, c.g. the fun, moon, or flars, it appears to me according to the natural perception I have of magnitude by the image up6n the retina: and if it be seen through a tele- scope, it appeals so much bigger, not so much nearer, as in the former cafe'; be- cause not having seen it at greater or lesser distances, I can from thence infer nothing to contradic& the appearance in my eye; which cannot here, as in other cafes,' be only a sign of the distance, but must be, as it truly is by nature, an indication of the magnitude.,Another proof of this is what happens when we are deceived with refped to the distance, as wien we fee things through'a fog: for from the dimness of the image upon the retina, we infer, that the objec is at a considerable distance; and friiit this,ft:ppofcd
supposed liilancc, compared with the great- Ch. 3. nes of the image upon the retina, we con- clude, that the objct is much greater than it truly is. And in this way, a dog fecn through a miit appears as big as a horse, and an ordinary man looks like a giant. And thus we have here likewise two judge- ments of the mind ; one a falle judgement concerning the difiancc, the other a true judgement founded upon the firit: which is truly an error of the underflanding, not a fallacy of the sense, as is commonly be- lieved; ior the sense does not deceive us, but truly represents the object to us as by the laws of nature it ought to appear, be- ing seen through so thick a medium. But it is we that deceive ourselves, by not at- tending to the uncommon slate of the air, which would have accounted to us for the distant appearance of the object ; and that illusion being at an end, and the object being acknowledged to be near, the great- ness of the image on the eye could no longerldeceive us.,There are other fallacies of this sense, as: they are commonly called, that I ihall but jui mcntion; fuci as a flick teeming crooked! in the water, .and a fiuare tower,appearing
Ch. 3. appearing round at a distance. These are,J true representations of the sense, but apt,to mislead the mind in judging of the real figure of such objets, if we are not learn- ed enough to know the causes of such ap- pearances, or have not been taught by expe- rience not to regard them. But there are, if I am not mistaken, other appearances of this sense, which we have learned to correct so early, that we have loft all know- ledge and memory of them; and the true appearances, which we learn by the sense of touch, are substituted in place of the false. What I mean is, Ifl, The double picure of every object, one in each eye; from which I think it muff necessarily fol- low by the laws of vision, that we fee eve- ry object double; but, by constant expe- rience from our infancy having learned that the object is truly single, we acquire the habit of feeing it only in that manner, 2dl', The inverted picture upon the retina; from which I infer, that at first we truly fee objects inverted: for as we undoubt- edly perceive the colour, figure, and mag- nitude of the objects by the picure in the eye, I do not fee how we can otherwise per- ceive their position. But this repreferita-,tion
tion of the sense we have learned also, by Ch. 3. the most early experience, to correct, and ^J to set the object upon its right end. And we have been so long in the constant cu- ftom ps secing them il that way, and the habit thereby is oso ormed, that we fee tllemno longer any other way. I know there'are learned opticians who differ from * me i,both these particulars: but there is oie,lhing in which I think there can be no diffrence of opinion, though I do not knolw that it ever was before observcd; anid i't is this, that at first we fee things only of the magnitude of the picture up- on the, retina of our eye: for the angle which that picure filbtends, is dcmonftra- tively equal to the angle of viiion, that is, the angle whvich the object fibtends; ac- cordinl to the size of which, as we have already said, we fee things of a greater or less, magnitude: And the objecd appearing close to the eye, which it does according to the natural perception of the fen!e, and c9pn!cuently at the famee, or nearly the fame, distance from the angle at the centre of tte eye with the piiture upon the retina, it is eyident, that the objcct and the pic- ture,. subtending equal angles at the lame ,. .VOLT.'I, E' diLiancc,
Ch. 3. distance, must be equal. And the only,w ay we can account for things appearing to us so very much bigger is, that by ex- perience and observation, arising from the evidence of our other senses, and particu- larly of our sense of touch, which makes a truer report, both of figure and magni- tude, than our fight, we learn to iee things in their true dimensions ; after which, we judge of their magnitude, not abJolutely by the size of the piAure in the eye, but rela- tively; so that -what forms the greatest pidure there, appears to us ceteris paribus the greatest objec. And this acquired ha- bit of judging, becomes so familiar to us by constant practice, that we overlook en- tirely, as in the instances jufr now men- tioned, the original perception, and ima- gine we really ee things of the magnitude 'we only judge them to be of.,But enough, and perhaps too much, has been said, to Ihew, that with refpcet to this sense of feeing, we mistake habits of judging, acquired by experience and observation, for the natural perceptions of sense; and that we have formed the ha- bit so early, and by such insensible de- ,rees, and perform the energics of it with," ' ' ^a
so much readiness and ease,. that it rc- Ch. 3. quires all the attention and accuracy of a philosopher to distinguish those energies from the operations of nature; and this was all that I intended by the example.,I will only fay further upon the subjea of our senses, that if some others of them, 'uch as that of hearing and feeling, were to be as accurately analysed and examined as the sense of feeing has been, I believe it might be found, that we learn to hear.and feel as well as to fee, and that a great part of our infancy is spent in acquiring habits of sensation *.,I a This is an observation of Dr Reid's, in his ingenious work, intitled, An Inquiry into the Human, Mind. I a- gree very much with this author in molt things, and par- ticularly in the dialinfion he has made betwixt natural and acquired habits; which he has illustrated by exam- ples that I have likewise made use of: but I do not like the name which he gives to the lafr-mentioned habits, when he calls them acquircd habits cfperception ; for as by the word pe:crcpri, is commonly underflood perception by the senses, one thould imagine the author meant, that these azcqiired habits were truly perceptions of fenfc. This, however, i:; not his meaning, though it be the opi- nion of the vulgar. But I think it is too much complai- fance to vulgar opinion in a philosopher, to speak vulgar language; when it is apt to millcad. I have therefore chosen to call such habits acquired habits ofjudging, iq eontradifinction to ina!. ral habits off'fiftiol, or percp-,E 2 tion
Ch. 3. I will give one instance more of our con- '.'- - founding the natural perceptions of sense,with the judgements of the mind: and it is a remarkable instance, for this reason,,that tion by sense. And by this way of speaking, T mean al- ways to keep in view the dillincfion betwixt mind and body, and betwixt those operations which the mind performs only viith the affifjance of the body, and those which it per- forms by itfr!f; a dillintion which I hold to be the foun- dation of the whole philosophy of mind, and which I ihall take occasion to explain more fully afterwards. In what I have said above, concerning some optical theorems, I have presumed to differ from the DoAor in a general proposition, which he lays down, p. 459. That a telescope, though it magnifies the visible figure of the object ten times in diameter, yet makes it seem no bigger, but only ten times nearer: for this is true only of known objects that we are accuflomed to fee at different diftan- ces; but it is not true of objects that we are not accuflo- med to fee in that manner, though they be known. He fays also of a tingle microscope what I confess I do not underltand, namely, that it does not magnify the visible appearance of the object, but only makes it appear at a greater diilance: And in the very fame place, he fays, that the object appears to the eye twelve or fourteen times larger in diauneter than it really is. How to recon- cile these two assertions, I do not know. But the fat I take. to be, that a microfcopc, whether single or double, does magnify the visible figure; because it makes the ob- jec appear very much bigger than it does to the naked eye, for a reason that is very well known to those who are learned in optics; at the fame time it makes the objet appear at a greater diflance than it really is. And this,too
that it is the error, not of the vulgar, as Ch. 3. in the cafes above mentioned, but of a philosopher, I mean Mr Locke. Accor- ding to his division of ideas, the idea, as be calls it, of any particular man, or o- ther animal, is an idea offifiation, that is, a perception of the sense: whereas the faa truly is, however paradoxical it may seem, thatno perfonfees (that is, perceives by the sense) either man or horse; for the sense of fight perceives no more than what is pitured in the bottom of the eye, viz. the figure, colour, and size of a certain mass of matter. But before the mind can pronounce that mass to be a man, it must have performed no leTs than two opera- tions of the intelle&; one previous to the perception of fenfc, the other subsequent. The firfl is that by which we form the i- dea of that fiecics of animal we call lman; and whoever fees a man must have that idea ready formed in his mind: by the too ca: lbe accounted for, if it were here a proper place for such difculions. I take notice of those things only with an intention that the Dotor may correc such inac- curacies of expreiifon in any after edikion he may give of his book ; which, upon the whole, I think is a very va- luable work.,second,
Ch. 3. second, we compare with that idea the ob- C~'^ jed which the sense prefients; and from,that comparison conclude, that the object is man or hoJi', or belonging to any other species of things. That this last operation is truly a dfcuijiis mentis, and a conclusion of reason, as I call it, not a perception of sense, is evident from this, that we often make an erroneous conclusion, and mif- take one thing for another, as when we fee things at a great distance, or through a fog, as in the instance above mentioned. In such cafes, every man must ackhow- ledge, that there is a judgement of the mind: but in other inflances, when there is no error, the process of reasoning is so very lhort, and the conclusion so inftan- taneous, that a vulgar man may be forgi- ven to overlook it, and ascribe all to the sense; but I can hardly have the fame in- dulgence for the philosopher, especially one who pretended, like Mr Locke, to be so attentive an observer of what passed in his own mind, 'and has written a whole book upon the subjet *.,Having * If Mr Locke would have taken the trouble to fudy what had been discovered in this matter by the antients,,and
Having thus confidered in general 'the Ch. 3. natural and acquired faculties of man, and shewn, that in some instances they are apt to be confounded, we are now to inquire,to and had not resolved to have the merit of inventing him- self a whole fyftcm of philofoply, he would have known, what I mentioned before, that every material objeft is compolfd of matter andform. Of these two, theform is by far the more excellent, being that which couiitutes the eJ;ence of every thing, and makes it what it is, in con. traditlincion to every thing ellc. This only is the idea of the thing, as we very properly express it in common ,.Inguage; and this is an obje& of intellea alone, which can no more be perceived by thefielfe, than the object of onC sense can be perceived by another; so that it is as im- proper to speak of an idea of sensation, as it would be to ipeak of visible faund or audible colur. The master, dn the other hand, is only that which excites the sense; by which indeed the mind, in this slate of its existence, is roused, and, as it were, awakened to the perception of ideas; but of which by itself there is no diftint idea, mnowledge, or comprehension, nothing but ;n obscure notion; for it'is only by the species that we know even the individual. See Philoponus in In/alytica pofler. lib. I. infine. And this is true, not only of^fuflances, fucl as a man or a horse, but of accidents, (and every thing that exists is titherfulflance or accident); for when I fay, that any fubflance is white or round, fweec or four, that quality which I ascribe to it is not a perception of the sense, but the idea of the general quality, which I ap- ply to this particularfitbilance. For though this idea a- ¥ile from the perceptions of sense, which furnriflcs tie nm- teria!s for it, it is impoflble it can be the sojct of i.infe,,vhich
Ch. 3. twhliich of then it^ecfaculty. :offpeiti be- ^"^ longs; and whetherFii this; as -inii;other,cafes, we may not fall into error, 'by not diitinguifling fuffciently what we have by nature from what is of our own acquisition. The facility with which we perform the operations in this cafe, as well asi in the 6ther above mentioned, is apt to ima'ke':a man believe, who has not thought' much upon the fubjetl, that Vwe do it natui'ally; and that though it costs us a good:ldal"' of pains and trouble in our infancy to learn the language that we fpcak, yet, without that trouble, as soon as we camc toripei years, we ihould hlave fioken some, kind of'language, that is, we ihould lhhae ,ex- pireifed the conceptions of our mind by ari- ticulate founds of one kind or another. On the other hand; I maintain', thlat this facllty is one of the many acqulirdd facul- which perceives only what is parficular, not what is ge. !reral, as Ihall be (nlewn more clearly afterwards, .Till, therefore, the idea of any quality, fuchl as .hite or rtrnd, be formed by the mind, and become an obje&t or the i.- telleft, the perceptions of the sense, witlh Ie'fipe to futch qualities, have no name or denomination, ncither isltherc anyknowledge or comprehension of them; ft that it is impolfible they can be affirmed or denied of any thing.',lies
ties belonging to our nature ; that though Ch. 3. the capacity is no doubt given us by na- ture, the /abit was very long of being formed. But as we now perform it with so much facility, we overlook the tReps and the progress that were necedtary to form the habit, as in the infrances above mentioned, and raTfily conclude that to be the work of nature, which is the result of long experience and obfcrvation, and per- haps the greatelt effort of human fagaci- ty.,The reader, I am persuaded, will be the more inclined to adopt this hypothe- sis, as from what is said above, it is evi- dent, that even the perception by fight, which one fIould think is as much the gife of nature as any thing belonging to us, is truly, for the greater part, the efiect of acquired habit, inibmuch that without such habit it would be of little or no use to us. The fame, I am persuaded, may be said of all the reft of our senses: and I have no doubt, but that when we firfc come into the world, we hear, fneil, touch, and taste, as imperfect!y as we fee. The reason of which I take to be, partly the weakness of the organs of sense, that,VOL. I F have
Ch. 3. have not yet acquired the proper tone, and,partly the infirmity of the mind itself, un- acculfomed to such impressions from ex- ternal objets, and therefore not knowing what to make of them; and the memo- ry, or retentive faculty, being at that time of life as weak as the sensitive, the impreflions are not retained by it, but are immediately effaced, like traces in water. So that it is highly probable, that by na- ture. merely, and setting aside all use and experience, we can hardly be said, at the time of our birth, to have sensations, or even to deserve the name of animial. If therefore we have not the use of our senses from nature, but from acquired habit, it would be really extraordinary, if the fa- cuity of speech was the gift of nature, and got of our own acquisition.,C H A P.
C H A P. IV. That Mall does not by Nature for'm ldleas.-,Divvfion of the Conceptions of the Minll.- Nature of Ideas. k UT in order to get at the bottom of this Ch. 4.,queltion, we must return to the divi- ' sion that I have made of language into the material and formal part, and confider each of these by itself; beginning with that which is moit excellent, namely, theJformal part. This part, as we have flewn, con- fills principally, and indeed it may be fiaid only, of ideas; for as we have just now seen, even irldividuals are knovwn only by ideas. Now, if I can llhew, that even the ideas are not from nature, but from acqui- red habit, there will be an end of the quc- stion, though I should not make out that the formation of articulate founds is like- wife by acquired faculty ; which, howe- -er, I trust I {hall be able to do.,To begin then with ideas, the nature and origin of which mull be explained be-,F. fore
Ch. 4. fore we can truly!juicge whether they .are,the work of naturc,; or of habit,acquired : The best divifion:that. I'think ever was made of the conceptions of the hluman mind, is that which Plato has given us in the Thetetetits '", into.thofe which the mind forms with the qafjlanlce of the feJess, and those which it forms by itSe!fwithout such affillancc. TiThisdivifion I prefer to all o- thers; becau'e it makes the. proper difiinc- tion betwixt body and mind, whiclh never ought to be out of the view. of a philoyfo- pher who treats of such a compound as man, ;--a compound that never can be properly analyecd, without making that diflincion with the greatest accuracy. Of the:,,fift kind are the perceptions of fesjf; which: undoubtedly are the acd of the mind as well as the other; for it is not the Jben/ that perceives,, but the miind through the medium of sense -. The other are what I call ideas 't: and.thefe I subdivide,into * p. I35. Ed. Ficinli. t x;F ls, ;- .,'y.s, is the faying of a very antient phi- ]ofopher; I think it was Thales; and it is adopted by A- rilotle. t This word is commonly flippofed, and, if I am not mitlaken, is said by Diogenes Lacrtitts to have been sirs,use
into two kinds:; th first such. : as are di- Ch. 4. reCdly and immediately formed from the perceptions of sense. Of this kind are our ideas of all natural and artificial fubftan- ces and their qualities, and in flort of e- very thing without us. The other are i- deas which we form from the operations of our own mind. In this way we come by the ideas of thinzking, believing, doubting; in fllort, of every operation of the mind, and of mind itself. The firfi class of ideas is produced from materials furnifed by the sense ; the second arises from the ope- rations of the mind upon those materials: for I do not deny, that in this our present slate of cxiftence, all our ideas, and all our knowledge, are ultimately to be deri- ved fromt sense and matter. But with used by Plat : but the faf is otherwise; for it is used by 'Tim.ruls the Locrian, in his treatise De Anima illundi; and it is likely w;is a word used in the Pythagorean chilool, from which Plato took his doarine of ideas, as wc!l as mofl other things in his philosophy, even his doc- tine ofmorals, though that is not commonly believed; a::d the contrary is said by the fame Diogenes Laertius in his life of Plato, where he tells us, that he took that part of hi philoolphy from Socrates. But the truth is, that he took nothing from Socrales but the manner oftphi. iolbplifing, and the art of dialopge.,these,
Ch. 4. tiefe, the ideas of thel firir class are-miorc,nearly connccted; :whereas those of the o- ther kind are more congenial to mind, and may be said to be of its owngrowth, being produced from materials which itself fur- nifies. They may therefore bc called na- tnral-bornz subjects of the state, not natura- lized only, as the others are; but thefji/l- tions are altogether foreigners .,The faculty by which the mind operates in conjunction with the body, is very well known by the name of Ji'fe; the faculty by which it operates singly, and without,* This is an observation of a late author, very little known, EriLeniui Diacon;s, a Greek by nation, and a profclfor in the Patriarch's university at Colliantilnoplie; from whence the reader would not expect to hecr of any book of Icience coming at this time of the day. It is a fyllem of l wgic, written in pure Attic Greel, printed at Leipftjick l766. The learned reader, I am pcrluaded, will be glad to fee some specimen of this living monu- ment of antieint Grce ; I Ihall therefore give his words, which I think are elegant.; Speaking of the first class he had mentioned, viz. the ideas of reflecion, he falys, 'oioCev .7, .a'i Evu T-; -rapar 7, Te iuaTi7 , cu.potg7 r J:u; n , U .tLey i 7; J ' -ii; 7rS JEur,,re, ;STc;r, (lie means what I call lhe fiirfl elaf;of i- leas, viz. thloi formed from exrernal oljeRt). .a; a;l ira' TLV i;.;; lctre Tlxa; i A.oo;r ro 7O ap r - aUvT r e ;ipvCI E. o Jav 'FIr WY , -c cac rsryrtr: 'sivoe w s rB U O U i ,,wa rT i ?,-ror,dst ' ', yap SJi T7i Llr)-,'tEo v vlE.rETLr;7& 'lFit ye^st ai ZTR.S [ .vS{. p. 19.,participaticn
participation of the body, I call inteilec7 :". Ch. 4. In the perceptions by sense, the mind is v to be confidered as merely passive, recei- ving like wax the impreilions of external objects: but in the other way of opera- ting, it exerts that aclive and Jk//lmovi:3 power which I hold to be the diftinguifll- ing charateritfic of mind, and the fpieci- sic dilference betwixt it and body '1. When therefore the mind operates in this lait vay, it alerts its native power, and adis in a manner more worthy of its divine o- riginal; whereas when it acts in the other way, it is to be confidcrcd as degraded and debafced by its nccflliry connection with leflh and blood. Whether it was al- ways obliged to a& so, and to receive its ideas from sense and matter, or whether there was not a former period of its exist- ence, when it derived its ideas from a nobler iburce, to the recolletion of which ideas it is now only excited, and as it were routed, by the impulse of sense, so that all our knowledge is no more than,It is Called by the Greek philosophers ,;. t This is the opinion of Plato, who makes the r ;vro- ,irito to be the dillngui!iing attribute of mind.,rcmini2lce,
Ch. 4. re'2infience, is a speculation not belonging,to our present subjet.,C H A P. V. Of Mr Locke's divifon of Ideas into those of,Sensation and Refletion. S this division of Mr Locke is that which is commonly received among us, it is proper to confider how far it dif- sers from, or coincides with, the division I have given. And, in the first place, It is obvious, that what Mr Locke calls ideas of sensation, comprehends the first mem- ber of Plato's division, namely, the con- ceptions which the mind forms by the as- fiftance of the body, or, in other words, the perceptions of sense. But further, it likewise comprehends the sir:s class of those conceptions which the mind forms by it- iilf, viz. the ideas that arise immediately from the perceptions of sense: for as his division was intended to be general, and to comprehend all the conceptions in the human mind of whatever kind, and as it is evident they are not ideas of refiec7ion,,it
it follobws of coifiequciice, that thley are Ch. 5. what h: calls ideas of fins ttion. And'fur- . ther Itill, as 'JMr' Locke tells us, he means to include in his dciviiion every thing that patns in' the human; mind, I doubt we mull class under the iirit - member of it the invward !Ueelings of plcafuire and,pain, as well as the perceptions of external ob- jeis; and in common language, such feelings are called by the name ofJenftionus. As td'tlhofe ideas which he calls, not im- properly, ieas of riji'ion, being produ- ced by a refex aC of the mind upon itself, they'.bi'ncide pcrfecly with what I call the se6iid class of ideas, viz. those form- ed by) the mind from its own operations.,But wmat apology can the admirers of Mr 'ocike make for his, not only givipg the flme general name of ideas to thiigs of fo'di;iErent a nature as the p.;i-.e i lis of fenilf, and the ideas fronl thence formed, but m'akirn theml to te of the fanme fIe- cies ofideas ? Is it not plainly confounding the materials wich what is macid out of thoie material.;, as if w'e ihould cxpreis by one word; thle brass, and the flatle that is niade:of it ? Does not fuclc a confusion of /lauagen ntuarally lead to confusion of VOL. I. G thloig'ht?
Chl, . thought ? Will a man who has only,learned the philosophy of Mr Locke, rea- dily make the diftinc'ion that Plato has made, betwixt the conceptions of the mind. produced by the afliftance of the body, and those which it forms by itfclf with- out the intervention of the body ? And. will he not, on the contrary, be disposed to believe, that the mind is entirely de- pendent upon the body, and that it cannot ac at all without impulses from the body What consequences this opinion leads to, I Ihall afterwards confider; but, in the mean time, I must observe, that I cannot carry my censure of Mr Locke so far as a late ingenious author, whom I mentioned be- fore, Dr Reid, does; who, in the conclusion of his work, charges Mr Locke's division of ideas with the grcateft fault that any divi- sion can have: for his accusation comes to this, that it is io division at all; becauie, fays he, ideas of reflection comprehend i- deas of sensation; for it is only by re- flecting upon what pafis in our own mind that we come by the idea of sensa- tion, as well as of doubting or believing; where, it is manifest, the Doctor confounds the abitraCt idea of sensation, with the i-,dea
dea of the external object which that fen- Ch. 5. fation presents to the mind. The firit is most certainly an idea of reflecion, being produced by the mind's reflecing upon what passes within itself; but the last is as certainly, in the language of Mr Locke, an idea of sensation. If it be true what the Doctor adds, that a certain later wri- ter, whom he mentions, has made this hypothesis the foundation of his system of fcepticifin, it is not the DocIor only that has fallen into this error. And 1 murf own, Mr Locke has talked so confusedly upon the fubjecl, and has been at so little pains to explain this grand division of his, upon which he has built his whole fyltem, that I do not much wonder thatD)r Reid and others have fallen into this error. For as Mr Locke has exprefled himself, it may be doubted, whether, by ideas of sensation, he means all, or only one or o- ther, of the following things: IZ, Percep- tions of particular objects of sense; 2dl, Abftira ideas of those objects; 3d1', Ab- ftract ideas of the perceptions or sensa- tions themselves, such as we form of the sensation of secing or hearing; 4thly, Par- ticular sensations of pleasure or pain; and,,G lally,
Ch. 5. lai/ll, AbftraC ideas of those sensations.,' The not diilinguiihing betwixt such differ-,ent significations of the, fame term, has thrown a very great obscurity over his whole work, though I know it is admired by many as a perfict' pattern of pcrfpicuity.,It may be laid in defence of Mr Locke, though I do not know that it has been laid, that his divifon of ideas docs not reipe&l their nature, or what they are simply con- fidered in theicmflves, but only tleicr source or origin: so that his meaning is no more, than that all our ideas are either firom finiation or rIcflecion. But, in the fiJf place, this is not a meaning to be ga- thered from his words, but rather the con- trary; for he every where speaks of ideas of icnfation as the iii;mcdliate perceptions of sense, not derived fiom it only; though he ought not to have left it even am- biguous in what rcfped' this division was, which he has made tle foundation of his whole system. And, Jecomdly, If this was his meaning, there Ihould have been no division at first, but he should have *laid it down simply, that all ideas are from sense ; and then he ihould have diftinguilfed betwixt tlhoe that were di-,rcctly
redly and immediately from the sense, Ch. 5. and those that were mediately by the ' intervention of the reflex aft of the mind upon its own operations. If he had done this, he would not only have proceeded methodically and diftindlly, but I think it is highly probable, he would have a- voided the capital error which he has fal- len into, of confounding the perceptions of sense, which are the Iburce of our i- deas, with the ideas themselves,C II A P. * Mr Locke wrote at a time when the old philosophy, I mean the fcholattic philosophy, was generally run down and despised, but no other come in its place. In that si- tuation, being naturally an acute man, and not abad writer, it was no wonder that his essay met with great applause, and was thought to contain wonderful difcove- ries. And I mull allow, that I think it was difficult for any man, without the afiftance of books, or of the conver- £ation of men more learned than himself, to go farther in the philosophy of mind than lie has done. But now that Mr Hartris has opened to us the treasures of Greek philo- sophy, to confider Mr Locke htill s a standard book of philosophy, would be, to ife an antient comparison, con- tinuing to feed on acorns after corn was difcovcred. I believe there have been many, since the restoration of let- ters, that lndcrFood Greek as well, or perhaps better, than Mir Harris: but this praise I may give to my friend, without suspicion of partiality, that he has ap- plied his knowledge in that language more to the study of the Greek philosophy, thah any man that has lived,since
CH AP. VI. Of the Formation of Ideas. T HE nature of ideas cannot be under- Ch. 6. tsood, without knowing accurately '-w.-' the manner in which they are formed;,and since that period. It was the misfortune of us in the weltern parts of Europe, that after we had learned Greek from the Greeks that took shelter in Italy, upon the ta- king of Conllantinople, and had got some taRe of the Greek philosophy, enough to know, that what was taught in the schools was a ballard kind of it, we immediately set up as mailers ourselves, and would needs be inventors in plilofophy, inltead of humble scholars of the antient mailers. In this way Des Cartes philofophiied in France, Mr HobbeJ and Mr Locke in England, and many since their time of iefs note. I would fain hope, if the indo- lence and diflipation that prevail so generally in this age would allow me to think so well of it, that Mr Harris would put a flop to this method of philosophising with- out the affiltance of the antients, and revive the genuine Greek philosophy among us. For this purpose, he has taken uncommon pains, leading us, as it were, by the hand to the sources, and even taking the trouble to give mofl accurate, as well as elegant translations, of the pas- fages he quotes, for the fake of those that are not fufli- cicntly maflers of the Greek language. He has, besides, discovered, to me at leat, a new set of writers upon phi- lofophy, of whom I was before entirely ignorant; I mean the later commentators upon AriJ/otle of the Alexandrian,school;
and from the account I am to give of their Ch. 6. formation, I hope it will be evident, that they are, as I have said, the production of minl, genuine andpure, without any,mixture school; without whose afliftance, the Efiteric works of Ariflotle, that is, the more abltrule parts of his philofo- phy, appear to me altogether unintelligible: for it is cer- tain, that Arillotle did not compote those works with the design that they fliould be underllood by the vulgar, or by any body that had not been taught by him, as he himself fays in his famous letter to his pupil Alexander, upon occalion of his publilhing his books of metat.hyfics; which he there fays he had prubblifjcd and not publijhed. In f(hrt, his philolophical writings are, for the greatest part, to be confidered as no more than a text-book, to be explained and enlarged by his Icdlres. See Sinuiplicius in the beginning of his commentary upon the Predicarcntr. Betides, there commentators, particularly Simpliciirs, whom I jult now quoted, have preserved to us many va- luable passages from antient books of philosophy which are now loft; for they had the use of many more books of that kind than we have. And further, it appears to me, that there was a traditional knowledge of AriJlotle's philosophy preserved in this school of Alexandria, which, in the second century of the ChrifRian era, came to be, what Athens was before, the feat of philosophy and learning of all kinds. Of fume of those commentators that have not been printed, Mr larris has been so lucky as to procure MS. copies: but there are many more of them to be 'found in the Escurial library in Spain, that have not yet been printed, and I doubt never will, unless the love of Greek philosophy prevails more in Eu- rope than it is likely to do. And indeed my surprise is ;hat so many of them have been printed; for which I can,account
Ch. 6. mixture of body, and its operations. In,this way the origin of our ideas will ap- pear; without the knowledge of which, it is impossible to give any philosophical account, fulch as we propose to give, of the origin of language. After we have done this, we hope it will not be difficult to solve the question now in hand, and to Ihew, that ideas, being the workmanship of mind, are not a natural production, but that there is a progress here, as in other things belonging to mind, from capacity to habit; and that the faculty of forming ideas is, like other faculties of the mind, acquired by use and exercise.,Much has been said, and excellently well said, by Mr Harris * upon this sub- jed of the formation of ideas. I do not differ from him materially in any thing he has laid on the subjet; but as the na- ture and design of my work requires that some things relating to ideas flould be account no otherwise, but that there was a passion for Greek learning and philosophy soon after the reftora- tion of letters, (for about that time they were all print- ed), which I doubt is not now to be found, except among a very few. e Htrms.e, lib. 3, cap. 4,,more
more fully, and a little diff'rently ex- Ch. 6 plained, 1 hope I fl{all be excused by the public, as I am sure I fliall be by Mr Har- ris, for coming over again a tffbjecl that has been alrcady so well handled by so e- minent an author.,I will begin with my first class of ideas, those which arise immediately and direct-- ly from the perceptions of sense. If we account well for the origin of them, the formation of those of the other class, ari- sing from the mind's own operations, will be easily explained.,The materials of the ideas which we form from the perceptions of feni', are all furnillhed by fe/iliion; with which there- fore we mu!t begin in our account of those ideas. A certain impulse made by exter- nal objcts u.pon the lbody, or certain parts of the body, known by the name of the or- ganls offtif', if propagated to the mind (for that does not always happen) by a convey- ance which we cannot explain, produces what we call a /e/ltiol, or perception of the sense; which is difcerent according to the difference of the fenfcs; but they all agree in the defcrliption I have now given. To a- nalyfe or describe more.particularly this o-,VOL.L I-, peration
Ch. 6. peration of external ob.jc;-s upon the mind, v'^^ is not ncccfuary for the purpose of this,work ; andbefides, it is done to my hand in the ingenious work I quoted before, I mean Dr Rcid's treatise upon the HIuman Mind.,According to this account of fenfiitioni it is by its nature fleeting and transitory; and if there were no way of preserving thofc nmprcfions upon the mind, but if they liould vanish and difippear like traces in watery there would be no comprchenfion or knowledge of any kind: but nature has contrived a way of giving a permanen- cy and flability to thofc fleeting imilpre/fols, by the means of what we call memory; il' which the perceptions of fInfic are fixed in such a manner as to become the olbjecs of knowledge.,If we could suppose but one objec&t of sense thus recorded in the memory, there could be no idea, nor any kind of know- ledge, such as we have at present: for, as; was said above, it is by the kind or fpe- cies that in this slate of our exiflelice we know any thing. Now, to what ffpccies or class of tlings could this single percep- tion be referred ?,Next, let us suppose the most simple,cafe,
cafe, that the famle object prellnts itself a- Ch. 6. gain to the seise; then will the trace of the former perception be renewed ; or, to speak without a metaphor, we fliall have another perception of the fame object, knowing it to be the fame. -And here for the firtl: time the mind begins to adc by itflhf, and to exert a little of its intellec- tual powers: for it is clear, that this knowledge of the identity of the obiect goes beyond the power of sense; which can do no more than give another percep- tion of the objed, but cannot, by con- p)aring the objec with itfi'lf, determine that it is the ifanl.,And thus far the bruce goes alongft with us: for lie las fenie and ncmory as well as we, and, like us, he can distinguish the fame from a different object ; for who will deny that a dog knows his malter, or a horse his keeper ?,The next caie we fllall suppose is, that not the fame individual object, but one of the fhme 1icies, presents itself to tie lense: I fay, the tnind there, too, exerts its intel- lectual faculty, and discovers that there is a likeness betwixt the two, though they are not the fame.,H : Hitherto
Ch. 6. Hitherto likewise, but no farther, the,- brutes accompany us: for it is manifest,,that these animals have tome notion of likeness as well as of sameness; for a dog will diffinguilh a man, or any other ani- mal, from one of his own species; and when a creature of an uncommon species, that he never law before, is presented to him, we iec manifest tokens of iurprife in hilm.,The next itep, one flould imagine, as- ter diftinguilhing the species in the indivi- dual, was to form the idea of the species, and so to perceive the one in the miany, as Plato has cxprelled it. But before we come so far, there is another ftep neceffa- ry, though I think it has not been obfer- vcd; for before we can fee the one in the manyss, we muff fee the one by itself. For underflanding this, it is necessary to ob- serve, that our fenfcs present to us the ob- jecls as the) cxift in nature, that is, mixed and compounded; for in that way, every thinm in the material world appears to the fenic: : so tllat in perceiving even a single object, the fcnfi perceives only Io many diffcrent qualities united in iome matter or .filbfliatllm, of which the sense has no per-,ception.
ception. Thus, when we perceive a man, Ch. 6. or any other animal, the sense takes in at > the fame time the figure, the colour, the size, and other sensible qualities; and the combination of these qualities in one com- mon subjec, is the firlt rude notion, and, as it were, confused fletch, which not only we, but also the brutes, as I have ob- served, have of the species. But in order to form the idea, aJfipanatioz or drljrimina- tion is necelfary of these qualities one from another: and this kind of abjfrac7ion I hold to be the firfi ac of human intellect, and that it is here the road parts betwixt us and the brute; for the brute perceives the thing, and preserves the perception in his memory, jull as the objed is presented by nature, that is, with all its several sensible qualities united; whereas the human in- tellea separates and dikcriminates, and confiders by itself, the colour, e.g. without the figure, and the size without either .,The ' By what is here said, I would not be underflood to deny the truth of Ariflotlc's maxim, that N;( ;s rs s oV7x, i. e. it is mind that makes one: for thoughfiyparation be the first operation of the human intelleft, uniting is the [r'incipal; and t/:t for the fake of which the other is per-,formed;
Ch. 6. The next flep after tliis, is undoubtedly t. . the idea, or thc gnclral: for pcrcciving that,this one, which by our intellettual faculty we have separatcd from the liatit a! inals, exifs, not only in the individual object from which we have abPlraCA ed it, but in many others; then, and not till then, we have the idea of a quality or property of any iub[tance; and as soon as wve per- ceive a certain combination of them uni- ted together in one common fhb jec, then formed ; for it is by uiII'/,, or making on: of the rman, that i,h'a, are formed. By the union of ideas we make propositions; by the union of propositions fyllogifis; and by the union of fyl!ogifins fylems of fcicnce. Plato has confidered them both as equalily the operation of mind ; for, fays he, the mind makes one of l.e man ; ;nd again, rar, of ti/ or:s; that is to fay, it forms the i- L,'ea of t!leg^.cl, and hlein we divide it into the fcvcral filb- alternl fpccics. And there is nothing in science that le re- conniends more, than never to quit the gener;l, or let thiings Sgo to i.,I'l, as he eprell:s it ; thlt is to fay, to in; io:n:l/,, till lwe arle fire that we have exhauliied all the fjsecific di!iFt'cnces. See tile Plilreliu. And accorldingly hce h1: hinTilrell'-.:ildl tiis method of diz':far, as it is ca:Ied, very muchls, plarticilll. y in the So/p.'iJalr and Politi. crt. I:lut (liil i tiiiiii it is t:ue, that union is thc princi- pal operation of mind; for it is in order to make line ipecics, or ne.w 6es, if I may lb fpc;ak, that: we divile the genus, in the fame manner as at firt f we ::bfratt from any objea of fnlfe any of its qualities, in order to sorn the ideit of the ficcics.,we
we have the idca of afit!nhance; for the in- Ch. 6. tellcct firfitJrpiarates, and then mnites. Nor ,- indeed can we conceive several things uni- ted, without firll conceiving themJpipara- ted; for as to the joint perception of feve- ral things presented to us -by the sense, it is plainly the operation of the sense alone, and hls nothing to do with intellect; and accordlin,ly the brute perceives in that way as wveil as we.,And! thus it appears, that by the mind's abl'raaiilg from any individual, one or more nl{;fible qualities, and perceiving these to exifr in other individua.ls, the idea is formed, and. the one is made out of the manyi. And what makes this one, is thlat o;:c thingl which is common1 to the manybi; for that gives thcem an union, and, as it wcre, a band or tie, which bundles them un to- gethcr. When the idea is pcrfedly form- ed, the fevcealJibjcLhsl in which this one common thing cxifts, are entirely laid out of the view of the mind, and the o,;e conm- oiowg ihini is only confidered ; th!:t is to -ay, in oher word:, tL' likens,, or, to fleakl more accurattely, tlat in;l , ich they are like, is only confidered, not the thiins that are like ; the cc.i.:n.'.fs, if I may so speak,,that
Ch. 6. that is, the thing which is in common, not u- , the things which have it in common'.,The process I have described above, will be cafily underflood when explained by an example. I have the perception by my lenfis of any individual animal, as, e.g. man; and this perception conifts of the perception of several particular qualities, such as figure, colour, size, &c.; which being all perceived by the finfe as united together in onejilbjelt, make up the gene- ral perception, bo I may call it, of a man.,But this union is entirely the operation of sense, not of mind; for the mind does no more than receive the united impre- sion from sense. And accordingly the brute has this perception as well as we.,* It is in this sense that Simpliciir, in his commentary upon the Categories, ul;es the word zoV;rr,. See the pas- sage quoted by Mr Harris in his Hermes, p. 38 1. And it may be oblirved, that it is fiom this x.r.;, that the more general idea is siid to comprehend or contain the less general, and the lets general to be a part of the more general ; for the volvrt, or common nature, is l;t;d to con- nain every thing that particirares of it; and, on the other hand, what participates, is ftid to be a part of the coi-. imons nature. This is the more to be attended to, that upon this notion of one idea being part of another, de- pends the whole docfrine of thefj'llgpifi, as laid down by Alnriftile in his Sirs/ ,nllal)tics.,And
And further, when this united impref- Ch. 6. sion is again made upon the sense, he knows it to be the fime. So far there is neither abfiraftion nor generalization. But if I ihall go further, and confider in the individual man, either presented to me by the sense, or preserved in my memory, any one particular quality, such as the si- gure, separated from the reft, then I per- form that operation of intellect which I call abJtralion. Again, if I go farther still, and comparing together the several perceptions presented to the sense, or re- tained in the memory, of individuals of the fame species, I find that this figure is common to them all; then, and not till then, I have the general idea of this si- gure, which, either by itself, or joined with other qualities abftraded in the fame manner, (according as my idea is more or less complete), forms the idea of man; which is plainly made up of one or more qualities, first abftrac'ed from one indivi- dual, and then recognised as common to many.,From this account of the matter, it is evident, that ideas are formed by the mind's reviewing and comparing together,VOL. I. I the
Ch. 6. the several perceptions of sense, and per-,ceiving what they have in common with one another. And this faculty of compa- rioin appears to constitute the very essence of intellec. We are not, however, to i- magine, that the brute wants it entirely; for a dog certainly compares, when he finds out that a man is or is not his mafler. But the difference appears to me to con- sift in these two things: IN, That the brute, not having made the difcrimina- tion above mentioned of the several parti- culars, does not make the comparison so exaclly, but only compares things toge- ther in the lump. 2zd/., The brutes make the comparison only when the seise is ex- cited by the pretence of the object, with which they compare another perception of sense preserved in the memory. Thus a dog, when he knows his master, com- pares the immediate perception which he has of him with the pafl, which he retains in his memory or imagination '. And I am perihaded, that in our very early years,,* The difference betwixt these two I vwiil aftervwards explain; but I did not think it proper to imbarrafs tha present argument with such a difcuflion.,we
wve compare in no other way: but in pro- Ch. 6. cess of time, we attain the faculty of com- paring together the perceptions of ienfc, even when the objets are not present; and from that comparison, forming no- tions of their likeness or unlikeness.,Of the generals thus formed by com- parison, logicians diftinguilh two sets or classes. The fitr consists of those of the lowcft fecies; so called, becauIe below them there is nothing but individtuals. Thcee being formed in the manner above described, and recorded in the memory, as the pcrceptions of sense were before, the mind again exerts its power of compa- rifon upon them ; and discovering among them likewise refemblanccs, forms of those refcmblances another fct of generals above the firfl; with rcfpec't to which they are, in the language of logic, said 'to be the gcnuss. And thus we arise fiom general to greneral, till we come up to thoie of the higlhef order, which are diflinguiflcd from. those of inferior order by the name of uni- ves;fds. The(e, in the antient philosophy, have, by an amazing exertion of the hu- man genius, been reduced to ten classes, and called by the name of categories ; such,I 2 as
Ch. 6. as fibJtance, qluality, quantity, &c. '* And,here we may observe in passing, the very great impropriety of Mr Locke's philofo- phical language; for these universals, or,whatever * This discovery was first made in the Pythagorean school, (if it was not brought by Pythagoras from Egypt); and is to be found in the work of Archrtas, a philosopher of that school; which has been preserved to us by Simpli- ciuJ, the commentator upon ,AriJltle, who has inserted the whole, or by far the greatell part of it, in his com- mentary upon A/riflolle's Categories. The title of the work, as Simplicius tells us, was, nrpl T; iacrc, that is, Ofthe universe: for it appears he confidered these univer- fals as the principles of all things; which no doubt they are. Ariltotle has intitled his work upon the fame sub- jea, KrIIyIP,1, Categories, or Ptrdicaments, as we common- ly translate the word from the Latin: and the reason of the difference of the title is, that Aristotle in his work has confidered there universals logically, as the predicates cfpropo/ition ; and accordingly has set this book at the head of his logic: whereas Archytas has treated of them ietaphlfically, as the priiciples ofthings. Simplicius tells us, that Arillotle in his work has followed Archytas very closely, differing from him in very few things: and in- deed it so appears from the pafliges he quotes; which clearly flew, that the Categories of Archytas are the very fame in name, in number, and in nature, with those of Arillotle; and there is only some difference in the way of arranging them : but as to the method of explaining and illultrating them, it is so very like, that it is plain Ari- ftotle mull have had before him Archytas's book; of which in some places he has copied the words, only tranf- lating them from the Doric of the original into the Attic.,And
whatever we can suppose farther removed Ch. 6. fromfeitfe and matter, must all be ranked 'v- under his ideas offeifation.,From this account of the human mind,,and And yet I am sorry to fay, that neither in that work, nor in any other, so far as I know, has he ever made men- tion of an author, to whom he owed a discovery so great, and of which he has made so much use. It is indeed true what Porphyry fays in his life f Pythagoras, § 53. That Plato, Aristotle, and other Greek philosophers, whom he names, have taken almost their whole philolb- phy from the Pythagoreans. But there is no other of them, so far as I know, that has transcribed a whole book of that philosophy, without acknowledging to whom he owed it. As to the utility of the discovery, it is such, that with- out it we lhould have had no perfeA science: for there can be no science without definition; and there can be no definition, unless we can tell the genus or class to which the thing defined belongs ; and the definition is not com- plete, unless we can tell, not only the immediate genus, but the higJhef genus, that is, the lafi class under which the thing is comprehended. Thus, though I know that man is an animal, if I do not know what animal is, I cannot be said to know what man is. But further, sup- pose I know that animal belongs to the genus of the 7J ¢v;os,, or animated body, in order to make the definition complete, I must know likewise to what genus or class of things the Ti g4vsx( belongs. But is there no stopping in this ascent ? or is there an infinite progress upwards ? If there be, it is clear there can be no complete defini- tion, and consequently no perfect science; because there is no science of infinity. Again, suppose there was a li-,mit
Ch. 6. and its progress, compared with that of \'^' the brutes, it appears, that the essential,difference betwixt them and us consists in this, that the brute frill continues as,much mit to this afccnt, and that we could determine the ulti- mate genus, beyond which there is no other, th'lt is the category, which in the inflance I have given is ftl/lance; yet if we could not define the number of ihofe universals, there would, for the fiame reason, he no science of the principles of things. which, as I have fi;d, the catego- ries are; and all we could fay of them would be, that they were infinite. And thus it appears, that with- out the knowledge of the categories, there would be no such science as mnetaplfics, which is the science of the principles of things, nor any perfetA cience of any kind. I fay, perse?7 fie:ce; for there may be science without such complete definitions as I have supposed. Thus Eu- clid has not told us quhat a point is; that is to fay, what genus it belongs to; but has only said, that it ii that which has no partI. Figure he has defined in the fame way, by telling us, It is that 'which is inclfed b) one or more boundaries. Length, breadit, and thicknefJ, lie has not at all defined, though he has made use of the terms in the definitions of lines, fiirjaceJ, and filids, but has referred to.fie.f and common apprehension for the know- ledge of them. And though be has made magnitude and number the fubjeds of two sciences, viz. geometric and a- rithmetic, he has said nothing of the category to which they both belong, viz. quantity. It is for this reason that Plato has said, that geometry, and in general what we call mathematics, are not prrfeer7flienccr; because they do not demonflrate or explain their principles. See Pla- lo, De Repibl. lib 6. But Aristotle has made an apology for Euclid, and all those that have treated of the inferior,sciences,
much immersed in matter as we are in the Ch. 6. firit Ilage of lite: so that his mind never acts but by impulie fiom material objects, either external or internal; by which last I mean the natural calls of appetite, pro- duced by certain alterations of the body and its organs: whereas our mind ac- quires the habit of acting by itself, with- out any such impullt from matter, and so of exerting thatJielf-mroving power, which, as 1 observed before, is the chief characle- riffic of mind, and which is denied to the brutes, at least in the state in which we fee them. Jfiences, by (hewing, that it belongs only to the fil p/i- Ifjphy, or the/cience offciieces, as it may be called, to demonltrate the principles of thefuhalternfciences, which naffnc their principles, but do not demonstrate them. And therefore Euclid would have been to blame, because lie would have gone out of the bounds of his fcicnce, if he had meddled with space, exteajicn, quantity, or any such universals. Thus it appears of what universal use, not only in lo- gic, but in the 'UIhole of philosophy, the doctrine of the Categories is; of which I could not help taking notice in palling, though it has run out into a long note. I flall only add, that the public will very soon fee a work of Mr Harris, in which the nature of the several categories will be accurately explained; and which, if I am not much miflaken, will be the bes book of metaph)fics in the Eng- liih language; for in that way he has chosen to treat the subjea.,This
Ch. 6. This observation will explain several,phenomena of the brute nature; from which some have raflily concluded, that they have the use of intellect and reason as well as we. Thus a horte, by travelling the fame road twice or thrice, learns to know it often better than his rider; from whence one might conclude, that he had orme idea of a road. But the fad truly is, that although, no doubt, the percep- tion of this particular road is imprcffed on his memory or imagination, and retained there, yet he has no iena of a road; be- cause, not having that active felf-moving power above mentioned, his remembrance is only excited by the objet being pre- sented again to his sense. At any other time, io far as we can discover, he never thinks of that road, nor is conscious that he has any such perception in his memo- ry: and therefore it is impossible that e- ver he can form the idea of a road, ac- cording to the process above described. Again, a horse or a dog remembers his home, or the place where he is fed, and protected from the weather; but, so far as we know, never thinks of that place, except when he is prompted by hunger,,cold,
cold, love of society, or any other natural Ch. 6. appetite. And it is the fame with refpead to the operations of the mind of the brute, as with refpea to his perceptions of exter- nal objects: for not having that felf-mo- ving power which we have, he cannot re- view his own operations, of which he is not conscious; and therefore it is evident that he cannot form ideas of rrlefleon.,From what is here said, the difference betwixt perceptions of fiJfe/ and ideas must appear manifold. In thefift place, Those perceptions are only the materials from which ideas are formed; and therefore are as diftinat fiom ideas as the matter of any thing is from its form. 2do, Perceptions of sense arise only from objects prcfint; whereas ideas may be formed, and are commonly formed, from pall sensations, preserved in the memory or imagination. 3tio, The perceptions of sense preserved in the memory or imagination, are no more than the images of objecs, such as they were presented to the mind by the senses: but neither sense, memory, nor imagination, makes that comparison which we have shewn to be abiblutely necessary in order to form ideas. And hence it is,,'VOL. I. K 4to.
Ch. 6. 4to, that the perceptions of sense, though,retained in the memory, are all of indivi- dual things; whereas ideas are all of gene- rals, being of things common to many in- dividuals. And, qflly, In the formation of ideas the mind is altogether active; whereas in the perceptions of sense it is merely passive. What confusion, there- fore, must it not have produced in philo- sophy, the not diftinguifling things so dif- ferent in their nature, and the operations of faculties so different -as fenie and intel- keI ?- And so much for the ideas that are formed immediately from the percep- tions of sense.,As to the ideas which arise from the o- perations of the mind, and which I shall call with Mr Locke ideas of reJlecion, they are formed in the fame manner: for the mind prefcrving the memory of its own o- perations, as well as of external objects, and reviewing and comparing together the individual operations thus preserved in the memory, and discovering something com- mon to several of them, of that one commnon thing it forms the idea; and in that way we come by the ideas of doubting, delibera- ting, afilin1g, and of thinking in general.,Tlhsi
This, I believe, is agreeable to Mr Locke' Ch. 6, notion of such ideas; and, as he has ob- served, under the operations of the mind we ought to include the pafqion as well as the action of the mind: fb that the ideas of pleasure and pain, (not the adual feel- ing, for that is mere sensation *), and of all their various modifications in the dif- ferent passions, are all ideas which we get from reflection. But we lhould carefully diftinguith two things that he has not dif- tinguifled, viz. the particular operations of the mind, and the idea or general notion.,I call it mere sensation, when there is no perception of any externalolbjed: for ic is to be obfcrved, that the word sensation, as it is commonly used, is equivocal, denoting either the perception of any external objec by the lenses, or the inward feeling of pleasure or pain arising from the body; and which is always accompanied with a certain emotion and alteration of the mind. This lafl kind of sensation is often joined with the former; for often when we feel pain, we perceive at the fame time the external objet that produces it; as when a man is pricked by a sword, or burnt with a hot iron. At other times we feel pain without the perception of any external objec; which is the cafe where the body labours under any disease. And as thus we have sensation of pain, without the per- ception of any external objea; so, on the other hand, we have very frequently, and indeed maot commonly, the perception of external objets without either pain or plea.,K thence.
Ch. 6. thence formed; which he has confounded,,in the fame manner as he has confounded the particular perceptions of sense with the ideas formed from them.,From this account of the formation of our ideas, it is evident, that the mind forms them without any afliftance fiom the senses. With refpedt to the ideas of reflecion, there cannot be the lealf doubt, as the senses do not to much as furnish the materials out of which they are form- ed: and with reipec& to the ideas arising from sensation, it is evident, that the sense furnishes only the materials, upon which the mind works by itself, and forms the ideas: for those ideas, as we have 1hewn, arise from the mind's conm- paring together the perceptions of sense, and discovering betwixt them certain re- fcnblances and similitudes. Now, it is impoflible that the sense can compare or perceive relations of any kind; and there- fore this comparing faculty is the peculiar property of the rational, or, as the Greeks call it, the logical mind: for the Greek word ^vos,. which the Latins render by the term ratio, properly signifies a relation. And accordingly Euclid, who must be,supposed
supposed to speak with the greatest pro- Ch. 6. priety, so defines the word applied to magnitude .,If any man, notwithstanding what is said, can have the least doubt of these i- deas formed from the perceptions of sense being the act of the mind singly, as well as ideas of reflection, let him confider that,Tile definition is, Ay:o; ;r, fySv iOoyi;,v xar' ,rl.rnT¢ roldcT X;, lib. 5. def. 3. And the learned in the Greek language may oblerve, that this is the proper etymolo- gical sense of the word cyo,;; for it is derived from l,.B ; of which the antient signification was, togather or collei ; in which sense it is used by Homer, and in the most an- tient diale& of Greek extant, I mean the Latin language; and in the later Greek it is flill used in that sense in com- position, as in the word cvucyo;. From this original fig- nification xoyoc, by a very natural metonijg,, came to fig- nify relation, or comparison; which cannot be made with- out colleting the things together, and setting them, as it were, bellde one another. And accordingly this very word coimparifon, from the Latin comparo, and likewise confero, compone, all denotefeitting together, or juxtapo- fition.,It may here be observed, that in this sense the word oylxcv is used with peculiar propriety in the Peripatetic definition of a man; which is, .ov Ay Xy:c, V; x; ;7!clrr Ji,- Tir.s. For here xyir.cv denotes the bei.g possessed of that comparativefaculty which is the foundation of rationality among men; and therefore the poffeflion of it is very pro- perly set at the head of the specific differences which dif- tinguilh man from other animals. - The reft of the de- finition will be afterwards explained.,class
Ch. 6. class of them which are called ideas of re- >^^- lation, such as likeness, diversity, double,,half, and the like. These ideas are cer- tainly formed from sensible objets, as much as the idea of a man or a horse; yet no body, I think, will fay, that the fen- fes have any concern in the formation of them; and the reaibn is plain, namely, because they are comparisons which the mind makes of two or more things. Now the other ideas derived from the fame fburce, though chey are not acual com- parisons made by the mind at the time we ipeak or think of them, and therefore are not ideas of relation; yet they are the re- fult of comparisons formerly made; from which we colledt that common nature which makes the idea of any objec of sense.,And thus it appears, that the division of the conceptions of the mind made by Plato is well founded; and that there are truly conceptions, which are the ad of the mind operating by itself, without a- ny assistance from the lenses. And thus I would fain hope, that I have diflinguiflh- ed the perceptions offense from ideas in such a manner, that they will not again be con- fbonded, and that we Ihall hear no more,so
so strange a language in philosophy,. as Ch. 6. that which speaks of visible and tangible J ideas '.,C H A P. VII. Of AbJfrac7 Ideas. -That there are Ideas,uwhich are not abfralt. ~ Of the three ways in zwhich Ideas exifl. IN the language of our modern plilofo-,phy, general ideas, and abJ/ral ideas, are understood to be synonymous terms; and every notion of the mind that is abfiraicd is understood to be general; and, vice ver- fa, every general notion is conceived to be abflraced. But this I hold to be a mistake: for, in the first place, I think I have shewn, that we not only may have a conception of a particular quality of any substance, abJfrat- [d from its other qualities, without concei- ving such quality to belong to any other substance; but that we mtrf have had such an abJitra conception before we could,* This is the language of Dr BAerkeley in his Theory of,have
Ch. 7. have any general conception. And we,may go further, and fay, that flich ab- ftradced conception of the individual qua- lity may never be generalized. Thus, e.g. if I believe that there is no other fun in the universe than ours, and if I confi- der his rays, or any other quality peculiar to him, separately from his other quali- ties, I have an abftracled notion of his rays, but no general notion or idea of them.,Thus it appears, that there may be ab- jlraaion without generalization. But can there be generalization without abJfration ? Or are there no other ideas but abftrac i- deas ? That all those in the human mind are such, is admitted. But are there no other in the universe ? Does every intel- ligence think in the manner we do ? If so, matter must be the eldest of things; and even mind and intelligence are to be derived from it: for that must be the consequence, if there be no ideas but such as arise from matter; because it is impoflible to conceive intelligence without ideas. And yet to this consequence Mr Locke's philosophy natu- rally leads; which makes mind so depend- ent upon body, as not to operate without,it,
it, and knows nothing beyond fenCcion, Ch. 7. and its ideas, as lie calls them. I am per- Y fuaded. that Mr Locke did not mean to draw ilch confequcnces from his philo- opl ::, but it is certain, that such confe- quc-:cs have been drawn from it, and that the most extravagant systems of iccp- ticifi have been founded on it.,The philoibphy I have learned is of a very different kind: it teaches me, That mind is the moit antient of things !; and that, as it alone has aAivity, and the princilie of motion in itJlf, it is the efficient cause of every thi;ii: that therefore there are i:cas of a much higher order than those which we abkruact trom matter, be- ing the models or archtjyles of all matcrial JfI.rms: that of fich ideas the inte/llecual vlorld is conipofed(; of which the material is no more than a copy: that there are other intelligences in the univcrfe betides ours, and ininitely tii)erior to ours ; and ole higille' o 'all, in wxhoie intellcdr relides thlat intellectual world, and who is not only the eff.ciC:t ca~f' of all things, but,Plato, !in E/,i:;... oo8. cdit. Fic'!ai. VOL. I, rT virtuas,.y
Ch. 7. tv;rtt.a7.i' comprehends in himself; every kV"J thing existing. -,These ideas of highest order and digni- ty are, in the language of antient philoib- phy, said to be before the many i; that- is; anterior to all individual and particular forms; which being infinite in number,- are laid to be maniz;', in contradiifincion .to the oie idea that is the pattern of, them. Again, if they are confidered as exiting. in the particulars or individuals of- which they constitute e nature and eLfence,,;they. are said to be in thbsin al y t. And:ll in this w-aR exills the whole vil,/- e world;w. which is nothing but the intellectual worldmade. perceptible to the sense. And last, of all come the ideas of our minds abflrac'ed from the inWaij; that is, from the mate- rial -crld: for ifuch is our condition, in this period of our existence, that wem'muft neceffaril- draw all our ideas from' that source; and this fort of ideas is faid-to'be after the /i.,ay I. ,,.-,... . : , .-.. -:; --.:;:. See Mr Harri5's 'eri, l .k . 3 . ch3. 4. h.:re thir cc;:L-:n is f.r .v illif:.a:cd b-y an example,frbm
*To this triple order of forms, as Mr Ch. 7.. Harris elegantly calls them, belong three V several sciences. To the first and highest ordeir'belongs that science which, from Aristotle's method of treating it, has got the name of Metapbyfics; but I think is better denominated thefir philofoply: the subjea' of which are the intelleSual forims, previous to the malterial, of which they are the pattern, and eternal and unchange- able, 'as not partaking ps the corruption or'contagion of matter; and therefore ha. virig a fixed and permanent existence: for tilofe forms that are unitled with mantter are ima 'cdnftant change and flux, as well as tlie iatter itself '. Of these intelledual '·'" ,!'·" i:''' . ' : form s, from tlihe ,orks of art, and byf everal elegant quotations frpm the Greek commentators upon Aristotle. What ,I have here said relates only to the works of nature. . *,ee upon this fubjeft a P.thagorean philosopher of the later times, Nicomachits CGeafinitr, in his treatise up- on ,rithmetic, it initio. The passage is fomewliat long, but I will tranlcribe it for the fake of the learned reader, who may not have the boo!, as it is rare, never having been but once printed. It is where he explains Pythago- ras's definition of philosophy, which was EYri, rZr , c'rv. Upon that occasion, he explains what the Srx, or things really exiJiiing, are, in contrhdiftintion to what Dlas no,'"':- 2L fixed,12[.~~~~~I-
CL. 7. fdrms, this science exalains the natdre _ashd,i intlhoie of tlhm tiat are mloft generali-ach as.the categories above mentioned,. con- templates the ji'rt principles and elenmelit of things: for all things existing, are nothing else but thoie universals unfolded, a: it were, and developed. From the intel- letual world, it naturally aftends to the contemplation of that univcijal mind, in fixed or permanent existence. The words are, 'ovr; Jt, r7, '.lTI 7Tr. aUT, Yl fOl7rSr idar'w J tY'IOroTra rv/T¢ Co' X?, . r .; UJTii rT Yvas Slsry;-:xol vJ ;I i:';, U T2OCiaTrT aT z , T e f i uV. rua y.lb o orTa sLTOi'a (raro, Xl ov, TOv ZYOOVi;D/, O* O C.Mr r xarpiOU2iO, oc To AryTalTZ Xa; 0l. Ta rlYIv rz,) (fUr.YaTI jóT:I ra; DAKa} ';v JIrvir;i pUJr( yLr p:TXIJ',lK 10',ah~ati,,,, ,oc T, 0/5,,0 : !u, s o.,, a/.,e cn b roooX.; 0 4l ravorr Frf, .ltlloutvy rTY Tni; 0at;p r iiioo " boo XuArC x . rOCroTs - PLciv 0xa0I to e.s l , be.n hnmate rlalrnal, nd unih, ,n..ah.e . ijrira* An t '.p S"' e Xn; a. Tpft-AdiO X0 a0OIhe rn. TOa S o' ctui , 4 -tual Y.cl Ko!3raer9'Tao'coa a o'Tlvr J opriTi XKa; C-OcaO.n ' lfl; T;V at; T T-,, P. ' . , . ' XalYe^V CixUX:ttecu. T4 all TChrat there i h'; Ie/ r.1t^l 'i', t h roug h rcvptla j;P i r r o;? uil' a, i0 /O T/('UTOTiX 0 x r0, 7 ra2 1i 0 1 ; ;A.CTO , Y A i. a-rao)&'OotTo, T7;Uxi Joarot.or ' ok.T UrT'c TOr CUTh u00-'0 ThixJ uto' T a~,0Y;0i51200Y2 Kuri, Tix; u ^'tY ASrcI. TIhe ren:,. ii. ltubit.inc is, tlhat intcar, or io aclllrcrl frrmsr, anlnc can be properlyfijd to cxiJ17, being immnaterial, eternal, and unch:lngeable that iaiter and b!l) abrc y their natures in a conitinuil f;lax and cihanoe ; thiat it is only by /iartic''iatiion of the iiC- 1cllr'ualrfaorm that the corpcrcal /-r can be sa;id to have any exiltence at all; that tllefe i.cllcsaraljcirms, thougll of their own nature imw.trla/, yet beinig united to body, they,by accident (,cw;'o.&s:c) )part;;ke ofits'afieflibs, and icconme liable to change,,"***'. * ' ^hic^vp ·~
which;this intellec'tualxworld is contained; Ch. 7. and'that makes the highest part of this phi- lofophy,: called by the antients Theology. With refpeclt to the ideas united with mat- ter, thatis, materialfojrms, they arc the fiub- jectof that fcicnce called Natu'ral Pbhilfophy. And. as to ideas abjlraced from matter, the science converiant about them is what we call .iathematics -; the uhbjec& of which are, length, breadth, thbcktnef, and in ge- neral maglnitude, likewise iatuniber, and its aifections, ratios, proportions, &c.: which are all ideas abftraced by our minds friom ma- terial forms; and not confidered as exist- ing in those forms, for then they become the subj e of natural philoJph)y or mixed mathematics; nor as previous to those forms, for in that view they would be the subjed of theJirJl) philoJopJy.,If this account that I have given of there three orders of ideas be just, any philofo- phy of ideas which docs not diftinguifll tliem mufl appear very defeecive. The first are ;the fountain and source of the other two, if it be true that this world is' the,* This is the way in which Arifotle has divided the sciences. See his lIItna:/ics, lti. 6. i; inliio.,produdioq
Ch.i. `p itbdaliori of iniiid and 'intelligencet; nor,of blind chance'; fo:-if so, there n.iftib'e an'iitelt/ecltal world previous to the mate- rial. To deny, therefore, the existence of fich ideas, is to deny, that the universe is. the work of mind. This is an impiety. which I am far from imputing t6o, Mr Locke: but thus much I may be al'lowed. to 'ay, that by not carrying his philofdo phy of ideas beyond sense and .imatter, t!he hlas given at least the appearance of indt'i rial/iin to his system.'1 ' *'",C HI A' P. VIII. Of pefrfl and imperfeI Idleas.-- Ofthe. Ideas. ':of Plato.-- Of Science and Opinion.; and. the dirence betwixt these two. , , IN describing thc progrcfs of the huiii'aii,mind in the formnation of ideas,' I ai'ave siid, that the. idea may be more"'tr'cs petfe7; frolm which itfollows, 'th 'trSeYr nmay be a general notioh or concebtid6i'''d the thing, but fich' as. is riot''*hatwe emphatically, ind i'poperl9y ei6'uh'"ih Eiglifh, call the i2' h of'th' thing. This,requires
requires .explanation;, ,without whiclh0u:r Ch. ., philifophy of .ideas,, and consequently of languages of which ideas mlake so eli'ntial a.part-, would be imperfcct. ·;:From the -account we have given of the formation of ideas, it is plain it muf: be a .work. of difficulty if rightly performed, requidhg attention and accuracy. It is therefore impoflible that it can be equally. well performed by ail, or. by any at first. The, brute, as we have fecn, has some confused notion of thefpecies in the indi- vidual. Our children at first, I am pcr- fuadedc have no more diftinc2 idea of it; and I believe they hiave this further rc- semblance to the brute, that the idea, such as it is, is excited,only by. tlh, pre- fence of the object, or by some bodily im- pulse of one kind or another; theirsminds not having yet acquired that felf-moviln poweri by which the mind, without fuchl excitcnent, reviews anid compares togce ther the perceptions of fcnfc lodged in ithe nmemory or imagination. They learn, no d4qubt .by ccnverfation with. grown per- fens,, o, fqrm, pretty;early, more diftint concepptons of; the different species offij,- flarots: ,but- as3.Sto,,qualifies, and par:ticC,,: 7 i;;*)-;, larlv
Ch. 7. pl bdftdibn of'iniii' and 'intelligence,;iunot b'- of bliid chlance; for if so, there miiftb'e,an'iitelleuial world' previous to the, tate- rial. To deny, therefore, the existence of futch ideas, is to deny, that the, universe is' thework of mind. This is an impiety. which I am far from imputing to;,Mr Lockie: but thus much I may be aillowed. to fay, that by not carrying his phlilofo- phyl of ideas beyond sense and imratter, lIh6' hs given at least the appearance' f indlt-i rialiJin to his fyftcm." . i , I .,C H A' P. VIII.,' ' , '; '! 1:: ' ; Of perfer and imperfer't Ideas.--Of the Ideas.,of Plato.--Of Sience and Opinion'; and, the' dlifference betwixt these two. i,, , I describing tlic progrcfs of the huimaiii miind in the foimaition of ideas," li'a:lv'e aid, 'that the. iea may be more or cs perfed7; from which it follows, thl:"t'lIf' may be a general notioh or concepti'ddi'6F tle thing, but such' .'as. is iiot'' hat *e emphatically, arnd i' poperly eio'ugh, ' in Erglifh, call thc 'ie of- the thing,. This,requires
requires explanation:, .without which!lQ Cr Ch. ., phildfophy :of ideas,a and consequently. of lalnguzgej of which ideas make Io ellential a.part, ,would be imperfet. *,From the account we have given of the formation of ideas, it is plain it muf. be a, uork of difficulty if rightly performed, requiring attention and. accuracy. It is therefore impossible that it can be equally well performed by all, or by any at first. The.;.brute, as we have fecn, has foome confused notion of thefpecies in the indi- vidual. Our children at first, I am per- fuaded) have no more dillinc idea of it; and I believe they lhave this further re- semblance to the brute, that the idea, such as: it is, is excited.only by;tlhe-pre- fence of the obje&, or.by some bodily 'im- pulse of one kind or another; theirminds not having yet acquired that f/cf-inoving power,. by which the mind, without such excitement, reviews and compares togec ther the perceptions of sense lodged in tihe 4emtpr or imagination. They learn, no dubt,j .by conversation with grown pFr- fpns,, to. form, pretty, early, more diflilia conceptins of;.th, diffel:ent species offj- fies: ,but- yas to,-gqalifies, and paticu-,ar r
Ch.. arlygenrl qualites, 'fich as, goo'l ·ad,,fair, : bald/ime, jifj, ·and zujgi 'thaolig they :have those words frequently il' their mnuths, the ideas they annex to rhemi 'are fovery confused and iiiiftincti, as"hardly to ldefrvc the name. Nor have they' any clear cnccponepton of any tcrm they ufe'de- notilig any general quaility, except it be of such as denotes ajfeJltion, as fzvet;'bitei paifill, pleafatlt; of wiich they have as cliar ideas as many philoroplhers. .lie vulgar imay be faiid to contiiue childreci iin this rcfpect all 'teir lives,;'at''leaft li some degree; soir th'oughi their noitjions arc,' no doubt, m0re' diftinch L thal' tliofe 6f chitldren,' aildi f as' they 'can BEtter 'explaisn, ? yet they; sse 'farJ' l'ifi-if of .persefd ideas i'hich''e ai'e r'no'"'to' \- ·his idea' is nbs d ib 9 1 than the'idla 'odf the iilan :f fdciice{ oi'philofopher'.,'wvi'c'nh isi very'di'ffetent ! som{ttlhat o, tlier-li.ilar. Foi:i';in:thes/iys place, it -is entirely'feplaiSt' ted an'd ab'firaied.' fromi' efery thi ig', ihma,FrHal, all^ t~the v'ral: particular'object Non mwhiel it is': colTecied being: labilodt of'the' vew 'of rhe iind, and tlja't '61y wilicr 'srty' have: i- i ti;m b'eibngcbnfid'er'",1d ;
ed; whereas the vulgar never perfectly Ch. S. make this reparation, but frill continue to fee the one only in the many: so that a- mong them, man, e.g. is no more than one name given to Peter, James, and John, and other individuals of the species; and when.they want to explain their idea of any thing, they cannot do it without an example ; that is, without flewing to the person with whom they converse, the ma- terial image of the thing in their own minds. 2dly, It is such an idea as con- ftitutes the nature and essence of the thing unmixt with any thing else.,How difficult this last requisite is to be attained, we shall be convinced, if we confider, that every thing in nature is mixed with every thing, according to the faying of the antient philosopher, I think it was A' naxagoras. Thus length, breadth, and ihick- ness, figure, Jituation, and. qualities with- out number, are all joined together in the fame subjed, and in that way presented. to the senses. Now it is the bufmefs of intellect to discriminate these, and setting them each apatt by itself, in that way to form the idea of it. If this is rigltly done, then is the idea that perfcct idea,TVOL. I. M w
Ch.8 ,F. e ,fsor, fIhclas iaxpfrefhdi,: leT,fitijos of the. teerms of science.. ;lut,it may be, defective :in. everal refpels.,,: In tJejirJf place, It may, only.,containi,qu1,v Ijties, such as are accidental, and ,Iot :,,if- tinguifling o; charac7et,'tical of thee fcisi; asif.l were to fbrnmmy idea of,a!;,nn from the colour or size, or any other, prt- perty belonging to the individuaJ,,nIay haye seen, but ntot,cqnno,- to thei'pe;ie. Secondly, The qualities, that form ny,, ge- neral,idea may bc,.cot!mol..to the.; iipesi blt not peculiar; as.if; I iould male;!,ny idea of a , man to be ,that of a, creatture wal;in'g opn twolegs,, ,or, ofa horse thtaof a,.creature ;with .Iso; legs. ThiTrdby The quality.lmay be commolQn to all the Species, ands ailfo pcitlial,5 but may not containis natrielanCdsnce. . ,Thus ,if I define, c ma, byAi~s ribl!e factqty;, ior a horse;,¥) his neighing, thef e qualities, thouglh ih,,tl ,omnmon,, and .peculia, to each of thereffe e- cjes, iy,et as .they do not: constitute, te i' nature and essence, ; thqy are not the .idea of 'the philosopher.; Fourth/j',. The Flali- ties of which I form my idea of the fpe- :;.t'(uou "' ':, '.1'*' . **'if * , .*ii ., ,.i cies, I may not hayS ;a clcer awld Oditin conQception lo as, e,,g. if I define mann to,rg
be'a~a.to6na'an;imal ' -capable .of's'i\tlt'e& Ch and'lcience;',uilesrs;I now what ran'dtmiM ty ^^ i's, h an-it intellEce are, - cain- notihaiic a iperlfec idea' of a man. Andi , /kl/r',' My idea may" contain the qualities that\ are COioinioll and peculiar to the pccies, an(l also such as constitute its nature and efizce ;: but if it contains, besides these; 6tlhri qualities that are accidental, or' idioma- tiChl,='that is, peculiar to the individual, or'- tlit are common to other species ; in {ort'if it contains any thing' else but tii6fe' v'ery 'qualities which constitute the niature and essence' of the thing,' from i*li ilci'all its prope-ries are derived'; .iay, if-it ihould contain an'y even' of tli6fe,'po- peit'tc.s which arie 'by demonftiratidOiidc- d'ficibled from its natfule,' as, e.g. if,' i'nmy definiti6n of a tria'n'ge, I fliould 'iriclude thlie q'ality of its"'havihg its thre a'nigles equial tio t'wo right o6es'; it'would"''idt be tliepcr/fef idea of tlie 'philofophei,''' lich mufii containi nothliig,' as;I liavc fcidf, 'but tHncviy c , nce of th'ethling. - " ' - ';i B{i'it i it vc iOt this' fupcrfluity, 'and haiQe all tihe requiiites above mentioned, tli2i'is it 'tle 'tdea of Plato, so much talked of, ad so 'littleuidc'i'fts'obod, being 2'f ife,M 2 of
Ch. S. of:the word different fiomn that in ;~which,itis used in modermphilofophy. - Foriit is not the meaning that I- have given to:it, which comprehends everygeneral notion, however inadequate to the nature of the thing; and far less is it the idea of Mr Locke, which comprehends even percep- tions of fenfz, though it was no doubt froml the phiiofophy of Plato that he,bor- rowed the use of the word. This,-.idcais the real thing exil7ing ', of which, Piato Ieal;s 3o often in a language that appeal!s my-)e-i;ous but which may be underLptoo fruomn waI have said: for he tells us,, '.tis,' Ltat w .hich makes oie of the miany; which. " prefrving the 2nv.iy and inltegrity of. its " o-n nature, runs through and mixes: " with thi gs i fiite in number; and yet, however iiizit;j'z it may apeDar,., is.al- "' way-s lthe fz;ie: so that by it we ,find. " cut and difcrimiriate the thling, whatever. " diterent ihapes it may afuhme, and un- "der whatever disguise it may, P-lotfeus- "iia', hide itself i." Now, though ;,this derfcripion alludes to a peculiar notion ,of.,' pSe P;.; : in Pri:.S , ei ali i, .. .,his
hirsf oncerning ideas;, which.-I ':h-al1 afcc'r- Ch. 8. wai;dscepplain, and .which Plato never has h out of his .view, it may be underflobd of the idea, -such as I have described if, by which wve discriminate a thing from all o- thers,'"and find it out mixed with many otheri things in various forms and fubftan- ces.: - ' ': ' ','Thils- perfre' idea is, in many cafes, very'difficult to be apprehended, especial-- ,y 'i it 'b a very general idea; for such ideas a're the principles of things,: and the'refdire the most fimiple and uncom- potin'ded: but for that very reason they ai'eithie most difficult to be by us' appre- lihended; ifrl, because we are accuftonmed to'perceivc only what is mixed and .com- pounded; and, fecoiidly, because thfe:ge- inral':principles are joined, and incorpora- te'd as- it were, with so many various foimi' aind fiubftances,: that jt itis very dif- ficti-ltt' evolve the'i% and 'few theli: by themifeIvcs. It is therefore true: vhat A- riftotle'iGy, that those principles;, by:liow mucli'ti'eyt :are great 'ii power and;effict-. cy, by so much they are the more diffi- cult to be diftinaly apprehended. - - ',Of this kind of ideas are the-ideas of ''; :ijutice,
£ ófg ercaliand' the'iefore of so' d^i' u defifiition, that tlie furiifhed ample' ma't- terl fb-r the Sophists of old to flieW' their artt,!!and to puzzle and perplex tho6fc'' it i whroti they conversed.- Plato has: -,}itt'e no' less than ten books ', in order to' ex- plain what jl//ice is; and hle has give't'i'is a' definition of it, takei friom th fchlobi of Pytliagoras -1-, and -which is veryili:ffet- ent'from the common notion of it! --He has'alfo, in the farmebooks, fpokdlei niue}l of !t he'- good, or '"yc, liut hellias n'6t- defirid it. H.e telis us, in the 'way 'of si- mi'itude,' that', what'the fPih is in tlie' vi- fibletlvworld, the :tiOBY is, in' thc' intel leftna'l. 'ilAnid he ftrther fays,- tliht ro know it -is the plefdatiboi of all knoVle'd:e, as 't'is :the governii g principle in ia't'ire asid ought to' be. % i'fri all humarn' actii ns and 'pu'rsuits :': Wlihether Plato 'li'i'flf kin'di any mbre of thii matter thlanikllat,'i Thi'efc are his books, np' or, De Rep'lica. 1' Sce tile Pythalgorean, philosopher TSeagcf, in his fnri vaihlable work, np!i iiripfrvi iifcrtcd' in Gai's c'oll'c- tioh,'irtitilled, Opzlcltla.:'ll!fdcgica, 'c.pb; 6Bil ,-'. ' v (, . I'P.1ato, De Re lc . ; .Ic a A. .,lie
he htas!itold. the .readpr in there bogks, Ch.,8. may pelrhaps be doubted, though I fipuld i incline, to, think he did; and therefore I hold this. to be one of the mysteries of his pl)ilofophy, which he did not communi- cate except to a very few :. and according- ly it is so treated by his later followers, Plotinus, Iamblizhus, and Proclus, who have mnade the doctrine of the 7'0 >aOov a great lpart of the mylfical theology of Plato. - As to the third of those general ideas, the,, .beaitiLl, or O, Y",:, hle has fpioleli mucll pft in the S9',pofizlm: and as what he fa-s. there ihews, that he underft>pd .leas .swrere formed in ithe lway I have, de- fcribed;. (though by the mysterious mrn-. ner inlwhich he speaks of;them one fihoidl thinkothervwife), I. will;here give the sub-, stance of it. " The f "itol*jests,' -iaysthe, "inr,-hvliclh we dilieri the beautiful,, are coFl frenlfonis : and-lve begin with i~a- "Yving on"e beauty of that kind; 'from "theiice we proceed to contemplate other " beauties of the fame kind, till we ,dif- "cover that in which they all resemble "one anorher; an.d thin abating of our " love for the individual,;:we come to be !o- "vers of this fpccies. of beauty, and gene-," ral
Ch. 8. " ral admirers of allfine forms. From bo- -V " " dy we next proceed to mind, and disco-,"ver the beautiful in charaders, manners, "and inflitations; and finding here, too, " the fame resemblance in all these, we "become general admirers of this species "of beauty likewise, esteeming but very " little the former in comparison with it. "The next ftep is to the beautiful infcience: " and here, in like manner, we are not to "attach ourselves to the beauty of a single ' science, but in general to contemplate "that species of beauty; and by this "course of study, we come at last to dif- "cover the general idea of beauty, com- " prehending all the species above men- " tioned, viz. the beautiful informs, in " manners, and infcience. A most wonder- " fl beauty indeed, fays our author, and "for the fake of which only all other beau- " ties are to be studied. It is eternal and " incorruptible, having neither beginning "nor end, increase nor diminution: it is "not beautiful in one respect and ugly in " another; it is not beautiful at one time, "or in one place, and ugly at another "time, or in another place; nor can it be " conceived by the imagination, like a," fine
"..fiie,:,f,'cC, 01or fii\\hAid, .orIC,1 y tter Ch.;8.. i -c:;ptO'real frim ; -niQr,:muft we.- repr-efnt ' to, ourf!lves this, unliyerlll beauty as cx- " irning. in any !).:tic.lar thing,, fuci as '..a!, : ,nimal, or even the earth anl. hlia- " vens; but wvc murf conlidcr it finglyrby ·".itiltf and deta. hed fiom evcry. thing " elJ,; and all tilings eife we muil.confi.- ", cicls beautiful, only by partic'cipaliot of " ti: isuniverfal beauty,, which always re- :.n' isn the famc, without fuffcring, the,e.'it impair or diminution by the de- "trfr'Ctioi of thofc o0her things in which :.'{* - " T *. i . . ; .* .i. , : ,F J l: .; itcc sifts., - This,? fa-is, Diotima,, j(,the ',·rophetefs, in y;1hotf mouSth .Spcrates ..,puts ,this} jdifqqur'fe)),;is t}le perfcc I !ieice " ofbeauty, :and.x ij make )ou, S,c aes, ",(.to. .whom flie is intrc9ducecl as flcaing) " a pcrrei lover, if you iare capablc 9f be- . .óin' i.nitiated into iuc¢,l.rm y i'c. e ,.,- In this manner h.Is, Piao mixed with the m-nrrimccnt of a fcaft, an3d cven.the riot of ,a .dcbauch, for ia that .way it ends at.. lft, .his, t.ublimle philolbiy of idcas aind.intel- ledutal forms, wvich, he has hardily ever QP.0t-% of his view in any of his cdialogues, ·whether he is il:rious r.,plealanti'.:-'. . :,. lie ', /' .'Is/:/ i ~ /,{.~ jrt4g~ - rI . I n :Vo,,. I. *N ' Froth
Ch. 8. From what is said, it will be further e-,vident, how difficult it is to give a pre-,cife * Tre foil/ol ing note is refirrred to on the preceding page. Those who are not acquainted with this intellecaual philosophy, will be surprised at one part of this defcrip- tion, namnely, that we are not to confider this idea of beauty as inherent in any particular subjea, not even the heavens. But thole who have ltudied the precious re- mains that we have left of the Pythagorean philosophy, from which it is evident that Plato took almost all his philosophy, particularly his theology and doctrine of i- deas, will not be llrprifcd at this expreflion of his : for the Pythagoreans made the fame dillinaion with reli)eCt tomufic that Plato makes with refpcte to beauty, diftin- guifhing sensible and intelleftual muCc ; by whlich last they underirood the ratios and proportions of numbers, confidzred mlnply by themselves, ablfracaed from voice or found, and every sensible objec, even the flars or planets; (s:ec Nicomachrs's lrjitlhmsti,, p. 5.). So that this music, according to their notion, was superior even to their music of the spheres, so much talked of, and so little underconrd. If it be objected, that this iitc!!ctuall mufiG of the Pythagoreans is as diflicult to to be c,. ceived as Plato's intellectual beauty, I .anlsvcr, tnit I myllf have known a m.an who unllerltood it per- fe :'y, and took great deligiht in it; for he would liend ;wl,rle d ys in reading music, without applying either voice or iiil':rmtn;: to it. Now this was certainly intel- leflial n:ilic, thirgh conveyed to tie mind by sensible mark-, as imuch as reading any book is an cxercife of the inr:llectual acu!!y; thgugh the thoughts are there like- iv;' conveyed to the mind by fenfilb!e charafters; be- caec in both cafes, the marks have not the least analogy or rel nhlince to the things signified; and therefore they only excite tlhe mmnory, but do n;t in the least ope-,rate
cife definition of ideas of such high abf- Ch. 8. traction. Plato, we fee, has not attempt- ed to define the beautifil in this passage, nor in another dialogue which he has writ- ten wholly upon the fubjcc&; I mean, the Hippias Major; where he fliews indeed very clearly, that Hippias did not under- stand what it was; lbt he makes us no- thing the wiser for that. The good, as I have said, he explains by a similitude, in the fame manner as he does the nature of the foul in the Plbdrzus; where he tells us, that to have the idea of the foul (that is, in his language, the perfect idea above mentioned) is divine knowledge, and of most diflicult attainment: but to know what it is like, is human, and of less dif- ficulty ".,This distinction betwixt perfecl and im- peife& ideas, which I have so much insist- cd upon, will explain a thing that is but little underitood, the difference betwixt science and opinion. The subjed of science is petfcc? ideas, such as I have described rate upon the fcnfe or imagination. The pleasure, there- fore, of this mulfcian, mull have been altogether intcl- fcTlial, produced by the idea of those numbers of which melody and harmony consist. ' p. 12l21. Ficini.,N 2 them ,
Ch. 8. them; thle ft!iiet: of oninion is imperfec7,iden.r. For if the idea wants any of the re- quifi:es above mnltiOnccd; if' it is not com- mon to all the i.ldividuals of the fpccies; or, thloug common, if it be not peculiar; or, though both common and peculiar, if it be not ..fiitia/; or, with all these three rcquifites, if wre have noc a lclar and drf- tinlu conception of it; or, laily, if, be- fides the c\VCtial qaaiities, we throw into our idea of the t.iingr oth'rs not cl'Ntial; in jhort, if it lbe not the idea e of/ t.h thilr; thenl is it the liibjc of opiol.ni' , about which we fee men wranglei and diLfiute without endci; becauib tlhy do not argue about the thing itelf; but about an iinporfcdl no- tion of it. It was not thlcrforc without :'ca;on that Plato litid, thai the filbjet of opinion was Incither tlhe T 0, or the thii.' it/J//; nor wIas it the .; . ,, or IlnothirJg ; but .o;mething cfit'uixt tlhci two. This may appecar at flil fighrt a little mylterlious, and dislicult to be unler;iocd: but, like other things of tllat kind in Plato, when exa- mined to the boLtom, it lhas a very clear meanilg, and explains the nature of opi- nion very well: for, as he lfays, every man Lhat opincs mufl opineJoriic:hi,g. 'The Iib- jel of opinion, thcreforc, is not otJbilr;,at
at the fame time, it is not the thiig itse/f, Ch. 8. but something betwixt the two.,There is a difference also betwixt fcicnce and opinion in the dicrtfiis menlis, or the cornbination and comparison of ideas, as well as with refpea to the simple ideas. But to treat of this would carry me too far from my present purpose .,* These ideas of Plato being the fibjeas of science, are, in the languaIge of Ariltollc's philofiphy, thle s' »or,, that is, tie or oj' of intellefi, or of that faculty of the human mind which, in the proper lense of the word, is called v,; by which, not general conceptions only are formed, but perlea ideas, foch as contain the nature and efince of things. The conclusions from thence de- duced with demonltrative certainty by the difctirfis men- Iis, make what the Greek philosophy calls ;srun,, and which we may express in Englifli by the word science. And now it is eals' to explain the whoole of the dcfinition of nan, of which before I explained only a part. The dcfinition is, ?.Ay.ov , oY xYaKi i;nsl ir .lx71oY, tihat is, a ra- tional animal, capable of intellcl and j'irence. By thle fir part of the definition, as I have already observed, is cx- pressed that faculty of comparison which is the foundation of our rational nature; for x;icr, as I have flewn, in its proper signification denotes cmrilarifon, though it is com- monly used to denote all the operations of intellet, and intellell itJc.f Of this conparativ: faculty the animal mull be in airtal pofleffion, that is, he mull be ,0, A.O)IxOY, otherwise he is not a man. But as to intcllci, by which we form perfeic ideas, or definitions of things, and that difculfiu ventis which fcicnce requires, the capacity of thcle two is all that is required to conflitute a man.,CHAP.
C H A P. IX. Of Plato's peculiar notion concerning the ex-,iflence of Ideas. - The opinion of jome mo- dern philosophers upon that fibje7. Ch. 9. T H E dodrine of ideas, as I have deli-,N' vered it, is taken from the Peripate-,tic school. I have flewn at the fame time, that, with refpea to the formation of them by the human mind, Plato does not differ from Aristotle. But I mentioned a peculiar opinion of Plato concerning i- dcas, which it is poflible the curious read- er, if he does not already know, may de- fire to know; and which therefore, as be- longing to the subjed we are now treat- ing, I will endeavour to explain.,Plato's opinion then is, that his ideas, though the human mind comes to the knowledge of them in the way I have de- fcribed, have a real existence by thenf/elves out of our minds, and out of the mind of any other intelligence, being incorporeal JifbJtances, not accidents or qualities of any,other
other fubltance; that they are by their Ch. 9. nature eternal and unchangeable; and it is by participation of them that every thing is denominated to be what it is. An individual man, e. g. by the participation of the idea of man, is that animal, and no other, and is called by that name ". What the nature of this participation is, or how it is to be conceived that one simple indi- visible idea (for such they all are according to Plato), existing as a substance by it- self, should mix and incorporate with so many different masses of matter, and yet still preserve the unity and indivifibi- lity of its nature, is one of the mysteries of the Platonic philosophy, which neither lie, nor any of his followers, fb far as I know, have ever explained.,This opinion appears so extraordinary, that I have known some learned men, very much conversant in the writings of Plato, who could not believe that this was really his opinion. But that he did truly hold such opinion, is to me evident: ifl, From,* The idea of man, in the language of the Platonic philosophy, is cal;cd ain-o .a:r, that is, man its f, or the real man; while the corporealman is only 'p;rc;, or rim- ply man.,his
Ch. 9. his own writings; particularly, the!Phile-,bis, which I quoted above, the Sophifla, and the Parmenides; in which last he treats professedly of ideas, and of the one, and flates several different opinions concern- ing them. And indeed, as I iaid :before, this doctrine of ideas runs through his whole philosophy, and is hardly ever out of his view: so that it is not from a single passage that we collect this opinion, but from the whole firain of his writings.,2dly, If there were any doubt as to Pla- to's meaning, or if we could fiuppofe that *it was not his own opinion, but only-put into the mouth of the interlocutors in his dialogues, and maintained, by way of ar- .gument, as he maintains several things which he certainly did not believe- him- self, we have the testimony of his scholar Ariflotle; who has told us, in the most express terms, that his opinion was such .as I have flated it; and not only so, -but he has bellowed the greatest pains, and employed all the acuteness of his genius, and all the fibtlety of his logic, in refu- ting it; and this not in one place only, but in many passages both of his Mletaphy- fcs and Phifics, and even in his Ethics;,where
where he makes an apology for differing Ch. 9. from a man for whom he had so great a regard ". In llort, it appears from the writings of Aristotle, that this was the chief ground of that diffircnce of opinion, which, it is well known, was betwixt him and his matler. I know there are fitom who think,) that Aristotle has often mifre- prcfcnted the opinions of other philofo- phlers, that he might have the pleasure of refuting them, and exposing their absurdity; and, among others, his com- mentator liuloponus is of that opi- nion -. But whatever friccdom he might have usid with the opinions of more antient 1)llilolophers, we can hardly be- lieve that he would have ventured to mif- reprelsnt the opinion of his own mai'er,* Ethic. ad Nico. iit. i. cap /. 4. t This pa.l.tgc is to be found in Philkponut's Commecn- tary upon Ariflotle's third book of Gnceral Physics, or, De naturali alThiuli'.sitn. , where Ariflotle rleftcs ano- ther opinion of Plato, .Ibout twoinfinites. There Philo- ponus plainly ltys, that Ariflotle aflecas to miflnderiland Plato, and refutes his words, not his meaning; and he adds, that this was a common praaice of his with relpc&l to the antient philosophers. Ki.; 1-TS --w ,*.USITI ; O IYa,S 5r.OwTt 7rat' \" 7o fx.EuIfm k ;Ly , Uv .; W 71Y iRVOWYa V TJ 4X.,air,. A molt grievous charge againll his candour, by a disciple too of his school, and one who, in other re- fpeeis, was his great admirer,,VOL. I 0 Plato%
Ch. 9. Plato, which must have been well known,to many others. But besides, he has not only told us, that this was the opinion of Plato, but he has also given us a probable enough account how he came to form it. He had learned, fays he, when he was very young, from some disciples of Hera- clitus with whom lie converted, that all material things were in a perpetual flux; and therefore that there could be no science or distinCt comprehension of them: and this always continued to be his opi- nian. Afterwards he became the scholar of Socrates, whose philosophy was entire- ly confined to morals, but who firfl at- tempted, fays our author, to define and investigate generals. This Pilato learned from him ; but perceiving that there could be neither definition nor icience of the ob- jects of fcnle, for the reafbn jufl' now mentioned, and thinking it was necellary that the fltbjcts of fciencc fllould'be some- thing fixed and pernlanent, he therefore introduccd h/lcas, whichl he conceivcd to be cternal and unchangeable, and to have an cxistence by themnflvcs, indepcndtet of all material thi;a s -.,t ,Ma i^c,,/Af. l. 6. cap. i.,* But
But, 3dl)', Suppose that we fllould re- Ch. 9. jest the authority of Aristotle altogether in this matter, the fame Philoponus, who has accuscd this philosopher of miifrepre- senting the opinions of antient philofo- phers, has himself flated the opinion of Plato to be such as Aristotle has represent- ed it. For in his commentary upon the fccond book of Aristotle's Physics, speak- ing of ideas, or forms separated from all matter ', he fays, they are either, accor- ding to Plato, substances, having a fepa- rate existence by themselves -1-, or they are forms existing only in the mind of the creator 1'; which was the opinion of A- riftotlc.,i£/7)', This opinion concerning ideas, was also the opinion of the Pythagorcans;,:' X',plr= 'n, that is what Mr H-arris calls prcevios forms, in contradillinflion to forms exilling either in ma- terial filbftances, or abitraqed /f.oiz then by our under- sanding.,t 'Aura ya5' dur= r~4'rcr. .. Plhiloponus's exprellion is, Ac,i i N; ' reepr; for in- deritanding whichl, vwe are to know, that in the lan- guage of Aritlotle's pliloliphy, the thing exilting I.Y, .x, that is, exilli;i:n .:tcr:!II', was only called 'ri,; but the idea of it was no nmore than the 7.-c ri; r c,;, or .mpl!y .'yo;.,'0 2 from
Ch. 9. from whom Plato took almost his whole,philofbophy, and particularly, as it ap- pears, his doIrinc of ideas: for in that genuine piece of Pythagorean philosophy yet preierved to us, I mean the trcatife of Timeus the Locrian, De aninmo mundi, i- deas are mentioned as one of the three principles of things '-; and, as I had oc- cafion to obfcrve before, it was from the Ichool of Pythagoras that Plato borrowed the term idea, which is now become so common a word in the Englilh language. Further, there is a remarkable paflige in Simplicius's commentary upon the first book of Aristotle's Phdfics, which Ihowsj that the dotrine of ideas made an essential part of the Theology of the Pythagoreans: for they not only maintained, that they existcd separately by themselves, but they made them to be a part of the divine na- ture; which they underflood to be three- fold, confifling of so many ones orpeeions, as we may call tlhem. "L Thef iif oe was,' The three principles are, the idea, the maller, and the boisd, falling under the fcnfes, which is the produce of the two sirs(. The words are, T; Ss v.,:raTal ;avy itAg t S Src l i 9T'10V r.VRI Ti 'iusr,) ini i!o,," of
6( of transcendent excellency, above all Ch. 9. " entity andj fbftance. Thefecond was ideas, -.J "that is, intelligible things, which have "a real and true exiflence. The third " was animal ife, or spirit, as we may call "it, participating of the -firl one and of "ideas." If Simplicius delivered this up- on his own authority only, we miglltjuft- ly doubt of it; but he quotes for it one Moderatus, a philosopher who appears to have given the best account of the dodrincs of Pythagoras, and who for that reason is frequently quoted by Porphyry in his life of Pythagoras. Simplicius gives us the very words of this philosopher, which I have transcribed below '.,I 'OvT Rap, (meaning MoAtrntuIs), YTrCs TwY neul)otuipr Ti r;v Ep V TO7rv sV Utp T ra s :I; a: ra T Wlv b aC oa;ivirTai TOs. Jit jruTpor iV, Srp ;r TO £vT'c 30 rO a iww loTv, T5 dSIn , l;rv Xn1I' TO St TpITO7V) Gp Ir isX'I 7.y, rETui TV ;M X; 1 T;» ,r., fl. 50. This passage plainly fllews, that Plato took from the Pythagoreans, not only his doArine of idea, but his Mieology, and particularly his notion of the Trinity in the divine nature, which I took occasion to mention in a former note. This notion ap- pears to me to be as antient as any thing in the Greek philofoply, and very probably was brought by Pythago- ras fiom Egypt wilh the reft of his philofoplhy. Those who are learned in the Hebrew, and the books *f Al0fis, may perhaps find the Platonic doctrine of i-,deas
Cl. 9 I have dwelt the longer upon this differ-,ence betwixt Plato and his ifcholar, that many authors, both antient and modern, have laboured much to prove, that thcre was really no difference betwixt them: but however iiiccefsful they may have been in reconciling them upon other points, they are, I think, clearly irreconcileable with refped to ideas.,The very reverse of this opinion of Pla- to is the notion of certain philosophers of our own time concerning ideas. For as Plato maintains, that ideas are fubftanccs, which have a separate existence by them- selves out of any mind, there philofo- phers, on the other hand, aLTert, that they have no existence at all, not even in the mind; that all our conceptions are per- ceptions of sense, being nothing else but ileas in that palfage of the second chapter of Gncfis, xwhere it is said, That God made every plant i the field be- fore it wan in the earth, and every herb in te field befsre it grew ; which I think can hardly be underftond but of the ideas of such plants and herbs. And the fame learn- ed men may also find some connetion betwixt that ,water which Simplicius, in the fame book, fol. I. fays the E- gyptians made the symbol of thefirJ mnatter, and that decp, and tbhfie 'waters, upon which Mers flys the Spirit of God moved when the world was created.,imlpi'qe/;ms
ivpre.ionis made upon the mind by ex- Ch. 9. ternal objects, through the medium of the organs ofienfc. These impreflions being preserved in the ummory, are what we call ideas; which therefore arc nothing but fainter perceptions of sense. This doctrine was first advanced by Dr Berkeley, Bifihop of Cloyne, and afterwards sup- ported, and much enlarged upon, by a later philofophcr, in a work intitled, A treatit of HIuman 1Amturee; to which, as he has not put his name, nor ever publicly acknowledged it, so far as I know, I think he is intitled not to be named. That this late writer, who profelees the sceptical philosophy, and whose intention appears to be, to overturn all science and cvidence of every kind, fiould be fond of a doc- trine that suits so well with his purpose, is no wonder at all: but I do wonder that Dr Berkeley, vwhofe intentions were cer- tainly good, however erroneous his philo- sophy may be, flould have advanced it; more especially as it does not appear to me to have any conneciion with his favourite doctrine of the nonexijlence of matter, which he maintained with the pious design of griking at the very root of AtheijiX, then,entirely
Ch. 9. entirely founded iUpon the doctrine of ."- materialjfi. For he thought, that if he,could flew, that matter did not exist, it would follow of necessary consequence, that there was nothing in the universe but mind; not foreseeing, that a philosopher was to arise, who flhould deny the existence of mind as well as body.,The consequence of the opinion of there gentlemen concerning ideas certainly is, that there is no science, demonstration, nor general truth of any kind; nay, 'there cannot be so much as a general propofi- tion, nor indeed any proposition, as one term at least of a proposition niuft be a general term, exprelling some general iotion. If, therefore, these gentlemen are in the right, there is an end of all belief in' reli- gion, morals, philosophy, or fcicnce of any kind. 2dly, There is no such faculty of the human mind as intellec?; the !buifi- nces of which, as we have flewn, is, to abftrat, and to confider separately, what is joined in nature, and in that wAy is presented to the senses. For if we clave no perception of things in any other way, it is evident, that we have no intellec, nor any thing befidesfieye, memory, and imagi-,miatioah
aition. These are all the powers of human Ch. 9. nature, according to thole philofbphers; and thcif the l)rutes pollsi as well as we. So that this philosophy, at the fame time that it deflroys all Icience and certainty of every kind, degrades us to a level with the brute, by itripping us of that intellea which, by the anticnt philosophers, was thought to be the difilnguilhing characte- rinfic of human nature.,As this philosophy leads to such alarm- ing conlfequences, and is entirely iubver- five of the theory which I have endeavour- cd to efablilh, that the mind operates by itself, without the afliftance of Jr, antd consequently deflroys altogether the dif- tintion that I have been at so much pains to ePfablifl betwvixt perceptions of Jfin'/ and ideas, I mufc flop to conider it a little more particularly. And, firl , I would alk there gentlemen, whether theiir propo- fition be general, that no such ideas as I suppose, cxift at all in any mind or intel- ligence ? or do they only maintain, that they exiic not in the human mind ? The first of tlhfc pro positions, I am persuadcd Dr Berkeley at leait did not mean to as'er, though he has ex.-rceiTed himself in much,VOL. I. P1 too
Ch. 9. too general terms: for he certainly belie-,- ved .that there exists aj;fipledie mildm; . and if,io, he could not believe that this mind perceived by organs of fenle, and had no other perceptions.,But without cntering into such high me- taphyfical (liflquitions, let us confine our- ielves to man, and inquire, whether in his mind there arc any such ideas. Now. this appears to mc to be truly a question of;facd, VWhether does man acually divide, abIf tracd, and gencralifc, in the manner I have described ? or does he confider things in no other way than as they are prelcnt- ed to him by the senses? If therefore it be a quetion of fad, every m;n's con- i'ciouicels of what pafies in his ow.n mind mutl determine it. Now 1 afLk any man of fcicnce, (for I admit it is only such that form an idea icrtfeLi), Whethcr he can- not fenarate and abll'ac any particular property of any f sl.je°: fi'om its other pro- perties, and make that property 'the ob- jec of the mind's contcmpla-ion by itself? whether !he cannot conceive that qualitysas exitling in many other fubjeds ? and, laitly, whether he cannot confider ihat whichlthofe several fi.bjedts have in com-,mon,
mlon, laving arfde the co;ildcration of Ch. 9. what may beloag to each of theml in par- ticular ? 1 ak, a geometer, e.g. Whethcr h3e cannot f1parat; that plroperty of a figure of bcing bounded by three lines, from a- ny other property belonging to the figulre and contider that properyy by itflif? whe- ther he cannot perceive that iicii a pro- perty belongs to many other figures ? and vlhether be cannot confider this commion property by itsel, witfhout taking into his consideration the particular properties of each figure ? whether he cannot reason uip- on this commc:n nature of a triangle, without conflicring any other qualiiy which may belong to it ? and whether it vould nor be the gcreate c dceic in a gCo- meter, andi fuci as would render him ut- terly incapable ever to attain to any the leait degree of excellcnce in the fcicnce, if he could not conceive and argue about a triangle in general, without imbarrailing his thoughts, by coildcring whether it was of wmood or of mnetal, whcthler it was vlite or black, whether ifo!'eles or scale- lumi. Or without appealing to a man of science, I al: any common mlan, Whether he cannot oblsrve, speak, and. reafbn, a-,.P bout
Ch. 9. bout the length of the room where he fits,,without taking 'into his consideration its breadth or height, or what the finifling is, whethcr wainscot or plaicer ? whether he cannot observe the size or figure 'of any animal or vegetable, without confidering its other qualities ? If these, and such like queltions, must be answered in the affir- mative, as I think they mulf be, then it is decided by common obflrvation and exi perience, that the human mind must at leafi have the faculty of abliraclion; 'and that it is not so nmuch under the dominion of ficnfe, that it nutt necefcarily contem- plate every objed as prelaentel to it by the ienfe, but can exert a power flpcrcior to ienle, by icparating andl divi(ling those things which icnfc prellnts only in the lump.,Thle latter writer . have mentioned, ad- mits the fat to be as I have stated it; and acknowledges, that the mind, in con- templating any individual object of sense, can lay ;a!le the consideration of the 'q:a2- litics peculiar to thati objcit, and Icofider only thoSe which it has in common with others of the fa.rn kind: and to there common qualities so confdlcrcd by! the,mind,
mind, we affix, fays he, a name, which Ch. 9. he admits to be a general term for all things of that kind, and to fland for them, in speaking and writing; as, e.g. I fee a three-fided figure upon the paper, and this is an objed which I perceive by my sense of fight. Now, fays he, I can lay aside the consideration of the white paper, the black lines, and I can also throw out of my view, whether it be a great or finall figure, right-angled, acute or obtuse angled, and can confider only its quality of being a plain figure, bounded by three firaight lines, to which I give the name of triagle ; and this is a general term, ap- plicable to all plain figures bounded by three right lines, without any other addi- tional circumstance.,Now I lhould desire to know, whether the idea described by this writer is not pre- cifily what other philosophers call an abf- tr:ac idea ? 2dly, I would ask, this gentle- man,: by what faculty of the mind this discrimination of the qualities of a triangle is performed, so that some of them are made the oLjects of the mind's contempla- tiorn, while others of them are set out of its:ighit ? He will not filrely fay it is
Ch. 9. sense; because fiefd discriminates nothi'ng,,but without diftinLtion perceives every quality of an object that is presented to it, not confidering whether it be common' to the kind, or peculiar to the individual. Neither is it imagination; which is nothing else but a weaker sensation. It is evident, therefore, that it mufi he Tome faculty dif- ferent from either of these two, and this faculty is what I call inttellel; unless it could be flewn, that there is any faculty of the human mind by which it perceives or knows any thing, other than sense, i- magination, and intellect.,It is said by this writer, That the triangle upon the paper is truly the triangle which is perceived by the mind, but it is confi- dered as reprefentinig all other triangles. But this appears to me to be playing with words, and speaking in figure and meta- phor, not with philosophical propriety and exadlnefs. For what is meant by the word repsrefentilg ? If it signifies, that the triangle upon the paper stands for a sign of the idea of triangle, in the fame manner that the word trialgle does in speaking, it is admitted. If, on the other hand, it is meant, that tl:e triangle upon the paper,is,
is the exat image of the triangle in the Ch. 9. mind, it is denied. For how can a tri- angle, that must of necessity be either right- angled, acute or obtuse angled, repre- sent in that sense a triangle which this writer allows to be confidered by the mind without any of those qualities ?,The diagrams, however, used by geo- meters in dcmon(lrating their propositions, may poflibly have led those gentlemen into so grpfs an error. But they ought to have confidered, that such diagrams are no o- ther thanJi'ns of ideas, and that it is the weakness of our intellec which obliges us to take that affiltance from sense. And ac- cordingly we fee, that men who are far advanced in the science, can go through long demonstrations without such aflift- ancc; and though we do not posiess, we may at least conceive fich a degree of in- tellect, as to have no need of such material signs or 1'mbols, but to be able to con- verse. with the pure intelleccual forms themselves. But even in our present slate, to argue, that becausc we use signs of i- deas, therefore we have no ideas, is the fame thing as if one llhould argue, that be- cause we use another fort of signs, namely,founds,
Ch. 9. founds, therefore we have no conceptions,but of founds. Now the fadt is so far o- therwife, that when we hear or read any thing attentively, we do not at all attend to the founds, letters, or words, but only to the things signified by them.,The arguments they use, tend chiefly to prove, that ideas have no real ex/flence, and that they cannot be apprehended either by sense 'or imagination: for who can per- ceive, by the sense or figure in his imagi- nation, a triangle, e. g. that is neither e- quilateral, isosceles, nor fcalenum? But this is arguing against the ideas of Plato, not those of Aristotle. And in this way the antient philosophers, and particular- ly Sextus Empiricus :, the great defender,of * This writer is of later times, having lived, as I con- jeAurc, in the age of the Aton;r:es; but there are very few writers of the bell times that exceed him in' puri- ty or elegance of lyle : and I would advile all our fcep- tical writers to study him diligently, not only for the im- provement of theirfiyle, if they happen to underfland the original, (or if they do not, there is a very good Latin translation of him), but of their matter ; for there is as great copioufinefs of argument in him as in any writer I know. I would alol advise such of them as write ngainst the Chriflian religion, to study Julian the Emperor's work of that kind, prcferved to us by one of the fathers,o s
of the Sceptic philosophy, has argued a- Ch. o, gainlt abhlrac iJl.us, , noc (enlyi!Li their ex- iftencc in the human min., but mainhain- illg, that i; was imnolibi' tihey could rellyr cxxi f iil ;itu,. Ai.! i dci, i; tIoc phiioo pheis h.ad entered a lie more ilto ;lai ;mi:;c;nt controvcirf , aa.l known per- "e y t''e d'i.rc:-ce b[tniX[ thoic two kinds of ideas;, thvy never would have fuapoied, tliat thie ieacs o-0Arilotilc, which are the o)nraioni ot' niini ale, could c'- ill any. whllre cfe but in the mind, or be perceived v til>e :; .fc, oir i''ijurl l y the il.nar,'. l .., .-:';, iO-reC than mind itself. And io i'muchi i'O tilis Itl'rane opilion con- cerning icdas, wh!ich :tpe.'.rs to me to be entirely new, and uniupiorted by any authority, antient or modern, and as re- pugnant to Ibund pilo y s to coim- mon underlfiading. I will only axl, that the philoiolphy oil'r Loclk appeais to me to have led into this as well as into other errors: for fom the way in which he talls of the church, C)Lr'l!:w; who, in sanfwerinlg him, has done his antagoniit the juRice to give us hlis own words. They will there Icarn better arguments, and much more elegantly exprelicd, than any they have ukld. VOL. I, ' Q of
Ch. 9. of abftraft ideas, it would seem he did not,believe that they existed even in the mind. He fays of the abstract idea of a triangle, "That in effect it is somewhat imperfect "that cannot exist, an idea wherein some " parts of several different and inconsistent,ideas are put together '." And accor- dingly Biflhop Berkeley avails himself of this authority friom Mr Locke, in ar- guing against abftrac ideas T. Indeed it is no wonder that a philofoplher, fiich as Mr Locli-, who derives every thing from fenfl a' - matter, and seems to know no- thing beyond tilefe, hculd not believe in the cxiflence of ideas that are altogether the work of mind, operailg by itlilf, wvit:out the afilftance of body.,Bectv.::; tolfc two opinions, so oppo- site, lies the opinion of the Pcripateic fchoo!, which;, it maybe thought, I have expiaind at too great lengla.; and, inflead of a trcati^e upon language, have written a fvfem of the lphilofophy of mind. But it ihould be confiderc(d, that I have under-,*' £ .!; 7 ' ,r. i j':s ]'. :.an Ul;s.1cr/Tan.ig, l,¢.k ., o h, ? e9. t "i:'rsr; 'fr::" , p. 1i;.,taken
taken to give a philosophical account of the Ch. 9. Origin and Progress of Language, which it would have been impoflible for me to give, if I had not entered into the philo- ibphy of mind and ideas; without the knowledge of mhich, the fLudy of lan- guage is the most barren of all studics, beiig that of fondl merely, and therefore unworthy of a philoobphcr or man of science. But further, I hope this inqui- ry into the nature and origin of our ideas yill facilitate the decision of the question which I am to treat of in the next chapter, namely, Whether ideas be the natural growth of the mind, or the fruit of acqui- red habit?,OQ2 CHAP.
C II A 1. X. That ilkas are formiled .y tJ,e .iiii:;, not nalu-,rl//,)', b:l: in eo/ilqcicc (',/ cirlied habit. -General rLJti:,o;Is Iplon the./ "jci. C. io. I Know that the argun.lnt I al now to,maintain, will appear to many a very ungracious argumcnt. Arc we then no bctter originally, they will fay, than the brute bcafis ? and is there then. no natural difference betwixt us and the brute ? To which 1 ant;ser, That no man is more convinced than I, of the superior dignity and excellence of huin-..t n ature, and' the difference betwixt us and the brutes in the {fate we fee them in: and accordilngl- I have been a; g:eat !lains to heCw tiis if- ference, in the .acco.!it that I have given of the operatioils of the hlmanl mind, and to mark the boundaries, as well as I could, betwixt the brute and us; and I have ivery much blamed certain philosophers for firipping lus of that prime faculty which makes the chicef diliinchion betwixt them,and
and us, I mean intellec. But it is no de- C. o. gradation to human nature to maintain, that this faculty is acquired, as well as ma- ny others, which set us so much above the brute, confefnclly are: on the contra- ry, it items to be our praifc, that we owe to our own indufcry and sagacity, not to nature, our chief excellence, while thLy have added little or nothingl to the faculties which nature has bcfto-;.cd upon them. It is enough, I think, for the honour of our species, that our c(apacity, is allowed to be greater, and that we have fiom nature a greater facility in forming habits and ac- quiring facullties that are not born with us. Further than this I cannot, though I. ihould give oftFnce, carry the superiority of our nature above the brute, in the pre- sent state in which both they and we are; (for as to any future or pa t slate of cither, it is beyond the bounds of this work to inquire): nor can I e.xaSly determine how far the brute might be carried by culture and education. Only thus much I think I may fay, that his progress would be much flower, for the reason julf now mentioned; and I think it is likely, that with any cul-,ture
C. e. ttie he would not go so fr. -- But to .-r^'' proceed in our argument:,From the flietch I have given of the ideal world, it appears to be entirely different from the natural. For, in the fijq place, In the ideal world, there is nothing but JaldouyJbolrms, as those would call them who believe that nothing really exists ex- cept what is material; whereas the natural consists of substances, compounded of mat- ter and fo.rm. Seconrdly, The natural world is a composition of infinite variety; of which it is true, in some sense, what the antient philosopher fhid that I quoted a- bove, that all things are mixed wish all; not as in the chaos of the poets, without order or regularity, Frigidc ubi pzt:na;it calidis, bhu:eltiaficcis, livollia curet h:ris,,fine pondere rhabenitia pondus ; but with the most pcr.efc order and regu- larity, though with such a mi:ture in the composition, that almost every thing par- ticipates of every thing, and the most di- ftant extremes run into one another. In the ideal world it is just the reverse: for every thing there is separated and difcri-,minated.
minated from every thing; and it is the C. IO. great business of human intelligence, to un- twist, as it were, this great web of na- ture, and show every thread by itflrf. 7)ird/lr, As the objcus in this world are different from tihof in the natural, so arc the faculties by which we rccogniif thofl objecls: the natural world we perceive by ourJfif/s, the ideal by our intcellt'; two faculties altogether diferent in their na- ture, and manner of operation.,The lafi difference I fiuall obfervc is, that the natural world opens upon us at our birth, at least in tome degree, and our in- fancy and younger years are wholly em- ployed in making difcovcries in it; where- as it is evident, that the ideal world is not discloscd to is till a confidcrable time after our birth ; for at first we are entirely im- merfed in lmatter, and it is only through the medium of sense and matter, as I have shewn, that we enter into this world of ideas .,When * There is ?notller difference, w!hicrh, though not im. mediately belonging to our ul.jdLt, ia well vorth obfer- ving by the philolopher ; and it is this: Thi:t the ideal world, being catircly of cur ovll creation, is, or ought to,be,
C. Io. Whcn I fay this, I would not have it '^ I ebelieved to be rrm opinion, that, however,we are connected with matter at the time of our birth, there is any thing material,,or be, perfectly known to us, so that we fiould be able to define or explain the en;nce of every thing in it; whrea::s in the world nmade by God, we know not thie clc:nce or conllniecnt principles of any thing; for I deny that we can dcline any natural fibltance. Not to lip.elk of the fijl malter of the philo)i)plers, which by all of them is :llowed to be undefine)aole and iiicoimplrchnliible, whliat do we know more of th.)le bodies with wihich we aC e lur- rounded, and arc daily convei;.i:lt, or evci of our ov.n bodies, wvith wh:ich we are so intimately connecred, except certain qu:iities or properties ? But wantt conllilutes the clfcnce of any particular body, or of body in general, no man can tell. The common definition of bod) is, that which hath three dimenfi:ns. But this is telling us no more than that it is bounded in a certain way : and I ask, I'hat is it that is thus bounded ? It is allb defined to be that which refills, or fills place. But Rill I alk, IYhat is it that has this quality of refiflance, or flliinb place? I have already obfcrved, that Euclid, in his definitions, ha;s very properly not meddled witIh face, exteisn.t,, quaniti)., or any other of those uni'i;cfls which arec tile iubject of the lirl, philosophy. I-le has also wilcly ab- ilained from making mention of r,,,a/, or body, even when he defines a solid. For lie tells us, that a lolid is that which hath length, breadth, and ihicknlels, without tell- ing us qvhat it is ; though lie no doubt knew that it was body, and nothing else. But the futbjeA of his 'cience was not that undefineable thing we call body, but only the loutuln.ries of body; which being abflratcd from bo- dy, are treated off by the gcometer. It is therefore no,impeachmen;
or congenial to matter, in the nature of our C. io, mind: for the reader, I hope, by what 'v he has already teen of this work, will not believe that I am addicted to that madphi- loJbphy " which excludes mindll from the fy- flem of nature, and supposes that nothing cxifts but lmatter and motion, governed by blind chance. Far from holding that opi- nion, I do molt firmly 'believe, that there is agoverning mind in the universe, imma;terial, eternal, and unchangeable; that our minds are of a nature congenial to this supreme mind; and that there is in us, even at the time our birth, a portion of those celetial feeds, of which the Latin poet, quitting poetical ficetion, and affu- ming the phlilofopher, divinely sings, 1licus eJt ollis vigor et COELESTIS ORIGO Sedminibus,- But he very properly adds this exception,,at- q iantzl m noit xio.a corpora taridait, Terrenique hebetant a:rt;s, moribundaque mcmbra. impeachment of the ccrtainty of the fcicnce, that Wb4vd v.-i:icl ;s wlnt is collaineJ wilhitn these boundaries, can- not bh definc:.,I,7,,.i;:., Iti, dlm/¥lieti'/ Coulairus erro. .HOR. VOL. I ' R Nov-
C. Io. Now these incumbrances are so great when,we firll come into the world, and the particl e of t ivinity within us, as the an- ticnts chose to call it, is then fb immersed in matter, and imbrtedl, if 1 may so fpcak, that it cannot exert that power of fiel-motion which is peculiar to its nature, but is altogether paflive to material im- pulses, either from external objects, or from its own habitation of clay; I mean, from appetites and feelings arising from the body.,This is the natural state of man when he first appears upon this flage: and the question is, How he undergoes so great a change, as to become, of a creature mere- ly pallive and finfitive, active and intelli- gent ? By what means does lie enter into this intellectual world, so different from the natural, and become, as it were, a new creature ? Is it by nature merely that this metamorplhofib is brought about, as the worm is changed into a butterfly ? or is it by habit which he acquires ? Do not we at first learn to ticnk as we afterwards ac- quire arts and fcz'iecei ? and does not the mind, by flow degrees, and very feeble attempts in the beginning, at last difcn-,gage
gage itself from the intanglemcnts of mat- C. io. ter, and lcain to exert its native power of intellec ?,Before we proceed further in reasoning upon this fhbjed, let us try what is to be learned from fact and experience, begin- ning with the infants of our own species. That they have at firlt no ideas, and but very imperfect fenfiations, is a matter of fad that cannot be denied; and it is as certain that they acquire their ideas, not by nature, as they do their bodily facul- ties, but by infirudion, and by conver- sing with elderly perlons. Now flippofe them deprived of this method oi commu- nication, how long may we ful:pofe that their infancy of mind wvould last ? 1 have been informed of an inflance of a child, who was come to be betwixt eight and nine years of age, and had learned, not only to speak, but to read, and by con- sequence must have had ideas, however imperfect, when he loll his hearing by the small pox, .and continued deaf all his life after. At the age of five and twenty he was put under the care of a mailer, who professes a molt curious art, of which I 'hall have occasion to make frequent men-,R 2 tion
C. 1o. tion afterwards, I mean the art of teach-,in the deaf to speak. This mafler told me, that as he had been much neglected after the loss of his hearing, without the pains being bcftowed upon him that .are commonly bellowed upon deaf persons, he found him, even at that advanced age, almost totally void of ideas, and was ob- liged to teach him to think as well as to speak. Yet this young man had been sup- plied with all the necelfaries of life. But let us suppose that he had had all those necefflrics to furnifi for himfdlf, can we believe, that if he had been so employed, he ever would have learned to think, or have become a rational creature, even sup- posing that he had lived in company with such as himself ?,In order to form a right judgement of this matter, let us confider the slate of frt- vage and barbarous nations. Those who have fludied the history of man, not of par- ticular nations only, that is, have fludied history in the liberal and extensive view of difcovcring the nature of man, from fact and experience, know very well, that all nations, even the molt polilhed and ci- vilized, of which we read in history, were,originally
originally barbarians; and as all the ve- C. Io. getables, such as the vine and olive, which ',v are now cultivated and improved by art, and in like manner the brute animals, that are tamed, were at first wild; so likewise man himself was originally a wild savage animal, till he was tamed, and, as I may fay, lhuimanized, by civility and arts. Who- ever, therefore, would trace human nature up to its source, murf study very diligent- ly the manners of barbarous nations, in- flead of forming theories of man from what he obfcrvcs among civilized nations. Whe- ther we can, in that way, trace man up to what I tfppofe his original tfate to have been, may perhaps be doubted; but it is certain we can come very near it: for we are sure, that there have been in the world, and are lill, herds of men (for they do not dcf'cve the name of nations) living in a state almost entirely brutifi, and indeed in some refpecds more wild than that of certain brutes, as they have neither government nor arts'-. Some of them who are advanced the length of ci- vil society and language, have neverthe-,: Of such nations more will be Laid in the lequel.,less
C. Io. lets ideas exceedingly imperfeT: for tho' '^'' tthey have general notions, wichout which,there could be no language, they can hardly be said to have abltradled ideas, as lhall be shewn when we come to ifeak of the barbarous languages. From such be- ginnings, however, men proceed to form diftinc' ideas; then they advance to arts and sciences, and so on to refinement and politeness. Now where-ever there is a progress, there must be a beginning; and the beginning in this cafe can be no other than the mere animal: for in tracing back the progress, where else can we flop ? If we have discovered tb many links of the chain, we are at liberty to suppose the reft, and conclude, 'that the beginning of it mull hold of that common nature which connects us with the reft of the a- nimal creation.,From savage men we are naturally led to confider the condition of the brutes; betwixt whom and the savages there is such a resemblance, that there are many who will hardly admit of any difference; and even betwixt us and them at the time of our birth, and for some considerable time after, there is not, as I have already,observed.,*t-
observed, any material difference. The C. io. mind of the brute (ib I call the inward principle in him that governs his mo- tions and actions) is iniiparably connet- ed with his body, and bound in the chains of matter, in the fame manner that we are when we firit come into tle world. And accordingly, in the firlt operations of our mind, we sec the very fame pro- cess: for they have the fame perceptions of sense that we have; they preserve those perceptions in their lmemlory or imagina- tion; and they have allb, as well as we, a notion of JiamcneJs, like-nfi, or divefjity, in the objeds of sense; and they recognise the /ppecis in the individual, as readily as our children do. Does not thi5 plainly indicate, that there is no natural difference betwixt our minds and theirs, and that the superiority we have over them is adventi- tious, and fiom acquiredr habit ? How far the brute might go in that way, we have no fufiicient experience to determine with any certainty. If we can believe some flories told of them, and by philosophers too, we cannot deny their capacity of ac- quiring the habit, not only of forming i- deas, but of comparing themi together;,that
C. Io. that is, of reasoning. The story told by " IJ Mr Locke of the Brazil parrot belonging,to Prince Maurice of Nassau, is well known. And Porphyry, the greatePt philofc- pher, as well as best writer of his age, relates, that crows and magpyes, and parrots, (and another bird that he calls is,0,ws), were taught in his time, not only to imitate human speech, but to attend to what was told them, and to remember it; and many of them, fays he, have learned to inform against those whom they saw doing any mischief in the house. And he himself, he fays, tamed a par- tridge that he found fomie where about Carthage, to fuich a degree, that it not only plaed and fondled with him, but answered him when he spoke to it, in a voice different from that in which the par- tridges call one another; but was -o well bred, that it never made this noise but when it was spoken to ". And in this work he maintains, that all animals who have sense and memory are capable of rea- son: and this, he fays, is not only his opinion, but that of the Pythagoreans 'i-;,Porphj'r. De AJflin. lib. 3. cap, 4. ii. cap. 1.,the
the greatest philosophers, in my opinion, C. Io. that ever existed, next to the mailers of their matter, I mean the Egyptian prieits. And he adds, that besides the Pythago- reans, Plato, Ariflotle, Empedocles, and Democritus, were of the fame opinion. One thing cannot be denied, that their na- tures may be very much improved by use and inftrudion, by which they may be made to do things that are really wonder- ful, and far exceeding their natural power of inftint. There is a man in England at present, who has pradifed more upon them, and with greater success, than I believe any body living ; and he fays, as I am informed, that if they lived long e- nough, and pains sufficient were taken up- on them, it is impoflible to fay to what lengths some of them might be carried; for there is a great difference among them, as well as us, in docility and natural ca-. pacity.,But allowing, that in these two refpeAs we are superior to all the brute creation, and that we can go farther than the brute with any culture can go, this is faying no,* Pcrplyr. De A4itin, lib, 3. cap. 6. inifnic. VOL. I. ' more
C. Io. more than what I have already said, that,we have by nature greater capabilities than they, and a greater facility of form- ing and improving habits; but I deny that there is any other difference betwixt us and them. We are for a time, like them, im- merled in matter,,- iclifi tenebris et carcere ceco.,VI RG. En. 6. Like them we acquire faculties, and inl- prove our nature by use and inftrution. Where then lhould the difference be but where I have placed it ? The maturity of age, we fee, makes no such alteration up- on their mind, as to take it out of the na- tural state: it does no more than give greater flrengtl to their bodies, and the perfed use of their cnifes; and perhaps by use and experience it may improve their inftind. What rcafons, or what 'sacs, can induce us to believe, that it fiould have any other effec upon us, so that when we come to a certain time of life, we ihould instantly burst our prison of fefll and blood, and be transformed in a moment into rational creatures, with- out any use or inltrudion, or previous la-,bit
bit acquired ? It is certainly much more C. Io. probable, and more agreeable to the ana- logy of nature, and the progress which we observe in our iifecies, from a state little better than that of the vegetable, to iuppofe, that we acquire ideas, as we do the arts and sciences, that are founded up- on them; and that as Nature has not gi- ven us the one, so she has not given us the other; and for the fame reason, namely, that we have the capacity of ac- quiring both: for Nature is always fiu- gal in her gifts; nor is lhe in any other instance so profufc, as to bellow upon one and the fame animal, both the capacity of acquiring any faculty, and the acual poflbfeion of that faculty.,S C H A P.
C I A P. XI. Continuation of the frbje. -- Ideas of Re- JleCioin not fromn Nature. C. I . IN order to examine this question more %v' - closely, we must go back to the division,that I have made of ideas, into those of ex- ternal objets, and those of the operations of our own mind, or, as Mr Locke calls them, ideas of refeflion. In forming the ideas of either kind, we may be said to fludy and investigate the nature of things; for we discover, in things of which we form the idea, that common nature which binds them together, and contfitutes the genus or species under which we recog- nife them. By the ideas, therefore, form- ed from the perceptions of sense, we in- vefligate the nature of external objets; by ideas of refledion, we fludy ourselves, and discover the nature of our mind, and its operations. The question then is, Whether those reflex ads of the mind by which this discovery is made, are the,mero
mere operation of nature ? or whether this C. I i. faculty of reflecion is not acquired by use and exercise, like other faculties belong- ing to our nature ?,In order to decide this question, we must confider the fiate of savages; who, as I have observed, are so much nearer the natural tfate of man than we, that it is fiom them only that we can form any idea of the original nature of man: and I will ventureto affirm, that any man who attempts to form a system of human nature from what he observes aimong civilized nations only, will produce a system, not of na-. ture, but of art; and instead of the natu- ral man, the workmanihip of God, will exhibit an artificial creature of humlan infli- tution *. Now though we flould suppose,,Sec Mlcnf. Rottrau, in his Trealife on the ineiquality /f Men, where he ridicules the folly of those who think they understand human nature, because they know the sharaaer and manners of their own nation, and perhaps some of the neighbouring nations, and very wifely tell us, that man is the fame in all ages and all nations. I am very happy to find, that my notions, both with refpea to the original state of human nature, and the o- rigin of language, agree so perfectly with the notions of an author of so much genius, and original thought, as well as learning.,that
C. 1. that the mere savages, employed altoge-,ther either in gratifying their natural ap- petites, or procuring the means of such gratification; wanting that leisure, and that affiitance to knowledge, which civil society affords to fpcculative men; without curio- fity also, or any desire of knowledge, which is known to be the character of all savages, would nevertheless apply themfclves to the study of things without them; is it poflible to suppose, that they would turn their eyes inward, and carry their philosophy so far as to tludy their own natures ? If we can filppofe them to do this by nature merely, we may likewise suppose that they will, in the fame way, invent all artsand fcienccs; for ideas are the foundation of all arts and sciences, which cannot exist without definitions; and tlicie, as we have fllewn, are nothing else but perfedl ideas of the things defined, which necessarily mufl be preceded in order of tiime by ideas less perfec: And particularly of this most useful of all fcicnccs, the fciencc of man, the ground-work are the ideas of reflection, of which we arc now ipeaking.,Not only is uich a supposition altogether absurd in theorz', but infac? it appears, as,much
much as such a fad can be known, that C. 1 i. savages have no such ideas. For even such of them as have formed themselves into society, and have got the ufc of language, and of other arts, have hardly any words to express the operations of mind. And in all languages, cvcn those the most cul- tivated, the words of that kind are meta- phors borrowed fiom the objects of sense* . Now as it is by language that we trace, with the greatest certainty, the progress of the human mind, it is evident, that i- deas of reflection must have come only in process of time, and after ideas of exter- nal things were not only formed, but had got a name. We must therefore confider this kind of ideas, not as the firll ftep of the progress of thc. human mind towards fcicnce and philofoplhy; so that if we are at liberty to suppose it to be the work of nature, we cannot stop, but mult likcwife suppose every other ftep, and the arts and sciences themselves, to be the work of na- ture, and nothing at all to be produced by vcquircd habit.,It may be objected, That coijcio7fnefs is : This, I think, is an obifrvation of Mr Locke.,held
C. I. held by all philosophers to be essential to i^J human nature; so that if a man is not con-,fcious of what he does, he does not de- serve the appellation of a human creature. Now if a man knows that he thinks, deli- berates, clhi/es, &c. he must necefarily have the idea of thinking, deliberation, &c.; and these are ideas of reflection.,To this I answer, it, That those philo- fophers who suppose, that coflzomtjizefs is efiential to human nature, are such as I mentioned before, who have formed their fyftens of man from what they observe a- mong us; and because they fee that all men in this country are rational, they conclude that man was always so; and that our forefathers, inhabiting the woods two. or three thousand years ago, were men in that refpcd as well as we. But this is plainly begging the question. For I deny, that in the natural slate, and previous to any acquired habit, there is any difference with refpead to mental faculties betwixt us and the brute, to whom I suppose those philosophers will not allow the privilege of confciouheefs. Further, I fay, that after man has raised himself so far above the brute, as to form ideas of external things,,be
he may be long in that state before he has C. I. any coJfciou/iefs, or k:nowledge of his own operations. For even among us, nothing is more true than the common faying, That we often ac without reflecion, or knowing what e are ardoing, going on in a course of acion, sometimes for a confi- derable time, without any reflex act of the mind upon itself. But, 2d/y, I an- fiver, Suppose that a man is conscious of one single thought, he has not therefore tie idea of thinking, any more than a man that has the perception of any one external object, has the idea of that ob- ject; since an idea is of that which is com- mon to many things, not belonging to one only.,VOL.. T CHAP.
C H A P. XII. That Ideas of external Objec7s are not fromn,Nature. C. 12. CO far, therefore, we have proceeded in,this argument, as to be able to affirm, with great certainty, that the reflex aSi of the mind upon itself, by which it is con- fcious of its own operations, is not from nature. Here then is one class of ideas which must be produced by acquired habit; and this creates at least a presumption, that the other set of ideas is to be derived from the fame source: for in that way the sy{sem of the human mind will be much more uniform and consistent, than if we were to divide the matter, and suppose that one class of ideas arose from nature, and the other from acquired habit. Both, according to my hypothesis, are from the laft-mentioned source; and nature has done no more than to furnifl the mate- rials, I mean the perceptions of sense; from which are derived, mediately or im- mediately, both classes of ideas.,But
But to come closer to the point,-it C. 12, will be necessary, for the decision of this question, that the reader should recollec what we have said concerning the nature of the intelleclual world, and the forma- tion ofthofe ideas which constitute it. We have seen how different in every refpec it isfrom the natural; we have seen how we come by the knowledge of this last; and the question is, How the intellectual is dif- closed to us ? To suppose that there is a- ny secret communication betwixt our minds and superior minds, by which it is revealed to us, is a kind of visionary and enthufiaitical philosophy that is now alto- gether exploded. The sac truly is, that every man is the architect of his own i- deas, and forms a little intellectual world in his own mind.,How artificial the operation is by which he does so, we have endeavoured to ex- plain: and indeed it may in some sense be said to be an unnatural operation, if we confider that every thing here below con- sifts of matter andform joined together. It is from this compound we receive our first impressions; and it is with it only that, in our natural state, we are conversant.,T To;
C. 12. To separate, therefore, matter fiom form, ?-. as we do in framing ideas, may be said,to be an unnatural operation, since it is d.;sjoiniln what nalture has joined. And it must appear still more unnatural and ar- tificial, if we further confider how long we were accullomed to view this com- pound in its natural slate, before we be- gan to make so violent an abd,)racion. This must make the operation at firit most painful and laborious. It appears indeed easy to us, who are accuftomred to it, by. insensible degrees, froml our early years, and allifted by inflrulion, and convcrfa- tion with those who had already formed the habit. But the philofolpher, who can carry himself back to the firll ages of the world, mull be convinced, that to a fia- vage, nothing could be more difficult, tlha; an operation, by which he learns to think in a way so different from that to whicli he had been accultomed. Even the vulgar, among us, though they have the advan- tage of being educated amlong thinking and fpcaking men, make this ahflracaion of the matter from the firm very clumsily, and, if I may he allowed to use the ex- preflipnl, leave always some of the matter,Jlicking~
Jlicking to the form. But how much more C. 12. clumsily, and with how much more dif- ficulty, must it be performed by the rude untaught savage ?,Can we then suppose, that so unnatural an operation is the work of nature ? or that what is performed with so much difficulty is a natural energy ? The operations of nature, we fee, are all cafy, and they are performed as readily, and as well, at first as at last. Now this is certainly not true of the ideas of external things; for there is a progress in the formation of them, as lhall be very clearly fliewn from sac and observation, when we come to speak of the barbarous languages; and ma- ny abftraaions which were not at all made at firfi, come afterwards to be made, till at last the idea ripens into that petfeSt idea which is the object of science. Even in our present slate, we are daily forming new ideas, or making more perfedc those we have already formed, in proportion as we advance in knowledge. For every man that learns any art or science, acquires i- deas that he had not before. Thus a man who studies geometry, gets the ideas of figures which he had not before; such as,,a
C. I2. a rhombus, a rhomboid, a paralellopiped, &c.,And of the figures which he knew, he learns to diftingiifh species which before he did not attend to; such as, equilateral, fofceles, andfcalene triangles, and the like. And as we advance in this and other fcien- ces, we learn to correct our former ideas, and to acquire new and more perfect ones *. But ietting aside philosophy and science, how many ideas has any common artist, that a man not Ikilled in the art never dreamed of, and which he has to learn if he studies the art? How then can we sup-.,*Geometry. affords a very remarkable intlance of this in the docrine of proporlions. After having learned that doctrine in the common way in which it is taught in our. schools, if we iludy the 5th book of Euclid, we there learn an idea of proportion altogether new, and much more general and comprehensive, including incnmnnju- rableB as well as commensurables. This idea will appear to the young geometer so new and strange, that he will find it difficult to apprehend it, and more difficult Rtill. to make it familiar to him; and before he perfectly un- derltands it, and fees the consequences of it, he may be disposed to reject it, as some modern smatterers in geo- metry have done. The fame thing happens in other sciences, and in every branch of philosophy, till we come up to the highest philosophy, or science offciences, as it may be called; where we find ideas that many persons are by nature incapable of forming, because they require a power of abltra&ion which few persons are pol[effed of,,pose,
pose, that a thing in which there is such C. I2. progress, correction, and amendment, is ,, a natural operation ? or how can we doubt, that men acquired ideas at first, in the fame manner as we acquire them now ? only with much more labour and difficul- ty, and with much less accuracy, no doubt, as being unpratifed in the art of thinking.,If, indeed, we were not so much crea- tures of artificial habit as it appears we are, it might be doubted, whether this faculty, as well as others, was not from nature. But the account I have given of human nature clearly fliews, that it is al- most wholly composed of artificial habits; and that even the perceptions of sense, which one should think were natural, if any thing belonging to us was so, are, for the greater part, the result of acquired habit. InJeeing, for example, we natural- ly perceive no distance, and fee the object inverted, double, and of no greater mag- nitude than the picture upon the bottom of our.eye: so that we fee objects as we now fee them, only by habits of judging 'acquired from experience and observation; without which, that most useful sense,would
C. I 2. would hardly be of any use at all*. What V~ reason, then, can we have to doubt, that,our ideas, which are so much farther re- moved from fcnfe and matter, are not the work of nature ; and that there is nothing from that source, except the bare impul- fes of external objeds upon our organs of sense, conveyed to the mind in some way that we cannot explain ?,If any doubt upon this subjed could re- main, it appears to be entirely removedi by confidering what I have so much la- boured to establish, lamely, that the i- dcas even of external objecds are altoge- ther the operation of mind. The body, therefore, and its faculties, are in this ar- gumcnt entirely out of the queflion. So that we are not to inquire what faculties belong to the body, or at What time of life they are molt perfect. Such inquiry might be very proper, if the queflion were,'This is a discovery of nlzoern plilofopliy, which was inknown to .Irijoltle: for lie reckons/je'i,:g among tho.' things which we do entirely by nature, not by cualoir. Ou yap E'r, T; r roxa? lfr J' x 1OXAAaiX s C X iOI7 rc; y1ivro s('Aoy T ,ui4V ;x.' I ttaxtv, Xort7l; ; i'Fpt:Gault( , ' Feir. z; vXOuE'. El/ . NicoM. Iib. 2 cap. . ; whereas it appears to be, at leaR for the greater part, ivliat w learn lo do by doilg.,concerning
concerning the perceptions of sense; but C. 1,2. it has nothing to do with this question concerning ideas; in forming which the mind singly is employed. The only que- flion, therefore, is, What influence the growth of the body has upon the mind ? When the mind is to operate by the as- fiflance of the body, it is evident that it will have a great deal, and that the mind will perform such operations much better, when the body has come to maturity, and the man has got the perfect use of all his senses. But how can the mind be there- by assisted in those operations which it performs by itself ? It may be said, that during the time in which the body is growing, the mind improves by expe- rience and observation; and I am perlua- ded it does so. It learns in that way, as we have seen, the use of the senses; and if it is admitted, that it learns in the fame way to form ideas, there is an end of the question. But the hypothesis I am com- bating is, that men do not learn to thiznk by degrees, and from pratice and expe- rience, as they learn tofie; but that, all at once, when we come to a certain age, intellec breaks out, like an animal out of,VOL. I. U its
C. x2. its shell; and the mind, though conver-,sant before with material forms only, is instantly enabled to lay aside the use of its instruments of perception, the senses, to difeiborly, if I may so speak, theform, and to contemplate the idea pure and unmixed. This hypothesis, when attentively confider- ed, is really wild and phantaftical, and alto- gether unsupported either by theory or fad.,The only way in which ideas could be conceived to be from nature, is to suppose, that they arc formed by what we call in- flinc7; which is an inward principle in a- nimals, moving them to perform certain adions. But I fay, Iwo, That the opera- tions of inftind, being from nature, are involuntari:; for they are not from the mind itself, but are certain determina- tions or dispositions of the mind to ad, not proceeding from choice or deliberation, but impressed upon it by the author of nature for certain purposes. Whereas the forming of ideas is a voluntatr ad of the mind; by which, from certain motives, which {llall hereafter be explained, the mind is induced to study the nature of things, to observe what is common to the wanzy, what peculiar to the individual; and,in
in that way to form notions and ideas. C. I2.,But, 2d0, Let us confider for what pur- poses inflinct is given to animals. For this we are to seek among the brutes, in whom it is still the governilg principle, as I admit it was once in our fpecics. Now among them, inflinct serves no other pur- pose than to dired to what is necessary for the preservation of the individual, or the continuation of the species; nor is there the least reason to believe, that it e- ver served any other purpose among us. Now we are sure, from the example of the brutes, that ideas are not neceflary for either of these purposes. Arts, indeed, may be necessary; and accordingly some brutes have the practice of certain arts, such as 'weavilg and building. They have not, however, ideas, but are direted to the practice of those arts by that superior impulse above mentioned: and indeed it is impoflible to conceive how ideas by themfelvcs, without arts, can be either necessary or useful for the preservation of the animal life in the individual, or the continuation of it in the species. Inftind, therefore, would not have answered its end, if it had bcefowed upon us ideas,,VU z wvithout;
C. 12. without giving us at the fame time arts,whichit is certain it has not done: for there is no dividing the matter, or flop- pingl betwixt the two.; but we must fay, either that nature has given us both ideas and arts, or that she has given us nei- ther.,It may be thought by some, that we have from izjin't a love for knowledge, and that this would be a sufficient motive to excite the mind when we come to ma- turity, to fludy the nature of things, and to form ideas. And in support of this hypothesis, great authorities from philo- fophers might be quoted, to prove, that the ldfire of knowledge is natural to man .,But I answer, Imo, That this is using the term i'jlinlI in a sense very diflerent fiom the common acceptation of it; and if we are to ufi such freedom with words, we may as well call by that name any motive direcing us to any pursuit. But, 2do, The love of knowledge belongs to * MctauvOs Av u itv 7 roT? ¢lXoSoro'; tJrsov, a>.xa y.a; T°o a;Axlr U o)lOg . AriJiot. Poct. cap. 4. And he' afigns this as one of the natural causes why poetry, and the other arts of imilation, please us so much.,the
the rational nature alone; of which only C. I2. those philosophers must be understood to speak: for the mind, as soon as it comes to feel its own vigour, and to exert its power of contemplation, is delighted with the exercise of this its nobleit faculty; and if it attains to any degree of perfchtion in such exercise, is infinitely more delighted with it than with any thing else. But the question here is, How our nature becomes rational, and how we first get that taste of knowledge, of which we are afterwards tb fond ? Till that happens, we-can have no desire of it; for, according to the com- mon faying, Ignoti nulla cupido. And ac- cordingly we observe, that the most bar- barous nations, that is, those who are nearest the original fiate we speak of, shew no desire of knowledge at all; which is one, among other reafbns, that makes them pass among us for animals quite ftu- pid and insensible, and little better than idiots.,If then ideas are not from inftin(, they cannot be from nature in any other way than as other natural operations are, such as breathing and digestion. But this is too absurd to be maintained. It remains,,therefore,
C. I2. therefore, that they must be from what,I call acquired habit. Now this habit is acquired by frequently doing the thing. If in this practice we have the affiitance of a matler, or if, without being taught, we have any pattern that we can imitate, we learn much fafler. But even without such afliflance, by pradice merely, and by oblcrving what is done wrong, and correcling it, and so becoming our own ..!:R.wrs, we learn at last to do the thing: antd i :i the habit is formed by similar or homogeneous energies, as Mr Harris has ex)prelld it, that is, by doing the thing, we learn to do it '. And in this way men have learned to build, and to weave, and to prac'ife other arts; and, among other things, to form ideas.,If it be objected, That it is impossible to do any thing before we have learned to do it, and that therefore we cannot learn to do any thing by doing it; the answer is, That we mull have from nature the faculty of doing something bs the kind, though very imperfecdly and upon that founda-,* A yvp S yX.Tr ; olW1J T7rra so ri; a osl) tIo/ roti o- 'r/rc z l'y'l 7u'Yi i rxia; zlzfxiporTl: xlSarai'. Elthic. Vicso nach. lib. 2. cap. i.,tion
tion going on, we learn at last to do the C. I2. thing as it should be done . Thus a man i could never learn to build, if he had not from nature the faculty of laying a stone; nor to weave, if he could not firctch out and arrange threads; nor to fpcak, if he had not organs for that purpose fiom na- ture, and could not move those organs, and put them in certain positions. In like manner, we could not form ideas, if we had not sense and memory;. and, besides these, the faculty of separating things that are joined in nature, and of comparing two or more things together. This fepa- ration, and this comparison, will at first be very clumsily performed, like the rudi- ments and firlt beginnings of all arts. Things, for example, will not be fuffi- ciently separated or sifted, but taken toge- ther, as it were, in great lumps; and the comparisons will be inaccuratcly made; so that similitudes will be observed which do not exist, and many will be overlook-,* This objefion was made by thle S[l.ifis in the days of Aritotle, ns appears from his /iCtlh/cific, lib 9. ca,. S.; where it is anlivered very fliortly, and indeed but in a word, according to the manner of Arirfnlle in his Efglcric 'works; but I think in the fame way tiat I have an'fwcr- cd it.,ed
C. 12. ed that do exist. In this way, the ideas,at first will be exceedingly imperfec, and hardly deserving the name. But the prac- tice being constantly continued, they will be improved by degrees, till they come to be good enough for the ordinary purposes of life, and at last so perfect, as to be it for the objecs of science.,And thus, I think, I have proved, that the ideas of the objets of sense, as well as those of the operations of our own mind, are not from nature, but acquired; and if I fliall be able to shew, from fads and examples, by what degrees they have been acquired, as I hope I shall in the sequel, the evidence I think must be allowed to be complete; for then the proposition will be proved, both a priori and a poJferiori; that is, from fad as well as from theory.,C H A P.
C H A P. XIII. Conclusion of thefitbjec7 of Ideas.-General,view of Human Nature, and the rank it :poffejes in thefcale of Being,--compared with Superior Natures. . Cannot conclude this subjet, without C. 13.,taking a general view of human nature, according to the account that I have given of it; which, I am persuaded, will be found agreeable to the general analogy of nature: for it seems to be a law of nature, that no species of thing is formed at once, but by steps and progreflion from one stage to another. Thus naturaliRfs observe fe- veral different appearances betwixt the feed and the vegetable, the embryo and the animal. The principles of body in general, are, points, lines, and Jilrfaces, which arc not body '; and of number, the monad, and,duad, It is in this way that the antient Sccpticr argued a- gainft the principles of geometry. What is a pint ? said they: Is it body ? or is itfpirit ?. And if it be neither one nor t'other, it has no exiltence at all. The anfeer VOL. I. X is,
C. I3. dusd, which are not nutmbers; and in ge-,neral, the elemcirts of things are different from the.thi,'gs tbelmlveJ. There is the fame progress, according to my hypothc- sis, in the formation of man, and tlih fame diftincion betwixt -the elements of this fpc- cies, and thcSpecies itself. The progress of his body I am not concerned with at present: but with rcfpcct to thec-'iind, the first observable ftep in its progrcfs, is sensation, or perception by sense; but e- yen before we arrive at that, there is a progress, though not com-monly obierved. For, as we have seen, Jfrie is very im- perfec at first; and it is only in process of time that this primary faculty, of a:ll others the moAl natural, becomes com- plete. Next in order comes the faculty by which those perceptions, otherwise flceting and transitory, are rctained'in the mind; for I am pcrfuaded it is not ib early as sensation, and thcrcfore does not cxift at all in new-born infants, nor per: haps for some considerable time after the is, That though i be not brdy, and much Icsfpirit, it is the e!.:er.t of body. See Sextui En:,iricus ad-.rrfiu,l. rth.
birth:; This retentive faculty is of two C.i 3. kindls;, or perhaps only assumes two dif- ferent names, according to the different ways in which it retains the sensations: for if they are there painted, (to use a me- taphor of Plato "), it is called fancy, or -,manzgnation; The passage is in the Philhbus, p. 398. edit. Ficini. sl,. ', Iuu r7C¢ at4 cla'7l ?u.Tt;'rjx ;' ; ' rjur,[' xiItavx a. ar- V.,l; oTi'yima i7 Di6;'rTt Thi. i. '^noJix Jr xat iut thaC Arlp- y iLV ;JV TY ; UvI » Tr STI X-- '? y;1Y k cv. Y i9l. Tia;; 'n.1 Zuytlssp3, C; ytro' Tlu >,pOOKL&aTP'lf,, T;'V At)O^tv- riitDlf *; TM 4.EY rteru ~y/5;l ( nln. n; J. T;Tr ku Xa 7IT, A;YCYiV; .l.; ^O!T 7 OITI* C s T-10s u3A^Ts 't-ltTrci; TO' 7'. Eovyactit ia; Xly:- y.ivz a.TX7XyiV TIC, TrTa J-Or cjid Y.rS XTliyr vrV jXar ;;ui71 :2 is;.,This is well said, buit nlortly said, and only by way of Wlneiapior oi j;hiiiiduld; which is one great fault that 'Ari- Ito:l finds with his malletr. 'or, faiys he, he does not tell us 'what a thing is, but `what it is lile. But even A- riitotle himself does not f-tisfy me entirely by what he has' said upon this subjec, though he has taken-a' :good deal of pains upon it in his books De linira et de ll'ene- via, The reader, if he is not 'ltisfied neither, may con- tent hirfelf with the follov.ing observations, till he Illal find fomiething better. Memory and imagination (confidering them as dif- ferent faculties) agree in this, that they are both fubfe- quent to sense, and prior to realbn and intellea; :dly, they both preserve in the mind the perecptioni brought into it.by the senses, which wou!d be transitory and cva- nefcent, if it were not for the aid of there two faculties. But they diT.-r in the fbllowin:g partiea!rrs.,X 2 Io,
C. I3. magitation; but if they are only written,,that is,: imply preserved, without ;colour **'*"i: OF imoa, Memory, as Ariflotle has observed, always re- sers to what the mind formerly perceived or knew; whereas the imagination only presents the objed to the mind, but without any reference to the pall, except it be accompanied with memory, which it is not always; for imagination so far resembles sense more than memory, that it represents the obje& as present, and affecfs the mind nearly in the fame way as if it were present; and from thence is called, by some antient philosophers, a 'weaker fieation.,2do, The imagination pieferves in the mind the pet- ceptions of sense only; whereas the memory retainls riot only these, but also ideas, and theorems, or propofi- tions. 3tio, The image of the objec preserved in the memoty is not near so lively and strong, as that which is present- ed to the mind by the imagination : for we often remem. her things in general only; or if we remember also the particular circumllances, they do not assea us near so much as the original perception of them by the senses; whereas imagination paints them, as I have said, and ex- hibits them to the mind with all the colourings, and all the peculiarities, with which they appear to the senses, and with very near as much emotion as they at first pro- duced. The consequence of this is, that having seen a- niy objec of the agreeable or disagreeable kind, if I have a good memory only, I can give a particular description of it, which will be very well underflood, but fach as will not much affect the hearer: but if I have the eye and ima- gination of a painter or a poet, I can declribe the object in so lively a manner, that it will produce in the hearer,very
orfhape, it is called memowy. And thus C. 3. sensation, memory, and imagination, to-,gether very nearly the.fame emotions that it produced in me when I firfR saw it.,4to, This lively painting of the imagination, and the emotions which it produces in the mind, of joy, grief, terror, or whatever other paflion was excited by the ob- jea itself, have a very great effect upon the happiness or misery of our lives; so that the man possesscd of luch an imagination, mutl neccfarily be more happy or more mi- ferable than other men. Stl, The imagination has not only the power of reten- tion, as well as memory, but it has a creative power, which is peculiar to it, and diflinguifnes it essentially both from sense and memory: for sense is only conversant with the present, memory with the pall; whereas imagina- tion, by the means of this faculty, is convcrfant with the future as well as the pal, and paints to itlClf 1ccnes that never did exil, and it is likely never will; for it may be said to create even the materials of tlhoe seenes, being such as are not direlcly and immediately furnilhed by the sense, but are formed upon the model of ohjets that have been presented by the sense, and are, as it were, imita- tions of them. This is that great work of imagination, which is the foundation of all the fine arls, and flamps men truly poets, or makers. By this faculty we are enabled to exhi- bit scenes both of natural and human things, which, though they are far beyond real life and nature, are ne- verthelefs natural; because they are imitated from things that have really exilted. I fay, imitated; for if they are servilely copied, it is not poetry or paintir.g, but hiltory or,portrait-
C. 13. getlier; with certain, natural appetites ,and,defres, complete the animal.. Next in- or-,der portrait-drawsing. And it is for this reason that those fine arts are very properly called arts of imitatiioi. · As the imagination is often joined with memory, as we have already observed; so it is very frequently accom- panied with opiniot, particularly with refpea to those picures of futurity which the imagination prefernt; to the' mind; for we often believe that the things are really to happen. And this has likewise a great effe& with refpecb to the happine's or misery of life: for if the events which' wefuppole are to happen, are of the joyful and profpe- rous kind, we have all the pleafuircs of hope, which makes a man of a warm lively imagination happier while it lats, than the aCtual enjoyment would do. But what he .hopes for may never happen, and then he suffers the pain of difappointmlent; which, in some cafes, is.fo in- lutferable, that men rather chule to go out of life than endureit: or he may obtain the object of his hopes and wilhes; but it may no:, and in fa& it very seldom does, anliver his expecations; and there is another disappoint- ment, often more cruel than the firfl.-If, on the other hand, the events I believe will happen are of the unpro- fperous kind, the fear of them mult make me' very unr happy; and if they are f(rongly painted on my imagina' tion, and appear unavoidable, they make me as unhap. py, perhaps more unhappy, than if they were actually present, and, by anticipation, reduce me to that (late of mind, which is well known by the name of despair. If. uch belief is taken up rahlly, and without sufficient grounds, it is the effea of a melancholy and gloomy turn of mind; which sometimes makes men miserable in the greatert seeming prosperity. ' Further, we may suppose the piture of those fairy,fcencs
der'cories the comparative; or rati6nal' fa- C. 13. cutty,· by which we become men, or raid'o- -*cenes by the imagination so very lively, that, instead of believing the. things rill happen, we think they have al- ready happened. Thus a man believes himself to be a king, or to be polleTed of great wealth and power, who perhaps is a beggar; and he ass accordingly. - This hlate of the imagination is what we call madness. But if the person does not go so far as to believe himself actually poffelled of those things he desires, but only believes, up- ,on very flight.grounds, or no grounds at all, that he is to be pollFe(ed of them, such a man, in common lan- guage, is called afrol. So that, according to this ac- 'count, madness is a disease of the imagination; folly an ·error of the judgement. As to the firlf, there is little difference of opinion betwixt the vulgar and tile philofo- pher; but as to the last there is a very great difference. For those errors in judgement, which make us esteem wealth, and power, and luxury, the greatet blessings in life, and pursue them accordingly, are, by the philofo- 'pher, held to be the greatest folly. But, on the contra- ry, the vulgar hold, that there is no error at all in the cafe; that filch pursuits are rational; and whoeycr fuc, ceeds in them they esteem a wife man. To conclude this note, which has drawn out to too great a length, it thus appears that the mind operates in two very different ways upon the materials which sense brings into it. For, either it abltraas from them ideas, which serve for the materials of science, when thorough. ly purged and refined from matter; or it forms reprefen- tations,and pilures of them, vlhich, properly chosen, and well painted, make the fuibjets of the most delight- ful arts among men.,nal
C. I 3. nal creatures; and the first exercise of rea- ^'"' £son is opinion *: and, last of all, out of,fenfc, memory, imagination, reason, and opinion,. is produced, by very flow de- grees, as I imagine, that best faculty of the human mind, and which therefore, in the common course of nature, oight to come last, I mean intellet, from which is derived science. And thus man is com- pleted, and brought to the perfection of his nature.,This is the scale of being, riing by pro- per gradations, from mere matter andfenfe to intellect, through the medium of mmno- ry, imagination, and opinion. Some animals appear to have onlyjfefe, such as muscles, and other flell-fiflh. There are others that never attain even tofcnif in any de- gree of perfecion, but fill up the interval betwixt the vegetab;le and animal, partici- pating something .of the nature of each, from which they have the name of Zoo- phytes. Other animals, befidesfeife,'have memnory and imaginatiotn; and some perhaps pnly one of these two; but man beifig a * Man, in this state, is very properly called by Polybius 7'. iY :'9-" - . .,little
little world, as the antients called him, C. 13. has in his frame a portion of every thing to be found in nature. He has in his body all the elements of which the inanin;atn world is composed; he has the growth and nutrition of the vegetable; and he has fenle, memory, and imagination, belonging to the animal life; and, last of all, he acquires reason and intellect. Thus is man formed, not however at once, but by degrees, and in fuccefion: for he appears at first to be little more than a mere vegetable, lardly deserving the name of a Zouphy/lte ; then he gets sense, but sense only, so that he is yet little better than a muscle ; then lie be- comes an animal of a more complete kind; then a rational creature; and finally a man of intellec and science, which is the iummit and completion of our nature.,From this point of view let us try if we can difccrn the difference betwixt us and higher intelligences. ,ec begin with mllat- ter and mlaterial objec's, and through parti- culairs and individuals invefligate generals. Thley (so far as we can conceive of their operations) proceed in a method dirctly opposite to this: for, beginning with ge- nleral, they through them recognise parti-,VOL. I. Y cular;.
C. 13. culars. In this way we too proceed, after,we have attained to intellect and science; but with this difference, that those more perfc~t minds fee the particulars in the generals intuiitively; whereas we for the greater part are obliged to invefiigate them, and find them out by circuit and collection. If it were otherwile, and that in the wli- )vetils we could sec at once the several JitbordinatcefpeciefJs, and their several proper- ties, connecions, and dependencies, we should then indeed be divine intelligences, and be ranked with beings of fipcrior or- der. But, if we cannot be gods, let us con- tinue men, and not be degraded to brutes, by, being firipped of that prerogative which chiefly distinguishes us from them, I mean intelleit.,CHAP.
C -I A P. XIV. That Articulation i.r lot natural to Alan. 'f E are now to descend fiom those high C. I4,,speculations concerning ideas which J constitute the form of language, to founds, which are the imatter of it. And though I may have failed in my endeavours to convince the reader, that the operation of abstracting the perceptions of fenfc, andt forming of them generals and universals, (for as to ideas of reflceion I think there can be no doubt), is not performed by any natural inflind, but has arisen, like the arts that are founded upon it, from experience and observation, and by use has been formed into habit; I cannot doubt but that I shall convince every one who vwill think it worth his while to read what follows, thiat articulation is altogether the work of art, at Icaft of a habit acquired by custom and exerc.ifc, and that we are truly by nature the nma!tl. pecust that Ho- race makcs us to be. This I think I am,* Y able
C(. 4. able to prove, botl from theory and f.ats.,I;will begin with the facts whichr will serve to explain my theory. . ,,.It is a clear cafe, that we do not speak in;l;hat slate which, of all others, Ibeft de- serves the appellation of natural; 1 mean wlhen we are born, nor for a considerable time: after; and even then we learn but slowly, and with a great deal of :labour and difficulty. About the fame time-alib wve begin to form ideas. But the f1me answer, I knbw, is made to serve for both ; nimely, That our minds, as well as our bodily or- gans, are then weak, and therefore are un- able to perform several of their natural functions; but as soon as they become firong and confirmed by age, then we both think and fpcak. That this is not true with respect toth/.inki ,u I have already endca- voured to ihow; and with refpeA to speak- ing, I fay, in the firfl place, that of all those favagcs which have been caught in differ- ent parts of Europe ', not one had ite use,of * See an account of them in Rnuflreau's treatifefur I' iiePl/i:i dcs omm.nme , note . Tile iril of tllel'c savages wvas c;atcled nealr ]lefl-C;ll'cl in i$i4, and was taught to 0peak. Another was found in the soreRs of Lithuania,ia
of speech, though they had all the organs of C. 14. proninciation such as we have them,. and the underfianding of a man, at Jeaft as muchl.as was possible, when it is confider- ed, that their minds' were not cultivated by, any kind of convcrfation or intercourse xwith-their own species nor had they come thd length, according to my hypothesis, of formingi ideas, or thinking at all. One of these was catched in the woods of Hano- in the )ear 1694. He too was mute when he was found; and '"]iether he ever learned to speak, does not appear. In l17i', two savages were found in the Pyrenaan mountains ; and the Hanoverian fiavage was catched and brought.to England in the reign of George I. All these, when they were firll catched, were not only mute, that is, had n6 articulation, but appeared to be truly qcia- drupeds ; and the first mentioned; our author savs, ,was taught with much difficulty to walk upright. When we join to tlis a fact which Mons. RonfQau likewise avers, that the children of the Hottentots and Carilbees walk so long upon their hands, that they are with much dif- ficulty taught to walk upright, it would fcem thiut we mull add to man's other acquired habits his quality of lip ed, Which lias been ahlays thougih an essential part of his origiial nature, and accordli rily is made part of some dcfil;iions of him. lhnt Ari[otle knew better; for ail that lie hals said is, that by nature man is mire a bi- pcd than any othcr al;lal, - liz. 0 .= ;, n I'i Sc¢. De aiii.iil i;;et c,'y,, cap. 5. The mc.anii:g of which I take to be, thalt he has by nature a greater aptitude to acquire the habit of walking c; :so than any oilier ani- mal. And M.ons. Ronl:aliu's arguments in support of his natural crcCiuefs appear to me to prove no more.,ver
C. 14. ver as late as the reign of George I. and,for any thing I know is yet alive'; 'at lcaft I am ifre he was so some years ago. He was a man in mind as well as body, as I have been informed by a person who li- vcd for a considerable time in the neigh- bourhood of a farmer's house where he was kept, and had an opportunity of fee- ing him almost every day; not an i- diot, as he has been rcprefented by some who cannot make allowance for the dif- ference that education makes upon mens minds; yet he was not only mute when first caught, but he never learned to speak, though at the time the gentleman from whom I have my information saw him, he had: been above thirty years in England.,IFurther, not only solitary savages,. but a whole nation, if I may call them so, have been found without the use of speech. This is the cafe of the Ouran Outangs that are found in the kingdom of Angola in Afiica, and in several parts of Asia, They are exacly of the human form; walking ereet, not upon all-four, like the savages that have been found in Europe; they use fliclks for weapons; they live in society; they,. make huts of branches cf trees, and,they
they carry off negroe girls, whom they C. 14. make Ilaves of, and ulc.both for workl and " pleasure. Thci facRs are related of them by Montf Buffon in his natural hiflory: and I was further told by a gentleman who had been in Angola, that there were fbme of them seven feet high, and that the negroes were extrcmely afraid of them; for when they did any mischief to the Ou- ran Outangs, they were sure to be heartily cudgelled when they were catched. But though from the particulars above men- tioned it appears certain, that they are of our fpccics, and though they have made some progress in the arts of life, they have not come the length of language; and ac- cordingly none of them that have been brought to Europe could speak, and what seems strange, never learned to speak. I mvfelffaw at Paris one of them, whose Ikin was fluffed, standing upon a fielf in the King's cabinet of natural curiolitics. He had exactly the llape and features of a man; and particularly I was informed, that he had organs of pronunciationl as perfect as we have. He lived several yedrs at Versailles, and died by drinking fpi- rits. He had as much of the underfland-,inLg
C. I4. ing of a man as could be expected from his,education, and performed many little of- sices to the lady with whom he lived; but never learned to speak. I was well informed too, of one of them belonging to a French gentleman in India, who used to go to market for him, but was likewise mute .,Further, to shew the difficulty of pro- nunciation, the sac is most certain, that those who have been accuflomed to speak all their lives, cannot without the greatest labour and pains learn to pronounce founds that they have not been accutfom- ed to. Thus a Frenchman that has not been taught Englifl early in his youth, can hardly ever learn to pronounce the as- pirated t, that is, the tb; and an Eng- lithman cannot pronounce the aspirated K, or x of the Greeks, which we. in Scot-,* AMos. Rorun' t, in his work above quoted, note Io. 'has collecftd the fevcral accounts given 6f this animal by travellers, and agrees with me in opinion, that he be- longs to our fpecics; rejecing with great contempt the notion of those who think that fpecch is natural to man. Now if we get over that prejudice, and do not insid, that other arts of life, which the Ouran Outangs want, are likcwife natural to man, it is impossible we can refuTe them the appellation of wIen.,land
land pronounce with the greatest ease. And C. 14. the Baron Hontan, who travelled so much in North America, tells us, that he spent four days to no purpose in trying to teach a Huron to pronounce the labial confo- nants b, p, and mi, which we reckon oi cafy, and which are among the first con- sonants that our children pronounce; the reason of which was, that the Hurons have no such consonants in their lan- guage.,But what puts the matter out of all doubt in my apprehension, is the cafe of deaf persons among us. And their cafe deserves' to be the more attentively confidered, that they are precisely in the condition in which we suppose men to have been in the natural state. For, like them, they have the organs of pronun- ciation; and, like them too, they have inarticulate cries, by which they express their wants and desires. They have like- wife, by constant intercourse with men who have the use of reason, and who converse with them in their way, acquired the ha- bit of forming ideas; which we must also suppose the savage to have acquired, tho' with infinitely more labour, before he,VOL. I. Z could
C. 14. could have a language to express them,,They want therefore nothing in order to fpicak, but inflrustion or example, which the savages who invented the firlf langua- ges likcwife wanted. In this situation, do they invent a language when they come to perfcci age, as it is supposed we all Ihould do if we had not learnt one in ouIe infancy? or do they ever come to speak during their whole lives ? The fat motl: certainly is, that they never do; but con- tinue to communicate their thoughts by looks and geltures, which we call Jfils, unless they be taught to articulate by an art lately invented.,The inventor of this wonderful art, which, I think, does honour to modern times, was.Dr John Wallis, one of the firlt members of the Royal Society, and a moll ingenious, as well as learned man. He has written an excellent Engliih gram- mar, which was reprinted in 1765, and subjoined to it is a letter of the author to one Bcvcrly, wherein he gives an account of this art which lie had invented, anid mentions two perbons upon whomn he lad praliifcd it with success. I knew two pro- fcflbrs of the art in Paris, one of them.
2MifI l'Abbc de l'Epce, with whom I was C. 14. several times, and whose civility, and the trouble he took to filew me his method of teaching, I take this opportunity of ac- knowledging. He had brought some of his scholars a surprising length; and one of them 1 particularly remember, a girl, vho {'soke so pleasantly that I flhould not have known her to be deaf.-Tlhere is ac preient in Edinburgh a profifibr of the lame art, Mr lBraidwood, whom I know, and who has likewise been at the trouble of Ihewing me his method of teaching; of which I very much approve. He has taught many with great success; and there is one of his scholars particularly who is lrefently carrying on the bufilnef of a painter in London, and who both speaks and writes good Englil. But it is fi;r- prifing what labour it costs him to teach, and his scholars to learn: which puts it out of all doubt, that articulation is not only an art, but an art of most difficult acquisition, otherwise than by imitation, and conflant practice, from our earliest years. For, in the firit place, it is diffi- cult to teach tlio!f scholars to make any found at all. They at first only breathe,Z 2 itrongiy,
C. 14. itrongly, till they are taught to make that '-,- concussion and tremulous motion of the,windpipe which produces audible founAs, Tlhefe are very harsh, low, and guttural, at first, and more like croaking than a clear vocal found; which I think will ac- ,count for what MAIf la Condamilne tells us of the strange method of speaking of a people .he found upon the banks of the river Ama- zons; for the found of their language was ob low, and so much inward, more refem- bling muttering than speaking, that he i- imagined they spoke by drawing in their breath: and a girl whom I myself saw in France, that had been catched wild in the woods of Champaigne %, when flie flhewed me how the language of her country was,There was an account of this flrange phenomenon publilhed in France by a lady, under the title, llif- loire d'une Fille Savage, and revised by ]lc'if.la Conda- nitne. It was tranfated into Englilh, and publiflied in Edinburgh in 1767, with a preface, fliewing it to be very probable, that (le came from a country upon the coast of Hudlbn's bay, where the was taken, and carried to one of the French islands in the Weft Indies; from whence fie was again imbarked, and the ship was wrecked some- where on the coafi of France or Slanders; and it ap- pears, that only file and a negro girl escaped by swim- ing. At the time I hltw her, the'had been thirty years in France, but remem;bercd many particulars concerning her own country, -,spoken,
spoken, made a low muttering found in C. 14. her throat, in which I could hardly dif- 'E" tinguifh any articulation. After this dif- ficulty, which is not small, is got over, then comes the chief labour, to teach them the pronunciation of the several letters; in doing which, the teacher is obliged, not only himself to use many distortions and grimaces in order to {hew his scholars the positions and actions of the several organs, -but likewise to employ his hands to place and move their.organs properly; while the scholars themselves labour so much, and bestow such pains and attention, that I am really surprised, that, with all the de- fire they have to learn, which is very great, they should be able to support the drud- gery. And I am assured by Mr Braid- wood, that if he did not take different me- thods with them, according to their dif- ferent capacities, and the difference of their organs, it would be impossible to teach many of them. And this very well accounts for what seems so strange at first, that those Ouran Outangs that have been brought from Africa or Asia, and many of those solitary savages that have been catch- ed in Europe, never learned to speak, tho',they
C. 14. lley had the organs of pronunciation as,perifec as we: for, as it is well known, fa- vages are very indolent, at lcalt with re- fpicc to any exercise of the mind, and are hardly excited to adion by any curiosity, or dcfire of learning.',If,. therefoie, this art be so difficult to be learned without imitation, even by the assistance of the most diligent inftruCion, how much more difficult must the inven- tion of it have been ; that is, the acqui- ring of it without either initrudtion or ex- ample ?,Having thus proved the fad, as I thinl, inconteItably, it will not be difficult to as- iign the reafbns, and explain the theory. For we need only confider with a little at- tention the mcchanifim of fpcech, and we ihall ioon find, that there is required for peakin g certain positions anl motions of the organs of the mouth, such as, the tongue, the teeth, lips, and palate, that cannot be from nttture, but must be the cited of art; for their adion, when they are employed in the enunciation of fiieech, is so different from their natural and quiescent situation, that nothing but long use and exercise could have taught us to. employ them in,that
that way. To explain this more particu- C. 14. larly I think is not necessary for my pre- icnt purpose. I flall have occasion to fay more of it afterwards; but who would desire in the mean time to be bettcr in- formed about it, may consult Dionysius the H-alicarnailian, in his treatise of Compofi- tion, where he has most accuratelyexplain- ed the difierent operations of the crgans in the pronunciation of the different letters. And whoever would def-re to be flill better informed, let him attend Mr Braidwood when he teaches, who, from his practice in that way, has learned to know more of the mcchanifin of language than any grammarian or philosopher.,I hall only fay further on this fhbjecc-, that pronunciation is one of thole arts of which the infrulments are the members of the humIan body; like dancinll, and an- other art more akin to this, I mcan sing- ing: and like thofc arts it is learned, ei- thcr by mere imitation, man being, as ArlI'otle llas told us, the nmot imitative of all animals; or by teaching, as in the cafe of deaf men ; but joined with very conflant and aiidluous pratice, that be- ing aboblutely neccfiary for the acquiring,of
C. 14. of any art, in whichever of the two ways,it is learned.,And here we may observe, that it is a very false conclusion, to infer, from the fa- cility of doing any thing, that it is a na- tural operation. For what is it that we do more easily and readily than speaking ? and yet we fee it is an art that is not to be taught without the greatest labour and dif- ficulty, both on the part of the mailer and the scholar; nor to be learned by imi- tation, without continual practice, fiom our infancy upwards. For it is not to be learned, like other arts, such as dancing and singing, by prafifing an hour or two a-day, for a few years, or perhaps only some months; but constant and uninter- rupted practice is required for many years, and for every hour, I may fay, every mi- nute of the day. And even after it is learn- ed with so much trouble and pains, it may, like other acquired habits, be loft by disuse: of which I mentioned'a re- markable instance before, in a boy, who did not lose his hearing till he was after eight years old, and had learned, not on- ly to ipealk perfectly, but to read; and yet, when he came to be taught by Mr Braid-,wood,
wood, which was at the age of five and C. 14. twenty, he had absolutely loit the use of speech, and had it to learn as much as any of his scholars. So that we need not doubt of what we are told of Alexander Sel- kirk, who was but three years in the desert island of Juan Fernandez; and yet during that flort time he had loft the use of speech so much as to be hardly intelligible to those who found him there. They there- fore who, from the facility of a perform- ance, conclude, that it is not a work of art, but of nature, do not sufficiently con- fider how much of artificial habit there is in our natures, in the state we are in at present, and that in this chiefly we differ from other animals; that the most of them, I mean such as are wild, are altogether creatures of nature; and even such of them as we have tamed, and assimilated in some degree to ourselves, have fill much more of nature in them than of art. Whereas a civil;.zed man is so much more a creature of art than of nature, that his natural habits are almost lolf in his artifi- cial.,I will make another observation before I conclude this article. If it had not been,VOL. I. A a for
C. 14. for this ncw-inventcd art of teaching deaf,pcrfons to speak, hardly any body would have believed that thec material or mecha- nical part of language was learned, with so. mutch difficu!ty. ..But, if we could get an Ouran Outang, or a mute savage, such as he above mentioned, that was caught in the woods of Hanover, and would take the famec pains to teach him to think that Mr Braid wood takes to teach his.fcholars to fpcak, we flould soon be convincecd, that the formal pait of language was as difficult to be learned as the material. For my own part, I am fully persuaded, that the minds of men laboured as much at firl, vwhlen they formed abftrac& ideas, as their organs of pronunciation did when thcy fprmed articulate Ibunds ; and till the mind is stored with ideas, it is a perfcct void, and in a kind of lethargy, out of which it is roused, only by external ob- jccts of fnf'e, or calls of appetite from within. It was this want of ideas which made the Hanoverian savage pass, in the opinion of many, for an idiot; and it ac- cotlnts for that bru'tifl inienfibility iil a nation of which Diodorus Siculus, in his,third
third book *, has given us an accoult. C. 14. Tley wtere situated upon the coast of the Indian ocean, beyond the straits whliich join tlat ocean to the Arabian gulf. Pto- lomy king of Egypt, the third of that name, having heard, he fays, much of their brutiflmnefs and' fupidity, had the curiosity to fend one of his fiiends to bring lim an account of them; who accordingly went, properly attended, and brolught back to the' king a report, which in fltbtlance amounted to this: That they neither dc- fired the company of strangers, nor ihun- ned it': That no appearance, however llrange, seemed to move them, for they kept their eyes alwhys fixt, and never altered their countenance: That wlhen any person advanced upoa them with a drawn tsord, they did not run a- way; and they bore all kinds of infiilts and injurics without fhlewing the least sign of anger. Nor did those of them who were. 'pcCitors of such injuries fllew any indignation at what they saw their coun- trymen susser. He adds, That they car- ried their insensibility so far, that when,c.7. 18. edit. lJSling.,A a z their
G. I4. their wives and children were killed in t'rt their presence, they were even then un-,moved, shewing no signs, either of pity or anger. In short, fays he, in the most terrible situations they seemed perfectly tranquil, looking ftedfaftly at what was doing, and at every event that happened giving a nod with their heads. Thus far Diodorus; and with this account many of the relations of our modern travellers, concerning people living in the lowest state of barbarity, agree. And I know ia;gen- tleman who saw in Batavia two savages brought from New Holland, that appear- ed to him to be perfectly stupid and idi- otical, though he had no reason to think that they were more so than the other na- tives of that country.,BOOK
189 B 0 0 K II.,IN T O D C TIO 0N. N the preceding book I have endea- Intr. voured to ihew, that our ideas of ex- kv ternal objets, as well as those of the o- perations of our own minds, are not the gift of nature. Further, I think I have clearly shewn, that articulation is not the work of nature. From there premisses one of two things must necessarily follow: ei- ther that language altogether, the form as well as the matter, is the fruit of human art and industry, as I suppose it to be; or it must have been revealed from heaven.,Another thing alfb appears to be evident from what has been said, That if language was invented, it was of very difficult in- vention: for if, even after it was disco- vered, it is learned, as we have seen, with so much pains and labour, it must have been invented with infinitely more. And indeed the difficulty of the invention ap-,pears
Intr. pears so very great, that it seems hard to,account how it ever happened; and it is the miore so, that it must have been among the firll arts invented. For one art dif- covcrcd, naturally leads to another; but thli begnin in i all things is 'exceed- ing d(ificult: and What makes the difli- culty the greater is, that, as Arirfot'i has obfirvcl, all our learning at fiilft i 'fromn imitation '. Children among us do' cer- tainly learn in that way; aind what is commonly said I believe to be true,'that meni,'learned at first to build, fioim thei swallow, or any ot!ier bird that' makkes fuchllan artificial .nest1 'from the'fpiiler to weave; and from the birds to sin'g. This, latI I haive a particular reason to believe to:bc true, because the .wild girl above mentioned, whom 'I'faw in France, told' mer the only muficof' the people. of ler' coi.ntry'was the imitation 6f tlihe figi'ilg of: birds; and she affirmed, that flie'her-' seif could once have initated th'e iidtes of' any 'bird. But tiis'facultv,' as v'ell as many others which she poffefled in the wild state, Ihe had loft; for it was then,,,. Pct':. :ap. c .4. .. ''" wwhen
when I saw her, above thirty years after Intr. fhewtas caught. In flhort, it appcars to me, that we refiml)le very much an Ame- rican or Weft-India bird that I have heard of, called. the Miock-bird, which has no tune of its own, but imitates the notes of any other bird: for we seem to set out in life witloutt.any original flock of our own, nor any natural talent bcfides that faculty of imitation, which nature has bestowed upon us in {b high a degree, that Aristotle has denominated man, very properly, the most imitative of all animals. Now while man was learning other arts by imitating the inflinCa of the brute.,creation, by what imitation could he learn to fjzak ?,These, and many other considerations that, might be mentioned, have induced some learned men that I have known to believe, upon philosophical as well as re- ligious principles, that it exceeded. the powver.of man to invent ib wonderful an art; and that therefore it was the gift of God, or of some superior nature . This,:: , . .is * This appears to have been an opinion as old as the days of Platr, who, in his dialogue upon laingnage, I mncan tle Cr.'il;i, ' 2 91. edit. Fici': , tei!s us, th:t
Intr. is an opinion that I am far from rejeding XV.~ as absurd, or improbable; nor would I,have it believed that I pay no regard to the account given in our sacred books of the origin of our species: but it does not belong to me as a philosopher or gram-. marian to inquire whether such account is to be understood allegorically, accor- ding to the opinions of some divines *; or literally, and as an historical fad ; an in- quiry, besides, which I am very ill quali- sied for, not underifanding the original language of those books. But supposing that we are to underfland the flory in the literal sense, and to suppose the gift of speech to have been once bestowed by God some, in order to solve the difficulty about the first names or radical words of language, did, as the tragic poets do when they cannot otherwise unravel their fables, bring down a god in a machine to cut the knot. x See upon this filbjec Baurne'i /lrchrolJgi.r Phihfphic., lib. 2. cap. 7. and the authorities by him there quoted; from which it appears, that it was not only the opinion of the Jews, but of the Christians of the firt centuries, that the circumftanccs related by Mofcs concerning the origin of man are to be confidered as allegorical or para- bolical, like the parables in the New Testament, and as many other paslages in the Old mut be understood. See allo two very elegant cpiltles of the fame author annexed to his ;irclto'ig,.,unoi
upon man, it may afterwards have been Intr. loft. For it is a fad that cannot bc controverted, that in many parts of this earth great calamities have befallen the human race, by fre or water, plague or famine, insomuch that they have been either totally destroyed, or very finall re- mains left, and these scattered and diifer- fed: so that all arts, and even language itself, which cannot be preserved with- out social intercourse, were in process of time loft among them *. In this solitary- slate we may hippofe them to have been for some time, till the males and females, by natural inftin,, going together, the race would increafc, and at last become numerous enough to herd and aflociate to- gether. Or, without having recourse to such extraordinary accidents as the de-,e See Plato in Timiro, in the beginning, where the conversation is related betwixt Slon and thle Eg)pian pri,':, in which, among many calamities that have be- fallen this earth at dil:lcr.ct times, by lire and water chief- ly, but likewiie irom many other caufc,, lie mentions particularly th: dclialrutiol of the Atlantic iflnd, by the fuhfiding of the cartih, and the inundation of lie sea, ia llie fame way tha: a part of the city of Lisbon was lately dcftroyed. VOL. I. B b fsrution
Intr. fli'uion of whole nations by fire or inun-,dation, we may filpofe that those sava- ges above mentioned, which have been found in different parts of Europe, had come together, (and two of them were ac- tually found together in the Pyrcn.ran lmountains), and had multiplied. In such cafes we have no warrant to believe, that another miracle would be wrought, and that language would be again revealed; and therefore we are at liberty to suppose it possible, and I faiy no more, that in process of time they might have invented a lan- guage. It will be the fubje& of this book to ihew, how this might have happened, by what fleps and degrees, and of what nature the firnf invented languages proba- bly were.,C HAP.
C I- A P. I. Of the connetIion betwixt Society and Lan-,guage. - ln Lhquiry into the Oricin of So- ciety n1cceffiy. 'T HIE difficulty of the invention of lan- Ch. I.,guage must appear so very great to tile philolbphical reader, that he will not be surprised that I have spent ib much time, and must still spend more, upon the preliminaries of it. I said in the begin- ning of the work, that it was an inquiry that would lead me back to the very origi: of the human race; and it has so happen- ed. For I could not give the philofophi- cal account I proposed, of the origin of language, without inquiring into the ori- gin of our ideas. This made it ncclElary for me to define and divide them, to ex- plain the nature of the two several :inds of thlmc, and to fliew how they were form- ed, without supposing them to be the .ork of nature. I have thought it proper also, in this difuifition, to itate the several opinions of philosophers concerning ideas,,B b andc
Ch. i. and to refute, as well as I was able, the,opinion of those who maintain, that we have no idlas, but only perceptions offef/e. 7litwe 7iol/is crat ZIUllANAM condere,gOIell '". But with all this labour we have only made of man a rational animal; it remains still to make him a fpeaki:g animal. For this purpofi I hold JbcieLt to be absolutely ncccflary: for though a solitary savage might in proccfs of time acquire the habit of forming ideas, it is impoflible to sup- pose, that he would invent a method of communicating them, for lwhich he had no occasion. Our fubjc5, therefore, fur- ther leads us to inquire into the origin of lbciety; which appealrs to MIonf. Rous- feau - to have ib necefcry a connecion with language, that he proposes it as a quefbLon to 1be rcii.vcd by the learned, I ';,ich Was i . s.er //l''cy, l la. e f.r th i.5'/:itzi:i,5, O; ,;9/ joCiJ3, or JcciCt /or lo:.e inve71n- tion oJ lGt::jt.tic'e ? This quecTion I hope I .fall be able to ibive, by ihcwing, that so-,e* , ,ai.. m7lis erat .i;..;:.i;z" c:;::::'re Jenlleo,,V RP.G. En. i. - Scc l:is treatise on tlc inceuall;!iy of nran!ilnd.
ciety muit have been first in the order of Ch. I. things; and that, though it was impollf- fible that language couldl have been in- vented without society, yet society, and even civil focicty, may have fublifled, perhaps for ages, before language was in- vented.,This is an extensive fubjcCt of inquiry, and belongs to a greater work, which I have long meditated, but probably fhal! not live to execute, I mean, The Hifloiy of Manl. But as my pricucnt fiubjcd requires that I should tfy something of it, 1 will cndeavour, in as few words as pofiible, to explain my notions concerning the begin- ning of society.,And the first qucfiion to be confidcred upon this subjec&, as well as with rcfpee to language, is, Whether it had a begin- ning at all ? that is, Whether it be from nature, or of human inflitution ? for there are many who believe that we are natu- rally a political, as well as a /i)cakin ani- mal: and indeed there is fuci a conncclion betwixt the two, that if it could be fllewn that we are by nature olit'ica!, I hlould think it not improbable that we derived from the fame source the gift of speech.,C H A P.
C H A P. II. Divfion of Alimalls into Solitary and Grega-;,rious, Political and not Political.-- Mal to be ranked in neither of thoi dlivfions, but in the middle of each of them.--Other Aninmals of the wime amphibious kind. Ch. 2. ALL animals, fays Aristotle, are grega-,notus, folitarJ, or betwixt the two; that is, participating of the nature of both, and able to live, either in folitudc, or in company, as occasion requires. A- gain, of the gregarious kind, ibme arc political; that is, carry on together one common work; others have no such bond of union, and live together without any joint stock, or common good of any kind ". The qucftion is, What place we,are * The passage is in the sirs chapter of the first book of Irifiotle'l HiJ/ory of ,Ilimals. The words are, T ..Ev Ya. UTwV ({j,,I) r2i e ;'?:oi/:S. 7\ S' 'ayaIV .5 v, Xt ,;. i, xa. 7rrv, rL nr^i T. Ji S,.r y;rrip', xa Tr: V V.x .[l v v.-.; Tx. V yviZ Siw v T5; ,rav aorlTtyru, TV S. CTopaJiK f;Tr;. 'A)'Aa 4V ay , ai;' i' T^C 7rsvVL T; TV.V ITvprrip:C yEV;, xa! Y?'pxV4:, xaL; z.V/.S3;*; VXyLvu4 v.t Sc Al '&VAi} Voy* xna TV/ hATIrv a70.i y;v iv' / a Va, o 4rv ro ; xiTi Su.x;, Quvvoa- -nS,Aay.hJ;,
are to aflign to man in thefc two divisions? Ch. 2. And with refpcie to the first division A- riflotlc has decided, that he is by nature,ncithcr ?.c(;!,u r aylusCi 1 ; ot G --~3,-i ; -(xspn/-i; Ttci~ r/ [ ri c c, 1q: ' r ; Xeri; 70slvsv EirUI %tvr^V ro if;7.0 .- r 7 .TaTa 7ro1. ra t.e lhrai. i-r J3 rT:. tVv, adS;,-ao;, siblTra, c; ., bi'¼lw >7if.'»;. Upon tlhis p;ilige there a;re ieveral obrervations to be made. In hlefrJf place, I hold, that anl error has crept, either into tle MS, or the printed editions, where it is said, that rTi&' h;i;lv va; T_'. oiajv Ta rT ;.v TrChll.=, &c. For it is impdllii)ic to conceive, that any of the lbolitary ani- mals, that is, such as by nature live in i'olitude, and in solitude only, lioulld be political. It is therefore plain, that the division only relates to the gregarious; so that the text fliOluld run thus, rTV Ji ad;,..a.v r,. !ivT oXivra=, T, si ticfSar,, where v.e may obierve the great propriety of the word ,fS.a, which delltes,f'attered, likefecd tkat irjfqun 1/5pon tie grori;d; and therefClre very fitly exprcllbs the condition of those alnilmlls living together in flocks or herds, but having no common bond of union.,2dly, In this paTsilge r.;/sJlole calls man a po,'tilca a- imaial, and clafies him with the bee and ant; firom wllich it lay be inferred, that Aribtotle underltood man to be by nature political, not by inllitution only. But with refpec to his applying to him the word Zoxrroi, it is to be obfcrved, that those adjecives in -Ir;, whether de- rived from verbs or noiuns, signify tle capacity of do- ing, without diltinAion whether the thing to which they nre applied have the acual pollcfiion of the capacity, or the power only of acquiring it. Thus it may be laid of man at tie time of his birth, that he is c. e;p .fr.a.v, as well as when he is grown up, and in poflTflion of the fa- fulty. And in the Peripatetic definition of man, he is said to be, bOcv x:.-iy; by wlhich is certainly not mealit,,that
Ch. 2. ncither gregarious nor solitary, but parti-,cipates of both: and, I think, rightly. For man is allowed by all physiologists to,be that he is rational at the time of his birth, but only has the capacity of beco;ing b : and Arillotle hiifeilf, in his Calr,5ries, lhas uscd the words Jr.:; and nrv.o: to cienote him tha;t h;;s no more than a tnaltral np/istutl for excelling in thlof exerciiis, without having acquired the ,habit. Sec /,:;ai:;ius in Ci, satfor. p. 13. It is true, the (reek languai;re is very rich in woords, and is plainly the work, not of grammarians only, but of philofo- phcr.a; yct it has not made all thlofe accurate dillin.iio.ns :::-d divisions of tilaus .hichi plhilolopniy makes: and :accordingly, thoul il it has di:li;::;iilhed betwixt e:esrgy :ind 'oe:r, yet it has not d(illi ogiliced betwixt that k:ind o! power whicl I c.ll c, t/-'ii!/. y, and ifliial c.;paci:ty or * Jc:'j; io tihat ;'irii.:, as we have f;ci, was obliged to ulc the litme word (.'ui :) to esprcis both, tliougls he has very acciirately made the dlilliinion. I hold, there- fore, that f-g. -rc.,r;.cv in this paiiage denotes only an ani- mal ,i,!' , es f eioe g p'i;ica!,. And as to his classing man with ants and bees, it muil be allowed to be somewhat inaccurate, that lie did not there make the distinction betwixt being aftnally political by nature, and only ca- pable of heco:iin so : but I thinl; it is almoil inmpoflible to believe he thoughit mlan naturall political in tile la;ne sense that a bee is, wlhen h: rec!kons him, not even of the ,r.re:rari3us kind, but fomeiliiig betwixt them and the iblitrvy. Lai/71, We may obefrve upon this pafiage how pro- perly Tl,/esdirsi (io:a, the trafl.ltor of this part of A- ri.totle's works, has 1palraphralcd the word ; .fJ=trp=', vi:i:,l, ali.c (dir;,/./ui.':) a 'c;tic!: dZiunt, til ctrri/es ]1,a- fiaoc ,stt, msd) f-l~titudis, ,.' fnsrf.:!/e. Tlls T/esdrrus Gan-
be of more various mixture and compofi- Ch. 2. tion than any other animal known, as we lave already seen. He is rational, and he is irrational; he has intcllect, and he has not intellect; he is a biped, and he is not a biped; he is a land-animal, and he is a water-animal; and, among other vari- eties, he is social, and he is not social, In Ihort, he appears to be placed on the za was one of those learned Gteeks who fled from the barbarians, after the taking of Conltantinople, into I- taly; and was employed by the Pope of those times to translate the Greek learning into Latin. For this purpose it was necef.;try that he, and the reft of his coun- tryrmen who were so employed, lhould firlt learn the La- tin tongue, the knowledge of which was as totally loll in the eall, as that of the Greek was in the weft. We may judge, therefore, how much we are obliged to the la- bours of those learned Greeks, who, if they had not filb. mitted to the drudgery of learning Latin, as our bo)ys do at school, (a molt ungracious talk for men that knew at language so much better, and in whichi all arts and fci- cnces arc to b. found in greater perlfcaion than in Latin), could never have taught us Greek. Some of them, as it appears, thought themselves very ill paid for their la- bours; and it was either this T7eedgrar, or his country- man Georgius Trapenunliua, I have forgot which, that having got a purse of gold from one of the popes, which he thought too small a reward for the trouble it had colt him to translate some Greek author, threw it into the river Tiber, with this faying, Pcriere laborsc; percat ct eortum ingrata mnrcrc. Vid. Bruckeri HiJf. Philofpli.,VoL I. I. C c confines
Ch. 2. confines betwixt different kinds of be-,igs ; and as the Zobphyte is in the middle bctwixt the vegetable and animal, so lman appears to occupy the space be- twixt the several classes of animals.,But in what sense does man participate both of the gregarious and solitary kind ? Aristotle has not explained this: but it is obvious, that.in one fenfc at least he is a- kin to both; for as he can live in society, so he can live without it. For not only savages can procure for themselves the means of subsistence in a solitary life, but even men that had been brought up in societies, such as those of Europe, and con- fequently were in that state of indigence and dependence which is necessarily pro- duced by such an education, have been able, when forced to it, to live by them- selves. But further, as by no necessity of his nature he is obliged to live in society, so. neither do I think, that by any propen- fity.,f his nature: he is determined to.live in that way more than in the solitary life. And in that refpeft too I think he is in the middle betwixt the two kinds, and diiffrs from other animals, such as horses,,oxen,
oxen; sheep, and deer, which though they Ch. 2. can subsist without one another's assist- ance, yet have a strong inclination to the fcllowflip of their own species.,When I fay so, I would not have it un- derftood, that I believe, as Mr Hobbes does, that man is naturally the enemy of man; and that the Itate of nature is a slate of war of every man against every man ' This is such a state as neither does exist, nor ever did exist, in any species of ani- mals: and however ingenious Mr Hobbes may have been, (and he certainly was a very acute man, and much more learned than those who now-a-days set up for masters in philosophy), it is plain to me, that he did not know what man was by na- ture, divested of all the habits and opinions that he acquires in civil life; but filppo- fed, that, previous to the institution of ibciety, he had all the desires and pafions that he now has. But my opinion is, that man participates so much of the grega- rious animal as to have no aversion to the ibciety of his fellow-creatures, far less to be the natural enemy of his own species,,* Hobbes's Leviathan, cap. 13.,Cc 2 as
Ch . 2. as certain specieses are of others; and that,he also has so much of the nature of the solitary wild beast, that he has no natural propensity to enter into society, but was urged to it by motives which I shall as- terwards explain. What induces me to think that he is of this mixt kind, is the formation of his teeth and inteflines. He has teeth for tearing, and others for grind- ing; whereas the solitary beast of prey has only teeth for tearing; and the frugivo- rous animals (so I call tholie who feed on- ly on grain or herbage) have only grind- ers, such as the ox and flieep; or if they have teeth which serve sometimes for tear- ing, such as those of the horse, they are not near so much incisive as those of man, which, by one nation that has been discovercd upon the coast of New Guinea, are ulet as an ofFensive weapon; for we are told, they bite those they attack, like (logs '. As to the intestines, the animals of prey have ihort guts, the fiugivorous have them long ; but man has them of a middle length betwixt the two. And in,* This is related by L: ile're. See the pafltge quoted below, when I fpcak of barbarous nations.,conformity
conformity to this ftrucure of his body, it Ch. 2, is well known that man can live, either upon the fruits of the earth, or upon the flesh of other animals. His nails, too, seem to place him in a middle state be- twixt those two kinds of animals. The frugivorous have no nails at all; the car- nivorous have crooked nails or talons; and all such animals Aristotle, in the pas- sage above quoted, fays are solitary. But man's nails are straight; and therefore are fit for tearing, though not so fit for piercing, or holding, as those of the beats of prey. Accordingly Sir Francis Drake tells us, that he found a p, ople in the South sea who had the nails of their fingers about an inch long, which served them for of- fenfive arms i".,Eut though I think that man has from nature the capacity of living, either by prey, or upon the fruits of the earth ; it appears to me, that by nature, and in his original slate, he is a frugivorous animal, and that lie only becomes an animal of prey by acquired habit. The histories of antient nations inform us, that the people," The particul:r panflige is quotcd aftcrwards.,in
Ch. 2. in the first ages lived only upon the fruits,of the earth *; and that he is not natu- rally an animal of prey, what Mons. Bou- gainville relates, and which I have heard,* Diodirus, in the beginning of his hiltpry; lib. i. cap. 8. edit. We/Ieling. gives this account of the way of living of the first men. He fays, they subsisted upon herbs, and the fruits of trees. Pazfanials, in his defcrip- tion of Greece, lib. 8. in iiiilio, informs us, that, ac- cording to the traditions of the Arcadians, a very antient people of Greece, the first inhabitants of that country, lived in the fame manner. And even in the times of hillory we fee, from an oracle recorded by HcDostuls, that they were then eaters of acorns, lib. i. cap. 66. The poetical fiAions concerning the golden age, have, like most of the other fiftions, a foundation in hitorical truth; particular!y in that circumllance, of men living upon the fruits of the earth without blood or slaughter. For the account which the antient Greekl' oets, 'ho were their first historians, as. well as philosophers and di- vines, give us of that age, is no other than a reprefenta- tion, a little embellilhed and exaggerated, after the man- ncr of the poets, of the simple and natural way in which men lived in the firIt ages of the world, .feeding upon herbs and fruits, which the earth produced fpontaneoul- ly. This golden age may be said yet to cxift in orme of the countries that have been discovered in the South sea, where the inhabitants live, without toil or labour, up- on the natural productions of the earth. /In some of those countries there was nothing else that the inhabitants could fublilt upon; particularly in the Ladrone ijlandJ, when they were firit discovered by the Spaniards, there was neither hog nor dog, which are animals commonly found in the islands of the South sea, nor any other ter- rtilrial animal, betides man. : - likewise
likewise from others, that when he landed Ch. 2. in the Malouine, or Falkland ijlands, as we call them, which are uninhabited, all the animals came about him and his men; the fowls perching upon their heads and Ihoulders, and the fourfooted animals running among their feet. Now if man had been naturally an animal of prey, their instinct would have direced them to avoid him, as experience direcds the wild animals of this country to do. But though he be not in this first stage of his nature an animal of prey, yet I hold, that he has even then no natural propensity to society.,I know that this opinion of mine is very different from the common opinion, and that it is generally believed, that men are by nature as much, or more, united to their kind, than any other species of ani- mal. But let those who believe so, confider one thing belonging to our species, and which seems to be a peculiarity that dif- tinguiflies us from every other land-animal, and Bets us at a greater distance from our kind, than even the beasts of prey are frorn"theirs; what I mieain is, the prI'aficc of men feeding upon one another. Those,.* ' .i ,1'who
Ch. 2. who judge of mankind only by what they,fee of the modern nations of Europe, are not, I know, disposed to believe this; bur they may as well not believe, that there are men who live without cloaths, or houses, without corn, wine, or beer, and without planting or {owing: and if ;there .was any doubt before, it is now entirely removed, by the late discoveries that have been made in the South tea . And I am,persuaded, * I mean, thole made by Mr Banks and Dr Sblanfder in their late voyage to the South sea, where they found 'in the country called Ae.u Zealand, a people who fed on human flefl; but were, in other refpcas, far from be- ing a barbarous or inhuman people, but, on the con- trary, brave and generous. I mryfelf krnow a French Je- suit, one 1ioif. Rlubaud, who was miflionary among a tribe of Indians in North America, called the A/11bina qysi!, and who told me he saw eight and twenty British men eaten at a breakfalt by a tribe of Indians who had come to the atliltance of the French in the late war, from a remote part of that country towards the wert, where they fill preierved the cuilom of eating men, which appears to have been once universal among the nations of that con- tinent. The Britilh had been taken prisoners by this tribe; and though the French general, 1lMoi. Mloncalme, was at great pains to save them, and offered the Indians double the number of beeves in the place of them, he could not nccomplinl it; for the Indians said, they were not such fools as to prefer the flelh of oxen to that of Englillhmen. And I have heard it well attelted, that tome civilized men, who by gfeat necefity have been reduced to tho,extremity
persuaded, that all nations have at some Ch. z. time or another been cannibals; and that men, as soon as they became animals of prey, which, as I have laid, they were not originally, fed upon those of their own kind, as well as upon other animals: so that it appears to me evident, that man has not that natural abhorrence to the flesh of man, that lions and tigers, and extremity of eating human fiefl, have declared, that they thought it the fwecteft they ever tafted. I nn well informed, too, that there is a nation in the inland piart of Africa, where human flelh is e::posed to i.lle ill the market as beef and mutton is among us. Garcil.5'J de la Tega, (an author of whhor I tfli1l give a particula; account afterwards), in his hiitoiry of Peru, fays the fame thing of a certain nation in South America, upon thn authority of a Spanilh writer, one Pedra dre Cicca, who affirms, that he saw there, with his ovwn eves, the hu- man flesh cepoled to sale in the lninibles; and thiit they ate their own children whom they begat upon their fe- .male captives; and with refpe&t to th:ir male c'psivcs, they gave them women to breed out of, and they ifatteneii and ate the offspring as we do cal;es and lambs; Ibcs i. c!.ap. S. We need not thereiore doubt of the truth oe thoe flories told by Herodotus, and other anticnt au- thors, of Indian and Scythian nations that fed on mens lelh. We are not however to believe, that their eeer tvas a n?.tloi that fed promifcuoifly upon one another; for the flat is, that ail such nations eat caiy their ene- mies, or lirangers, whom they treat as enemies, and fuchl of their own people as die, er beco^nm 'af.efs througlh age or infirmities.,Vol. I. D d other
Ch. 2. other beasts of prey, have to that of their,own species; who, so far as I can learn, never feed upon one another except when urged by the extremePf hunger.,This therefore is another peculiarity of .our species, which distinguishes us both from the carnivorous and frugivorous kinds of animals; and proves to me in- conteflably, that what is said by philofo- phers of the attachment we have to our common nature, and of those ties of love and sympathy which bind us so fast toge- ther, applies only to the ratiohal, not to the natural animal; for as Marcus Anto- ninus the Emperor has observed, we are social, bccaufe we are rational .,Let us next confider how man stands with refpcct to the other division of ani- mals, into political and not political: and I fay, that he is likewise in the middle be- twixt these two; for' he is political, not by nature, but by inflitution, and acquired habit. And indeed, if he be not by na- ture even a herding animal, it follows of confeqtrence, that he is not political: nor can we suppose that any thing is natural to an animal that 'is not sleceiry for his * ;JTr r1 .y:OK5»,vI uft .I .olrz.i . l'lif. lit. T0.,subsistence,
subsistence, which certainly the political Ch. 2. life is not to man ; whereas to the bee and ant it is natural, because it is neceiTary i and accordingly thofee animals have never been found single or detached. With re- fpet to man, it appears to me, that he has herded, and entered into the political life, for the fame reasons, and at the Tfme time; and therefore I believe no men have been found herding together who did not like- wife carry on tome common work; that is to fay, as has been explained, lived in the political state.,But is man the only animal that is in this state with refpec' to the social and po- litical life ? If it were so, it would be no- tling extraordinary in so extraordinary an animal as man. But there are other animals. ofthe fame amphibious nature. And,fit/, there is the wild boar,- hich, while he is. young, is a herding animal; but when he grows old, he lives by himself, and becomes what the French call un fblitaire. Then with rcfpcct to the political slate, the horse. in this country is not a political animal,. though social. and gregarious: but in the deserts of Tartary and Siberia he is political; for being there hunted by,D c 2 the
Ch. 2. tlhe,Tartars, as hares and deer are, in this,country, they, for felf-defence, form them- ltlves into a kind of community, and take joint. measures for saving themselves, which they commonly do by flight'; and that they may not be furprili-d by their enemy, they ftt watches, and have com- manlders, who direc and haflen their. Ii!i4t; some of whom have been seen brlgiingh up the rear, and biting and kick- ing the hindmost, in order to make them run faster.,But there is another animal that re- femblbs us flill mo.e in this refpeed, and that is the beaver; of which I lhall fay a lrcat deal more afterwards, but it is sus- {icient for my preJent purpose to observe, that le is precifely;what I suppose man to be, amrliplibious betwixt the solitary and tle social life: for in certain countries, particularly in North Amnerica, and some of the northern countries of Europe,: he is foan(l living in what may be called ci- vil Jpicty, without metaphor or exagge- ration; whcreas in other. countries, where they alrc not so numerpus, or in those Arery countries when they happen to be difpcr- red, and thicr villages (for fb I may call,them)
them) ruined by the men who hunt them, Ch. 2 or when they are prevented by men from associating, as they are in all the south- crn countries of Europe, they lead a soli- tary life, and hide themselves in holes, without any community or public good :.,Of the fame amphibious kind is an ani- mal well known in this country, viz. the hare, which being few in number in all the countries of Europe, and much perse- cuted by men, lead a solitary life, and ne- ver associate or form a public; but in the plains of Tartary they are gregarious. The fad we are aftured of by the fame au- thor who informs us of what is above re- lated concerning the horse, viz. Mr Bell, who has publified his travels through Tartary and Siberia, which he made with the Ruffian caravan that goes to China. Now I cannot conceive that the hare, which by its nature appears to be solitary, fllould associate in Tartary for any o- ther reason except sustenance and self- defence; which, as I fliall shew after- wards, are the reasons that made men first herd together, and enter into the po-,i Bus/t's list. Natulw. vol. 8. pag. 297,,litical
Ch. 2i litical life. Whether the hares have any,thing of policy in their associated tfate, Mr Bell has not told us ; but I think it is likely they have ;. otherwise I do not think that they would have come together. For even those animals, filch as the sheep, wvhich are not political while they are fed and protected by us, become so when they live in a kind of natural state by them- felvcs in the hills: and accordingly they arc observed to set watches in the night-, time against their enemy the fox, who give notice of his approach; and, .whea he attacks them, they draw up in a body, and defend themselves. And, in general, as nature appears to me to have always some further intention than pleasure mere- ly, and the gratification of appetite and, inclination, I think it is probable that ihel has not given to any animal that.defirefor society, without intending that it Ifhould be ufefil. for ibme political .purpose, ei- ther of sustenance or defence: so that I; doubt whether gregarioli s and political: ani- imals differ entirely in their natures,, oP only in the more or left, so that some by the. neceffities.of their nature are more politi- cal, others lefst, ',But
But that the fierce and ravenous. ai- Ch. z. mals, which subsist entirely by prey, are naturally solitary, and averse to all society, cannot be doubted, for this plain reason, that they can both subsist and defend themselves without it. For though some wild beasts are much stronger than others, yet as they do not prey upon one another, the weaker have no occasion to associate in in order to protec themselves against the stronger. :But though they have no foci- ety on that account, they are by nature directed 'to associate with the female at certain tiies, for the purpose of priopaga- ting the-fpecics; but this inter;couirfe con- tinues no longer than is necessary for that purpose. That time is longer or fliorter according to the nature of the animal. In birds it continues a considerable time, bc- cause both the parents must contribute to the support of the young; whcreas in beasts it is commonly over very ibon, the care of the offspring being entirely left to - the mother. Of what kind our commerce with the female is in the natural slate, wvhether we be of those animals which Linnmeus calls bizsa;uozs; that is to tay, which pair for the propagation of the fpe-,cies,
Ch: 2. cies, and continue jointly their care of the Wow offspring; or whether we are not in this,reti)pe rather to be clafed with the ox, the iheep, the deer, and almost all the o- ther beasts of the frugivorbus kind, as well as those of the carnivorous; is a difquifi- tion which belongs indeed to the history of man, but not I think to our present subjec.,I shall add only one observation more before I conclude this chapter: That tho' we should suppose that men herded toge- ther before they entered into civil society; yet I think it is impossible to believe, that while they only herded together, they ever could invent a language, which could on-' ly be the fruit of that firikt intercourse ivhich the political life produces. Our business therefore at present is, to inquire how the political life began,,CH AP4
C H A P. III. Examp'les from antient and modern J iory' of,gMen living in the Briut/J State, -iitloiut Arts or Civility. BUT before I enter upon this inquiry, I Cl. 3.,think it proper to support the ac- count I have given of the original state of human nature, both with rcfped to rz- tionality and fJciety, by sacs as well as by arguments: for it is very different firom the notions commonly received, and will no doubt appear incredible to those who have been taught, that man is by na- ture a rational, as' ell as a social and po- litical animal, and have read large vo- ].limes oil the fubjl te of the aw of inaturc, fiouilded all upon the supposition that ci- vil obciety, or the political life, is the ori- ginal and niatu'al Rtate of man. I have al- ready given sundry examples of solitary savages that have been found at different times, in different parts of Europe, with- 0iit language or arts of any kind, and e- ven without the erec form; and I will now proceed to lsew, from the history,VOL. I. E e both
Ch. 3. both. of the antient and modern world, itha,,there have been found whole nations, not indeed altogether without arts orcivility, (for.that is impoffiblc, since, according to nmy hypothesis, they associated together only: for the purpose of carrying on ofme joint: work), but with ib little of either, that:we can be at no loss to ftippofe:a prior state,: in which there were none at all.,:And I will begin with instances, fur- nified me by an antient author,;,namely Diodorus Siculus, who was a traveller. as well as an historian, and whose work, the greatest part of which. is unhappily loft, was the fruit of.the labour of thirty years, which he fpentiin icolleding materias, and travelling inte .the different,! parts of th .world, which he had occafioprtpen- tion in his history ?. I am the mpore in- clined to lay weight upon the .faas..re- corded by him, that his style is very, plain and: fimpe ; so that ,he appears to !e, to have spent that time in preparing. and di- gesting the matter- of his history,;, which many historians, antient as well ;as, mo, dern, have spent. in. adorning their flyle.,* Dikdor. Biblioth' lib..;i. in imito,,In
In the ibeginning of his history he fays, Ch. 3. that men at first lived dispersed, and sub- . silted upon the natural produdions of the earth ;! that they had no use of lifeech, and uttered only inarticulate cries; but that having herded together, for fear, as he fays, of the wild beasts, they invented a language, and imposed names upon things -'. This opinion of the original slate of man he no doubt formed from the study- of many antient books of history that are now loft. But besides this, he re- lates .particular fadts concerning certain savage; nations which lived, either in A- frica, or upon the opposite coast of the Indiainocean, or that gulf of it whichis now 'called the Red fJn. Of these he had an opportunity of being very well inform- ed, by' the curiosity of one of the Ptole- mies, king of Egypt, who, as I mentioned before, sent men whom he could trust, on purpose to be informed concerning such natiinsi ; and besides, the pallion he had for hunting elephants made him diicover more of Africa than I believe has been dif. coverd' in miodern times.,: Lib. i. cap. 8. edil. Ve llIng,,E c a TheX
Ch. 3. The first instance I shall mention from '^^ IDiodorus is of a nation, if a herd of men,may be called so, of ie.rvr,., or fijf-eaters, that lived near the firait which joins the Indian ocean to the Red sea or Arabian gulf, upon the Asiatic fide. They went snakcd, and lived entirely by fishing, which they praclifed without any art, other than that of making dikes or mounds of stones to prevent the fish which had come with the full tide into the hollows and gullies upon that coait, from -oing out again with the ebbing tide, and then catching them in those ponds as in a net '. In this way they employed themselves for four days, and the fifth day they all set out for the upland country, where there were cer:ain firings of fresh water, of which they drank, after having filled their bellies with filh. This journey, fays,This is precisely the way of fil.ing praftifed by the inh;lilirants of New 1 loland, as delcribed by Dampier in his Tr',vcls. 'Thlis Da;mpicr appears to me to be one of the mo!t accuratc and judicious of o'r modern travel- lers :- b that when we rind him agreeing in his account o' the cul'orms of biarharous nations, with an antient hi- tflrian whom I ami periladed he never read, nor perhaps eer heard oi; we can hardly doubt of the truth of the,our
our. author, they performed just like a Ch. 3. herd of cattle, making a great noise, and ' ' uttering loud cries, but all inarticulate; and after haying filled their bellies with water, so that they could hardly walk, they returned to their habitations upon the coast, and there passed a whole day incapable to do any thing, lying upon the ground, and hardly able to breathe through fullness; after which they re- turned to their only occupation, of fihing in the manner above describcd: and this was the round of their life. The women and children were common, belonging to the herd. They had no sense of what is juif, honest, or decent, living entirely un- der the.guidance of inflint and appetite. They had no arts, unless we give that name to their way of fishing above men- tioned, and a certain method which they had of curing and prefcrving their fili, very particularly described by Diodorus. They used no weapons except o!lnes, and the iharp horns of goats, with which they killed the Ilrongcr fiih. They had no use of fire, but roaftcdi their fiih upon the rock:s by the heat of the fin. Neither do thley appear to me to haave had the faculty,of
Ch. 3. of'fpeech; for though our author does Gr^j not expressly fay so, yet I think it is his,meaning, from the account he gives of their journey to the springs: and it is clear that, they had nothing like religion or government *.,The next nation he mentions is that of the Ifienfibles t, as he calls them, of whom I have already spoken. Of there he fays expressly, that they had not the u'ie of fpeeeh, but made signs, like our dumb people, with their heads and hands. They lived, he fays, promiscuously with-other animals, and particularly with feals, which, he fays, catch the fish in the fame manner that these men did, who were also of the race of fiflb-eaters; and he adds, that they lived with those other animals,; and with one another, with great goodlfaith, and in great peace and concord. The most extraordinary particular he tells concern- ing them is, that they never used water, nor any kind of liquid, not having so much as an idea of that fort of nouriih-,* Diod. lib. 3, P. xo6. Slephani.,ment
ment ;: though even this I think is less Ch. 3. incredible than what more than one mo V dern traveller has told us of people in the South sea, that when they had occasion to be long at sea, supplied the want of liquids by drinking sea-water.,The next nation mentioned by Diodorus that I flhall take notice of, is one upon the African fide, in that part of lEthiopia which is above Egypt. They were of a quite, different race, being what he calls vxo;oal, or wood-eaters; for they subsistcd entirely upon the woods, eating either the fruits of the trees, or, when they could not get these, chewing the tender shoots, and young branches, as we fee our cattle do in this country. This way of living made them very nimble in climbing trees; and they leapt, fays our author, with ama- zing agility from one branch or one tree to- another, using both feet and hands ; and when they happened to fall, their bodies were so light that they received no hurt'.1',-~: ::~ They * Digd. lib. 3. P. I8S. ' The wild girl whom I mentioned above, mufl have been of a race of people very lik, ;tis mentioned by Di- odorus: for sue climllbed trees lil:c a filuirrcl, and leapt,from
Ch. 3. They too went naked, had no arms but,sticks, like the Ouran Outangs, who are still to be found on the fame continent, and their wives and children were in com- mon. Diod. p. I I .,Diodorus concludes his account of those savage African nations by telling us, that in the southern part of that great penin- fula there are races of men who, in the human form, live a life altogether brutal. p. 115.,Thus far Diodorus Siculus; from whose account it is evident, that there were in Africa, and the opposite continent of Asia, in his time, herds of people that lived without any civil society, even the do- froin one branch to another, upon all-four, with wonder- ful agility, as I was informed by the people of the vil- lage of S'olwe in Champaigne, where fnle was caught: and file till retained, when I saw her, a mark of the use of her hands as feet in leaping ; for her thumbs were of an unnhiual breadth. When ihe happened to fall too, she was so light and nimble that fle received very little hurt. For the Abbels of the convent of Cbalons, (near to Songe), where llhe was confined for some time after flie was ta- ken, fliewed me a very high window that flhe leapt out of into the lireet, without receiving much harm; and what flie did receive, fle imputed to the gross aliment they had given her, which flie said had made her so much heavier than when lhe lived upon wild food.,meelic
meitic society of man and wife, which is Ch. 3. the firlt fep towards forming a slate or political focicty.,\Vith Diodorus, in this account of the favagcnefs and barbarity of the people of Africa, agrees Herodotus; a man of the greatest curiosity and diligence that per- haps ever lived, and whose authority may be depcnded upon, lwhen he relates a thing limply as an hif:oical fad, and not as a hearlify. HIe , iealks o hlerds of people in this penninila that coupled together pro- mifcuoufly (r,,, r) like cartle, ,ib. 4. c. iSo.; and of men and women abfolutwely wild, lib. 4. C. I9 1.; and particularly of the Trog- locidtes he Iays, that they fed upon ser- pents and other reptiles, were hunted like wild beasts by the Garamantes, and by way of language made a kind of mur- muring inarticulate fiund which he com- pares to the cry of a bat, ibid.. c. 13. And it is not unlikely that it is the isume kind of language that MIornf la Condamine reports to have been fiiokcn by a nation that he met with upon the banks of the river Ama- zons: for it was a muttering murmuring kind of noifc, as he has described it, and which appeared to him to be formed in,,VOL. I. F f drawing
Ch. 3. drawing in the breath ; probably because,it was a low and olfclure found, not nn- like that which a man makcs who is very hoarfc by rcafon i . a colld ',As to modern authorities, I will bcgin with that of Leo Aificanus, an African !L;o; of ti;ceixtecnth century, who comning to Rome, d(id thlre abjure tihe ahometan aiith, and was baptized by the name of the Iponiid' who then filled the pan::! chair, Leo X. Iic had travelled much in the in- terior parts of Africa with caravans of merchants, and appears to me to have k;inownl more of that country than any modzrn. HIe wrote a decrirtion of it in Arabic, which is translatcd into Latin, anld publilhcd in nine bloolk, containing a very ccat accate account, both oi the men,Tliere is at race of imen yet to be found in thlt part of rati.iint .*.;li:i.ia t'r:t vwc call .i:,';.'.,', ,t, whofc lan- ,i.;: . r1i tiils il!l i nric that of tle T'qcg::, ici, as dc- fcrliic.l 1 y I'clod! ;; l'r it in:lkcs ha lliling kind of n'c, vec!"; iy "Cl['Cli by the Grcc' wordl Tu[:', (in ],: i' /, ia'!:,, ,' :C;. i iercd'.itus appicsi to to tile lngu;tIge oJ the 'r,/<: l':,.r, ;ild whiichl I liiipofi rcl'cmblcs tlhe fiiund in.idL; ;y a b:;t. (f tlheIC peapile in zEthiopia, tinn?'w*s, as v. was i '.mrae':: by one of his scholars, had an asc.Clut fr,.:' tw\o ri.'l:Cllcrs who hald biell in that cituilrv .It hii'ce;:)t tl:ts; ;and both agreed in this, :a:n fcvcrail (otile particurl:r.; concerning tlhofe rcn. See,I,,;. 5' '? . /I t!. ', v . I and. 3',and
and manners, and natural curiositics of Ci. 3. the country: and he agrees with Diodo- rus as to the favageneis of fbme of the people of Africa ; and particularly he fays, that in the inward parts of the coun- try, southward from 13arbary, there arc people that live a life entirely brutilh, without governent or policy, and coplu- lating promificuouifly with their fcmikllies, after the manner of the brutes -w. And he mentions another nation to whom he givcs a name, calling them Bor1l;.::s, w-ho lived not far distant froml the fiuntain of the river Niger. Thefc people, ifys he, are without religion of any kind, and have their women and children in common t.,The next modern author I fliall men- tion is likewise a very diligent and accu- rate writer. It is Garcilaf!o dc la Vega, who has written in Spanilh the Hilfory of the Incas of Peru, of whole race he him- fils was .. According to his account of,that Lib. 7 in i.iib. t Ibid. . Gs6. l He was born, as lhe informs us, cight ycars after the Sp:lifhl conqupcll of Peru was colnl; !'cd. liza notlcr was thie g:and-dtghtcr, if I :m:Ll;:c ncl, (o thile ''a:,I f 2 thlui
Ch. 3. that country, when the first Inca began,his conquests, or rather his taming and civilization of men, (for he was a conque- ror of that kind, fich as the Egyptians report their Osiris to have been), it was in- habited, for the greater part, by men li- ving in a slate altogether brutiih, without government, civility, or arts of any kind; and such of them as were in any decl-e civilized, had a tradition preserved among them, that they had been taught, as the sub- that preceded him who was dethroned and put to death by the Spaniards. He was brought up among his rela- tions of the Inca race, till he was twenty years of age; and frnm his mother and her brothers, as lie tells us, hc received information of the faas which he relatces in his hillory. He also employed hi, Icilool fellows the Indiatns, after he had formed the dcfign of writing it, to get him information from all parts of the country. His hitlory therefore, I think, may be cretleid as much as any that is only from tradition; which, however,- this history was not altogether ; for they had a kind of record Iy threads and knots. And indeed the faFis Ihe relates, and his manner of relating them, bear infrinfie marks of truth, at lealt that no falfoliood or fition was intended. And with relpec to the principal faats, we m:ay believe a tra. dition that went no farther back than four huludred yea:rs; about iwhich time the firail i/c, nlil;cs C/1,ae, began his reign; eljecially wlhcn it was preserved in tle ifaily of that prince, :and we may bclieve carefuliy pre- firved, and the incle carefully tIlat they had no written reccldi,.,jeas
jecs of the Incas were, by men, who came Ch. 3. from diliant countries, and imported a- mong them the arts of life. And, more particularly, he relates, that in Iome parts of Peru, which were afterwards civilized by the Incas, the people were under no kind of government, living together in herds or flocks, like so many cattle or flecp, and like them copulating promiscuously *. In other parts of the country, they did not so much as live in herds, but dwelt in caves, and holes of rocks and mountains, in finall numbers of two or three togctlcer, feeding upon herbs, grass, roots, and wild fruits, and copulating promifcuouflyv J. And in later times, under the fourth orfifth Inca, he mentions a people in the great province of Chirithuana, who lived altogether like beafcs, wandering in the mountains and woods, without religion or worfiip of any kind, and without any community or political go- vernment, unlcfs when they allbciated to infcft their neighbours, and make ufc of them for food ; for the end of their wars was to eat their enemies. These people were,* Li, . ó. 5. ,' 6.,' liNhl. c. 7.,so
CiC. 3. so brutish, and the country of so difficult,' access, that the Inca gave over thoughts of,conquering or civilizing them; and the Spaniards afterwards attempted it, bur without success, lib. 7. c. 17. He men- tions also another people of the fame pro- vince that lived near the Cape of PaJimi, who never having been conquered, or ra- ther civilized, by the Incas, lived, even at the time the author wrote, in a flare of the utmost savageness and barbarity, ha- ving no religion at all, and worthipping nothing either above or below them; in- habiting caves, and hollows of trees, with- out communication, friendihip, or com- merce, and hardly having language fufi- cient to understand one another '. One of the Incas, he fays, coming with an ar- my to subdue them, but despairing of be- ing able to reclaim them from their bru- tifh life, said to his people, " Come, let " us return again; for there deserve not " the honour of our dominion." Uponi which the whole army faced about, and returned home -1[. And thcfe people were ili,' Lib. I. c. 4.. C . 'I Lib. 9. c. ,,that
that state of barbarity, or very little better, Ch. 3, at the time the author wrote; for he fays, he himself saw some of them :. He further tells us. that one of the Incas found men that preyed on one another like wild beasts, attacking their fellow-creatures for no o- ther purpofei than to eat them. Thcei the Inca hunted on the mountains, and in the woods, like fb many beasts 1'.,But the communication and intercourse that has been betwixt tle fevcral parts of the old world on this fide of the globe, and likewise betwixt the old and the new world discovered by Columbus, during these last three hundred years, has made ib great a change of the manners and way of living of men in those countries, that it is not there we are now to look for peo- ple living in the natural state, but in an- other part of the world, as yet very im- perfectly discovercd, and with which we have had hitherto very little intercourse, I mean the countries in the South sea, and such parts of the Atlantic ocean as have not,Lib. 9. c. 8. L Lib. 8. c. 3. Sec anio c. 6. , 7. of the fiamc book, Yherc there arc other acccounts to the fame purpose.,been
Ch. 3. been firequented by European fhiips. What,I llall here set down of the wild people found in those countries is taken fiom a Ircnch collceion of voyages to the South Ica, printed at Paris in the year 1756, in two volumes 4to. The author's name, as I am informed, is Labrof'e.,Americus Vcl)ucius, who made the difcovcry of the continent of America for the King of Spain, and gave his name to it, was afterwards employed by the King of Portugal, in whofil service he made a voy- age in that great ocean which extends from Brazil eastward, towards the Cape of Good I-lope; and in this voyage he discovered a great trac" of country, which he calls a continent, where he found a people who, though living together in herds, had nei- ther government, religion, nor arts, nor any property ; and every one- of them had as many wives as he pleated. Amcricus was among them seven and twenty days, r.vicll was long enough to have observed what lhe affirms of their manner of living. 1ol. I. p. 96. of Labjef's Coillcfiol.,Jack the iHermait, a Dutch traveller, as- firms, that the people of Terra dcl Fuego live entirely like brutes, without religion,,or
or policy, or any the least regard to de- Ch. 3. cency, vol. I. p. 445. And the falme is v taid of them by an English traveller, Sir John Narburgh, vol. 2 . . 3. They are besides cannibals, and have not the least idea of honesty or good faith in their dealings, vol. I. 1. 445.,Another Dutch traveller, one PRoeseveen, came to an island in the South lea, where he could not find out that the people had any kind of government; but bome wav or other they had got a religion, in which they were very zealous, and trusted to it for their defence, in place of arms, againlt the Europeans, vol. 2. p. 235.,Many people in those countries have been found without almost any of the arts of life, even the art of defending them- felvcs, -or attacking their enemies; for but few of them have been found that have the use of the bow and arrow. Molt of them, like the Ouran Outalns, ufi no- thing but sticks and Itones; ant the lalt- mcentioned people, who hadl 1o much re- ligion, used no arns at all. Sir Fran- cis Drake diliovered certain illands in the South fca, to the north of the line, where he found inhabitants who had the,VOL. 1. G g nails
C:l. 3. nails of their fingers about an inch long,,which he uidcerftood servcd them for of- fen!ive arms, vol. i. p. 1 7. And Le Mere rne; v.;ih a lpeople in New Guinea, who uf'l thcir treeth as an offensive weapon, and bit like dogs, vol. 2. p. 396. & 397. Am;ong fl ch a pco;le, if there was any government or civil focicty, it must have ;becn very imperfc5:, and of late iniiitu- tion.,Thils s all, so far as I have obfcrvcd, tl:ht lhas hitherto been the Soiith tiea conccrniny the natural itate of * lcn dicre. But we have reafbn to expcct from tiofie coui:lrics, in a lhort tinec, mucih gr : ater and molre certain diliovc- rieS, iuc:1 ;s I hope will im rove and ln- latge thie I.nowl;cJi of our own fiecics as iluch as thez ntiural hifloory of other ani- mrals, and of ji:!. and linerals.,Beflore I co-ichit'ec this article of travels, I will quote o!!e traveller more, who is very little kilowVil tlhough h1e reports a ver',- etraorinary sac concerning our fpecLcs, and which wc ell defervs the at- tc:tiol of InatualliLs. His name is K'epinig, a .vcxied by birth, v:lso, in the year 1647, went to the Eafi lindics, and there servcd,aboard
aboard a Dutch flhip of force,. blonging (C. 3. to the Dutch Eait-lnidiacompany, in qua- lity of Lieutenant. In iailing throulg thole seas they had occasion to come upon the coalt of an island in the gulf of Ben- gal called icobar, vwhcee they ifaw ncn with tails like tlhofl of cats, and v:!hich they moved in the fame n:anner. They came in canoes along-side of the flip, with an intention to trade with them, and to give them parrots in exchange for iron, which they wanted very much. Severcl of them came aboard the Ihip, and many more would have come; but the Dutci were afraid of being overpowered by their numbers, and therefore they fired their great guns, and frightened them away. The next day they 1eit aihore a boat with five men; but they not having returned the following night, the day after the Cap- tain sent a larger boat alhore with more hands, and twvo pieces of cannon. When they landed, the cmen with the rails ca:!m about them in great numbers; but by firing their cannon they chaled them a- wvay: but found only tle bones of their companions, who had been devoured b1 the favagcs; and the lboat in which l re-;,C g ha .:
Ch. 3. had landed they found taken to pieces,,and the iron of it carried away.,The author who relates this is, as I am well informed, an author of very good credit *. Ie writes in a simple plain man-,ner, * The fiory is told in the 6th volume of LinnTus's ,liti'titale academi,;icr, in an academical oration of one Hioppi;m, a ficholar, as I ifupofe, of Linnxus, who relates the R(ory upon the credit of this Keoping, with several more circumftanccs than I have mentioned. As I knew nothing then of any other author who had spoken of men with tails, I thought the fat extraordinary, and was not dil'poled to believe it without knowing who this Keping was, and what credit he delerved. I therefore 'wrote to Linmcus, inquiring about him, and desiring to know where his book was to be fiund. He returned me a very polite answer, informing me, that the book was lately reprinted at Stockholm, 1743, aiud Salvium ; that the author vwas " natione Suecus, fecutus naves Belgi. " cas per plures annos, imprimis ad infulas Indita Orien- " talis. Incepit iter 16.;7. Erat Lieutenant navalis rei. " labet multa de aninialibus et plaitis fparfa, fimplici " slylo; fed omnia rcli(llu qu(a rctulit de his, fimpli- " citate ct fide funimna recenfct; quorum omnia reliqua " hodie notillima ct confirm.lta.". Upon this infornmatinil I got the book from Stock- holn. It is in the Sswedilh language, which I do not un- derftand; but that pailslge of it having been translated to me by a Swedlilh gentleman, I found it to agree exatly with the flory told by Hoppius. And the gentleman, who was very well acquainted v.ith the book, confirmed what Linnans savs, of its being written in a plain and fimlpie ayle, bearing intrinuic sarl:s of truth.,As
ner, not like a man who intended to im- Ch. 3. pose a lie upon the world, merely for the filly . pleafuire of making people flare; and if it be a lie, (for it cannot be a mistake), it is the only lie in his book; for every thing clfe that he has related of animals and Ye-,As this is a matter of great curiosity, I will subjoin what Linnmas further litys in his letter to me. "2. Bintittu longius poR eum (Keoping) vidit ipfe "honmines caudatos et noaurnos.," 3. Gefierus et Aldicrvanidui habent ex antiquis fiii- lem figuram caudati. " 4. Opus ilud Chlincne lingua et flylo Chinenfi cum figuris, 30 vol. Svo. quod poflidco, ct fitlit fideliter "multas et plantas et animalia, idem depingit. " 5. Rlimpuhiii habuit per plures annos vivunm homi- " nem noLurnum, quem aluit; auaor fidiflimis vocat ' eum Cacutlack. " 6. Brad mercator vivus qui din, per septennium, vixit in Malacca, fiquis alius vir gravis, candidus, ct ' fincerus, vidit hlominem nocaurnum, ct defcriplit in , familiari colloquio; onlnia quai ego novi antca ita fil-,cere, ut de cjus fide dubitare nequeam, mihi retulit. "Et nocaurnus ct caudatuw reAi incedunt; caudatus non loquitur. " Dalin suit informator Principis noari lihrcditarii, vir infinita eruditione ct fapientia. Hie edidit oratio- " nem quam habuit cora:n Soc. Re,. Acad. Scicnt. in "qua de his agit. " illotipertuis epiltola Gallica Bcrolini ad Rcgem "BoruTie de his multum agit. " Unius oculati teflimonium, quod vidit, pluris mihi " et, quam centum negantium idco quod non vide- " runt,",getables .,
Ch. 3. getables has been found to be true. I am,icnfible, however, that those who :believe that men are, and always have been, the flame in all ages and nations of the world, and such as we fee them in Europe, will think this fiory quite incredible; but for my own part I am convinced, that we have not yet dilcovered all the variety of nature, not even in our own ifecies; and the moil incredible thing, in my appre- henfion, that could be told, even if there were no facts to contradid it, would be, that all the men in the different parts of the earth were the fime in size, figure, ihape, and colour. I am therefore difio- ied to believe, upon credible evidence, that there are Hill greater varieties in our tipecics than what is mentioned by this traveller: for that there are men with' tails, such as the antients gave to their la- tyrs, is a facd tb well attested that I think it cannot be doubted *. But our Swcdili traveller, so far as 1 know, is the only one who speaks of tails of such clngth as those of the inhabitants of Nicobar.,That these animals were men, as they * Sec Linni.f Sjfti/e:a Aa!ur.e, v.'r, b. . 33. and Bi/s- fen'; .'attr,~t~,!/ It :j. a"l.,,trast-ickcd,
trafficked, and uscd the art of navigation, Ch. 3, I think cannot be denied. It appears, that they hcrded togc'her, and lived in iome kind of ibcicty; but whether they had the use of language or not, docs not appear from our author's relation: and 1 Ihould incline to think that they had not, and that in this refped& they resembled the Ou- ran Outangs, though in other refpecs they appeared to be farther advanced in the arts of life; for I do not think that any traveller has said, tlat the Ouran Ou- tangs praelifed navigation or commerce. They live however in society, aA togcehcr in concert, particularly in attacking ele- phants, build huts, and no doubt prac- tife other arts, both for fiftenance and de- fence; so that they may be reckoned to be in the firtl stage of the human progression, being associatcd, and pracifing certain arts of life; but not so far advanced as to have invented the great art of language,. to which 1 think the inhabitants of Nico- bar mull have approached nearer, (if they have not already found it out), as they are so much farther advanced in other arts.,C H A P,
C H A P. IV. Of thle progress of Civil Society. --That this,pfrogrefs Jheius it is not from Nature., Ch. 4. \T Nough, I am persuaded, has becn said,in the preceding chapter, to fllew fiom fad, and the history of mankind, that civil focicty at least is not from na- ture, but of human inflitution. And in- deed there is.fuch a progress in it, that it must needs have had a beginning:, for, as we have observed, there is no fuch,,pro- grc'fs in natural things. Firfi, we fee. men living together in, herds, like cattle. or horses, without even coupling together, or pairing, as we fee the males and females of certain other species do; but, never- thclefs, carrying oil ome common buii- ncis, iuch as fihling or hunting, or what- ever elie may be neceilary for their sus- tenance, though without any thing that can be called government or rule; and of this kind are the initances that I have quoted from Diodorous Siculus, Herodo- tus, and modern travellers. Next, we fee,thlem
them submitting to government, but only Ch. 4. upon certain occasions; and particularly for the purpose of felf-defence: in which cafe, it has been observed, that other a- nimals, such as sheep and horses, who are not by nature political, institute a kind of regimen and discipline; but which ap- pears to last no longer than the danger. Under this kind of occasional government certain inhabitants of the Caribbee islands were when we first discovered those islands. They had chiefs and generals in time of war; but in time of peace, they lived un- der no government at all *.,The next stage of civil society I flall observe, is that of the Indians of North America, who have a government in time of peace as well as war, and may be said to form a state. This government is administered by their facheins, or old men, who meet together in council to de- liberate upon public matters; and to their determinations in such matters the young men submit; but without any compulsion or punifhmenr, if they are refi'acory. But in other matters, every man is his own master, fibjec to no controul, not,* See Le Bas's account of those islands. VoL. I. H h ven
Cl. 4. even that of his parents. For thoughk,they havc all separate and (liitinc' famini- lies, there is no domeffic govcrlnnient a- mong them; neither have they aily laws or judgec;: so that every man defends his own rights, and rcvenges the injuries done him.,A' firider and more regular form of go- vernmlent obtains in the fevcral countries of Europe, which is adminiftcred byi cer- tain magifratcs, known under'different names in the different countries, accorlding to certain rules and iregulations, to which every membcr of' the state is obliged to llbmir, under ccrtain pains and penlaltics. For the great di;i,'lrence betwixt tiis. go- vcrn:ment a:dl the last mentioned,: is the power of punitihent which the. magistrate affium,;s; not only for offences agailit, the Itate, but for injuries done to any ;menber of it, who is not allowed to bchjidge'in his own cautle, but must apply to the ma- giftrat e for redress ; and he alfb determines evc'y question concerning right or proper: ty among the citizens, according,!to elta- bllifhed rules. But the private lives-of.the 1ib.jects under those governments'.are left as;much.to ;he free will of cacl indis;ilual,,and
and as little ifbjecd to rule, as in the Ch. 4. American governments above mentionedl: and every man in !uch a ltatc may with impunity educate his childrel in the .v'orl' manner.poflb le, and may abuse his owvn pcrfon and b'lrotune as much as le piaCts, provided hce (los 1no injury to his lneigCh- bou rs, nor attempts any thing alsaiit t!he state.-,Tlhe lafi stage of civil focicty, in lwhic the progrlcilon ends, i. tihat moil pei;i: form of polity, vhich, to sli the adva:n- tages of the governments iatl mcntionid, joins the care of the education of da youth, and of the private lives of the ci- tizens; neither of which is left to tie wilt and pleasure of each individual, but bioh are regulated )by pLublic witiom. Such was the government of antinct Sp'rta, and such wvere all the plans of govern!mnt cevilted by Plato and lther plhiloijllihrc.,Nor do 'focictics di!Fr le!s in tlhir lize and extent, than in their nature and inti- tutions. The first ocicty a:nong me'. was undcoubtedly thle family-ifcIy. in this way, as I-lo:er tells us, the Cyclois, a barbarous people of those timns, lived. And Mon. F :czieri in his -,-'owac to t!he,II 11 Co,.... -,:
Ch. 4. Solith sea, inform's 'ius, that a great. part,of the inhabitants of Chili live in the fame manner at this day. Some of those fami- lies produced out of themselves, without alin' foreign, mixturc, great nations. This was the caif of the flAily of Jacob. But the tnolt of nations have been formed by the afflciation of several familiesi; not,. however, a great number at first. For the Indianl nations of North America consisted originally of no more than three families, which are yet prefcrvcd among theml dif- tinc, and there is always one of them thAt is accounted more honourable: than either. of the other two '. The ;Roman fiatc, in like manner, consisted originally of'affociatecd families; a clear proof of whltih is, that even in the civil state; the antient family-government among them was'preferved in its full rigoui, irifomuch that the father had power of life and' death over'his children. From' such finall be- ginnings nations have grown to thd size of ,i * '!Welher tils particular lie mentioned in anylprint- ed account of Nnrth America, I do' not knov; but I lia'e it from the French jeihit I mentioned above, wlion I reck-on a better a.lithority in what relates to thcIndians of tht country tnar. any thi:ng we have printed.,which
whllich we now fee them; and the whole Ch. 4. hiltory of mankind is nothing but a nar- rative of the growth of ifamilies into na- tions, of finall nations into great, and of great nations into mighty empires. Theit at last become too great, and fall by thcir own weight. But they are never broken into so finall pieces as those of which they were originally conflituted: for 1 dou)t it is a mistake to suppose, as some do, that .there is a perpetual revolution and circle in human affairs. So far from that, it appears to me, that men are fRill going farther and farther off, not from the state of nature only, but from the original con- ititution of lociety.,This progress in civil focicty, and the many changes and revolutions it is fulbjcc: to, plainly flew, that it is not from na- ture, but of human institution. For, na- ture is permanent and unchangeable, like its author: and accordingly the wild a- nimals, who are undoubtedly in a slate of nature, Rtill prcfcrve the fame oconomy and manner of life with no'variation, ex- cept such as change of circumstances may make abfolutcly neceflary for the prefer-,vation
vaton. of tle individual or the species; and the v.ariation goes no farther than that ne- ceffity requires.,C H A P. V. Of the ca fes which gave rif to Civil So-,ciety. Ch. 5. I Think I have fliewn very clearly in the,.,. ppreceding chapters, that civil society,,whvichi alone could produce a language, is not from nature, or coeval with the ani- mnl, but must have had a beginning; and the quellion now to be examined is, I-Ho it ,khgan? for it is evident, that there m1iftlhave been some cauic of a change so great as from aJobitany, or at least an ani- mal. ?not political, to a Jocial and political a- niiyal. And I fay, that the fame cause thatfirft produced ideas, and made; men rational creatures, did alif make them so- ci?,,and political, and in process of..,time produced all the arts of life; and this caqfe' is no other thal .the 1:creities. of hu- mn lif. ... . ,A<; Hfltc
Hinc vanrie venere artes : labor omnaina it Ch. 5. Imp'tobrs, et duris irglens in rebus egeflas. lor not only did this want produce what is called the neceflry arts of life ; but as- ter those firfi: wants were supplicd, there arose another want very urgent likewiie, I mean, the want of occupation, of plcallrie, and amufcment, which gave birth to the pleafureable arts; and when the mind came to be cultivated, there arose a curi- ofity, and desire of knowledge, which pro- (uced the sciences.,But the necessities we are now speaking of were, either the want of subsistence, or of defence againfl filperior force and vi- olence. As to the want of sustenance, it appears evident, that in certain countries and climates the natural produce of th'e earth is sufficient to maintain man, as'well as other animals, without either fociet) or arts: but, in the first place, he may mul- tiply so much, that the fpontaneoiis growth of thl earth, without art or culture,''cin- not maintain him; or he may go to coun- tries ,and climates which by nature are'ndt fit:ctd'to support him. In either of tlefe cafes he muit have recourse to society and,arts,
Cl. 5. arts. It is by means of these, that man. -^^ has multiplied more than any other ani-,mal of equal size, and has become an in- habitant of every country and climate; whereas every other animal has only cer- tain countries or climates where it can lubfift. The other motive which I mentioned, as inducing men to enter into society, was felf-defence; the necessity of which will appear the greater if we confider two things. Firtf, That man is by nature much weaker and not near so well armed as many of the beasts of prey; and, fe- condl,, That he is the natural prey of all those beasts, when they think they can master him; whereas such beads do not prey upon one another; by which I mean, not only that a lion does not prey upon a lion, but that he does not prey upon a tiger, or wolf, or any other carnivorous beast, though of less size or strength, unless per- haps in cafes of extreme necefity. But man is the common prey of them all; and some of them who have tafted of his flesh are, like the Indians above mentioned, fonder of it than of any other; which is said to be the cafe of the Hippopotamus or river-horfe
in Egypt . In this so disadvantageous Ch. 5. situation, surrounded by so many enemies, nature appears to have provided no de- fence for man but superior sagacity. Nor would even that have availed him in the tingle ftatc; but it direcctd him to afio- ciate hirnfelf with others of the fame fpe- cies; to adt in concert with them; in flort, to intfitute civil society, and invent arts; and, among others, that great instrument of social. life, Language, without which mankind never could have proceeded far in the invention of arts. But with the as- fiflance of language, society, arts and fci- enccs, it is hardly poflible to set bounds to the progress of an animal, the moftfa- gacious and inventive, as well as the most imitative of any that has been hitherto (lifcovered; and who has from nature an instrument of art, which may be called the iltrlument of iflruiments, as by it he both makes and uses other instruments; I mean, the human hand, without which he could not, though possessed of such fupe- rior talents of mind, perform the works of art. He has already made himself the,* See Maillet the French Consul's account of Egypt. VOL. I. I i lord
Ch. 5. lord of this lower world, and acquired,dominion over animals very much itrong- er and fiercer than he, and by nature much better armed. The face of the earth he has changed by his art and industry, and even the elements and powers of na- ture he has made subservient to his pur- poses.,AuLdax omnia perpeti Gens hlnuana. - Expertus vaculum DAedalus anra Pennis nion homini datis *. Perrupit Acheronta Hlerculeus labor. Nil mortalibus ardunm. * This flory of D,rdalus is no doubt a poetical fiAion, though, like other poetical fitions, it has a foundation in historical truth; for the fat appears to have been, that Daedalus made his efeape from Crete in a fwift-failing vessel of his own invention. But it is not a fiction, that Billop Wilkins, a moRt ingenious as well as learned man, did try to invent an art of flying, and was so con- sident of his success, that he said, he did not doubt but that he fliould hear men calling for their w.ings as they now call for their tots,.,CHAP.
C H A P. VI. Continuation of the fjae Subjec7.-- Some counlll,tries nlot ft to maintain Mzen in the Naatural State.--All countries may be overlocked with Men, as well as with other A.nimals. - The Remedies initcb a cafe. T H E origin of human society is a sub- Ch. 6.,jeA of great curiosity, and of great importance in the history of man. I {hould far exceed the bounds of my work if I were to treat of it at as great length, and with as great accuracy, as it de'erves; I cannot however difinifs it without some further observations.,It appears to me, that without one or other of those two causes which I have as- signed for the origin of society, there never would have been society, language, or arts, among men: and could we suppose a country naturally so fruitful as to produce, at all times of the year, food in abund- ance for men, however numerous; and if we could also suppose the climate of such,11 i z a
Ch. 6. a country so mild as not to require any,protection from art against it, which is truly the cafe in many countries; and if we could further fiuppofe, that there were there no animals of superior strength, with which men were obliged to contend,-I do not fee how it ever could have happened in iuch a country, that men mfould have afnociated, and instituted civil society.,One thing at leaPt is certain, that in fruitful countries, and benign climates, men can live very well in the natural state, and may continue a long time in that slate; and I think it is equally certain, that in rude climates, and barren coun- tries, they cannot fubfifl at all without so- ciety and arts. In such a country as Ca- nada, for example, which is covered a- bout seven months of the year with deep hfow, how is it poftible the Indians could live without the arts of filhing and hunt- ing, by the first of which they support thenmflves in the fumner, and by the last in the winter ? As it is, they very often perish by hunger; but without those arts, or agriculture, and the art of preserving, as well as raising, the fruits of the earth, it is evident they could not live a year to,an
an end. For supposing that men could Ch. 6. subsist upon herbs or foliage, as horses and cattle can do, without feeds or fruits, (which however I do not believe); or sup- posing that they could be nouriflhed by the roots of certain vegetables, to be found wild even in the northern countries, which, for any thing I know, may be the cafe; a-nd supposing further, that they could dig for them with their fingers, as the wild girl above mentioned, whom I saw in France, told me the did ; where are leaves or herb- age to be found in such countries for one half of the year ? and how could single men, without infiruments of art, dig for roots in ground hardened like iron by frost, and covered with five or fix feet of snow ?,From these considerations I think we may infer, that men never could have lived in the natural slate in uich coun- tries; that is, without focicty and arts; and consequently, that in those countries the human race never could have a be- ginning, and that therefore they muil: have been peopled from milder climates, by tribes and colonies of men already ci- vilized, and who brought with them arts,,by
Ch. 6. by which they were enabled to subsist in,those rougher climates.,And this explains a fad- in the history of man, which I hold to be certain, as both sacred and profane history agree in it, That the progress of the human race has always been, so far as we can trace it, from the east, and particularly from Asia, where, according to our sacred books, the human race first began. For Asia (I mean Asia Minor, and the more southerly parts of that great continent) is a much finer country than Europe, and has always produced finer bodies of men, and other animals, as well as better vegetables ". This of itself makes it highly probable, even if it were not at- tested by history, that men having first associated themselves in those milder and more fruitful regions of Asia, did from thence spread themselves into Europe, and other parts of the world, where the cli- mate was not so propitious to the human race, and there fubfifed by arts which they had imported.,But the molt fruitful country may be overstockcd with any animal, and parti-,* This is an observation of Hippocrates the physician, in his treatise, De arre, aquis, ec locis, § 3. P. 288.,cularly
cularly with man, who I believe is main- Ch. 6. tained with more difficulty, even in his natural fate, than other animals of much larger size: for I hold, that he cannot subsist upon herbage or foliage alone , but must have feeds, fruits, roots, or flelh. And it is to be confidered, that man must have multiplied very much in his natural state, as he likewise does in the first flages of society -t. Now when men were so multiplied that the natural fruits of the earth could not maintain them, they were under a necessity to pradtife one or other of the following methods; either to dif- perse, and go in search of other countries,,* The Egyptians pretended, that they had sundry a- quatic plants growing in their river, which were funi- cient for the aliment of man, particularly one they call- ed the Lotus. If this be true, it is an exception to my rule; and is a very good argument, and as fuchl was u- fed by the Egyptians, in favour of the antiquity of the human race in Egypt, as being the country of all others the most proper to maintain man in his natural and in- fantine slate, as it may be called, without society or arts. See Diodsrus Siculus, in initio. i This is so true, that it was the itudy of the antient legislators to prevent the too great increase of their citi- zens; for which purpose they used itrange expedients, such as allowing the exposition of children, and even the unnatural passion of men for one another.,where
Ch. 6. where they might fubfit more at their krVJ cafe. But this in many cafes might be,impraCticable: for the countries round them might be, and in process of time cer- tainly would be, as much overstocked as theirs; or they might be hindered by fias, great rivers, or impassable dcecrts, To all which may be added, the natural avcrfion that every animal has to quit its native country, and the haunts to which it has been accustomcd. Or, 2do, They must prey upon other animals, or upon one another. But this, besides the danger of it, would hardly be practicable by man so- litary, unassisted by arts, and without o- ther weapons than those which nature has given him. Or, laftiy, They must affo- ciate and provide in common what singly they could not procure. And this last ne- thod, it is natural to think, so sagacious an animal as man would prefer to the danger- ous expedient of devouring one another, which I think can never be but the last resource among all 'animals '.,It * What extremities men have been reduced to for fib- fitence, even in the lirft ages of society, is evident from a fa&t which cannot be doubted, that several of the bar-,barous
It would lead me much too far from my Ci. 6, purpose to inquire, what methods were first used by men associated for increasing their natural flock of provisions. I will only fay in general, that I believe hunting must have been among the first; -- Clum jamo glandes atque arbtta sacre Deficerent filve, et vietlum Dodona negaret.,VI G. Georgic. For, as I have already observed, the natural fruits of the earth were the first food of men. My reason for think- ing that hunting was the firit expedi- ent they fell upon for supplying the want of those fiuits is, that it is much ea- sier than planting, sowing, or any kind of culture of the ground, before infiru- ments of art were invented. For man, by his natural strength and agility, with the addition only of a stick, which, as we have seen, is used even by the Ouran Ou- tan gs, whom some authors will not al- low to be of our fpccies, can master a great number of quadrupeds, efipecially if he be alliifed by numbers ; and I remember the wild girl I have so often mentioned, told barons nations, at this day, use for food the vermin of their own bodies. VOL. I. K. k me,
Ch. 6. me, that with no other weapon than a 9^>r bludgeon, which Ihe called a Boutoui ', ime,was able, with the assistance of the black girl her companion, to kill as much game as, together with the roots they dug up, maintained them in their travels through the woods. One natural confcquence of hunting would be, that in process of time they would think of the expedient of catching certain animals alive, taming them, and brceding out of them, which would greatly add to their flock of provi- sions. This producei tdie pastoral life, which is the only means of tfbfiflence of whole nations at this day. But it may be obfcrved, that, unlef in countries where flocks and herds can live through thle win- ter upon the natural produce of the earth, it is. impoiibie that menI can be supported in that way, without the afiifance of other arts, and particularly agriculture. And this is a good reason why the Indians of North America, not having the art of a- griculturc, have never attempted, the pa-,* It x;:s fiom this circumniance tllat I discovered she 1ad lbeen in oni of the Cari'bef il:n.ids; for in a French ;iccn;:t publiiiled of thoi: ifl:nds, by o:e Sictur la BcaZt, I find thti the Caribb:s ufi: thint weapon, and call it by the faime name.,floral
ftoral life, or to tame any animals other Ch. 6. than dogs that live upon fleih.,But I have no occasion to trace any further the progress of men in the arts of fubfiflence; it is fffiicient for my preient purpose, that I have brought them toge- ther by means of the first cause of aliTcia- tion I have mentioned, viz. the want of the izecrfrines of ls; and I proceed ncxt to examine the second reason I mentioned for the inflitution of society, JfSLf-dI',cc.,But before I come to that, it may not be improper to oblfrve, that this change of man from a frugivorous to a carnivo- rous animal must have produced a great change of charader. What effect the mere feeding upon filcf, instead of vegetables, may have upon the temper and disposition of the mind, I lhall not at prefie.t in- quire; but it is the way of procuring this flefl-diet, by the deftruc'ion of other a- nimals, that has produced the change I fpcak of. While man continued to feed upon 'the fruits of the earth, he was an innocueus animal, and, like others who lived 'in the fame way, more diifofcd to flyi from an attack than to make one. But as soon as he became a hunter, the,K k 2 wild
Ch. 6. wild beast, which is part of his compofi-,tion, became predominant in him. He grew fierce and bold, delighting in blood and slaughter. War soon succeeded to hunting; and the neciefary consequence of war was the victors eating the van- quilhed, when they could kill or catch them '. In this slate, man, if not tamed, or subdued by laws or manners, is the most dangerous and most mischievous of all the creatures that God has made; much more so than any lion or tiger, or any other the fiercest animal that roams the forell. It was in this state that Or- pheus, the first civilizer of men, in. this wcftern part of the world, found the fa- vages of Greece, when he imported a- mong them the arts he had learned in E- gypt, and tamed them by religion and music.,* It is so at this day in many parts of the earth; and, I am persuaded, it was so originally among all nations. In the language of the Iroqutoi of North America, to put on the cauldron, is to declare war, as Charlceaix informs' us. And though those hunters have given over eating their enemies, it is certain, there is nothing in which they delight so much as blood and slaughter.,Dicius
DithIs ob hoc lenire tigres rabidofque leones A. Which is one of the fic2ions of the Greek poets, where the truth of history is easily seen through the vail of fable.,C H- A P. VII. WIhat dangers made men ajfociate for the Jfake,of fe/f-defence. M1AN, in the natural fate, must stand Ch. 7.,in need of defence, either against , wild beasts, against men of the fame country, or, lastly, against foreign inva- ders.,As to the first, those who know no more of the history of man than what they have learned from observing the customs and manners of their own and other modern nations of Europe, will hardly believe,,* Silvqflres honines facer inlerpre/fque deorum Ca'diirtnz et VICT rEiDo deterruit OQpheus: Dilfus ob lho Icnire tigire rabidofque leones.,HOR. Art. Poet. 392. Where the fledus vifrus is no doubt the eating one ano- ther; from which, among other barbarous cultoms, Or- pheus reclaimed them.,that
Ch. 7. that there was a time when wild beasts,disputed with us the empire of this earth: but nothing is more certain, Te'npora ft fiflojifle 'elis cvolvere mnndi.,HOR, And it is likewise certain, that they very often prevailed in tli dispute, till art and numbers came to the assistance of our na- tural strength and agility. And therefore the first heroes, and grcateft benefators, of mankind, next to the inventors of arts, were those men of superior fircngtlh aind valour, who fought with andt destroyed wild beauts. Such was Hercules of old: I mean, not the Greek Hercules, the obn of Amphitryon, who came too late into the-world to have much ado of, that kind; but the Egyptian Hercules, several thousand years older, wvlofe exploits the Greeks, with their usual vanity, alcri- bed to their hero, who was indeed origi- nally from that country, and from thence probably had his name ". The arms. which,the * He had at firht another name, which I have forgot; but afterwards his parents, vwho were both criginally from Egypt, thought proper to give him the name of tll,.Egyptiaa
the later Greek fables (for tliey arc not so Ch. 7. old as Homer i') give to this hero, were very probably the arms of his antient name- fake of Egypt; I mean, the club, and the lion's fidn, thcfe 'being the only arms then known. But experience would soon discover, that it was neceilaury to have o- thcr and better arms againit enemies so Egyptian god. See Ilrodotus, ib.. 2. ci,. 43. c s. who tells us, that, in order to Icttle the )oint of antiqui- ty betwixt the £E;ypti.n and Grecian c l-ercule], he m:ade two voyages, one to 'ITyre, and the other to Thiafls; iii each of which places there was a temple of Helriles, both long prior to the Ibn of .;lci/era: from whence lie very jullly concludes, that tllele temiples werec craecd to the Egyptian Hercules. Suclr was the curiosity a:id di- ligence of thi; hiiiori:ln, who had si little of the vanity of his countrymen, that in this, :aid fcveral other inllan- ces, he was at uncommon pains to rctfte their vain lici. * According to this poet, he v.ore neither lion's skin nor cl'il), but was armed with a bolv and arrows; and ib he is introduced among the other spirits vwhich appeared to Ulyfife, in the i ith bnok of the Orvlsi:, e^r/' 6c6. And u:on this occaf;on, it m;ay he obfervrd. that a rceat deal of the Grcci: lab!es an:d rlig;on is poierlior to Ite days of llhorcr: for iln his time, ne:ihcir this !ecicules, the flo of AlMclena, was worl:;ippcd, nor C allor ald lPo!lux. .\And 3Bacchiis, .-ho became so rc:'.! a;t ,od ai'te' aird.s, is, I tilik!, lint on-c mnliion;ld in {o hcr, and that in a way that de:; lhim no honour ; for she is repr;:.: ned as tiin- nih;g a:.w-;. i-or. Lyci:gs;;, the King of Thrace, and hidiing hiti;.clf 1:n til: occ;.;,,muchl
Ch. 7. much superior in bodily strength ; and,that it was also necessary to avail them- selves of their numbers, and to adt toge- ther in concert, both in attacking and de-,fending. * Even after arms were invented in Greece, and the lfe of them well known, the Caledonian boar was de- firoyed with much difficulty, and not till he had killed a great many of the youth of Greece, as Homer informs us, Iliad, ix. 542. And in much later timesi as latd as the days of Crcefus King of Lydia, a boar laid waste the lands of the Myfians, a people of Aia, in the neigihbour- hood of Crccfis; and they not being able to defroy him themselves, sent to Crecfus for assistance; who according- ly sent them his son. at the head of a chosen 'body of hunters, Herod. li1. I. cap. 36. I know the mere mo- dern reader will reject all these lories as fables, anrd will not even believe Pausanias, who fays, that he saw the tusks of the Caledonian boar, which were preserved as late down as his time, and gives us the dimenfions'of them. But the learned will have no doubt of the truth of either of the flories, knowing well, that even what is called the fabulous hifory of Greece, .is for the great- er part true hiflory; mixed indeed with many romantic cirumRfances and fuperfitious tales, which a little saga- city and critical difcernmcnt can easily separate from the truth of hillory. As to Herodotus, though, I know, his authority is by many thought no better than that of Homer, and the other Greek poets, yet I will venture to affirm, that whoever underfiands his history, and has diligently fludicd it, will hardly doubt of what he re- lates, not as a hcarfiy, (for he has many flories of that kind which he tells us he doesnot believe himself), but as a simple hiitorical fa&. But as to this article, concerning the difficulty of mens defending themselves against wild beads,in
fending. And this I hold to be one kind Ch. 7. of felf-defence that made association and a public necessary; so ncceflary, that Dio- dorus Siculus mentions no other reason for mens herding together '.,The second reason I aff,gned for affo- ciation under this head was the violence and injustice which men had to fear from one another. For as soon as men began to multiply very much in any country, there would neccffarily be an interference about provisions; about their layers, where they slept, or refted, and fheltcred themselves from the weather, in the first ages of the world, Diodorus Siculus, in his ,d book, informs us of a savage nation in Africa, that he calls fir()o:, from their fecding upon roots, who, he fays, not having the use of arms, could not defend themfclves againlt lions, and would have been quite de- troyed by them, if it had not been for a multitude of fi;es that came at a certain season of the year, and drove away the lions. It is in a situation such as that of those re-ot caerJ, that I fippofe men would, from the motive of felf-defence, enter into political society, and invent arts of defence. And not only by fuchl fierce beasts have countries been rendered not habitable, but also by rep- tiles, fulch as serpents; and small animals, such as mice, frogs, and sparrows, which, in fevcr.l inflances mentirned by Diodcrns, lib.. 3. 114. Stcpia;i, have got the bcter of peeple with all the advantages of society and arts, and driven them out of the country. * Di.c:rim, li . ca. . p. VOL.I. . L 1 .- Glanzrdc
Ch. 7. '--Glandem et ctibilia propter; ,,aind, lastly, about their females, ,: -cuneremz incertam rapientes nore ferarium.,HOR. Such' intcrfereence would produce firife and contention; of which the consequence would oftcn be wounds and death, and ii which tlhe ftrongcr would always have the better, as wve oblerve in the herds of other' aiiials, where there is no other law 'but that of the strongest. In this Way there wOiiild be great violence, opprclion, and deftHuction of the fi)ecies; to prevent which, so fa- gacious an animal as man would be natu- rally led to form a kind of public, by the st.rength of which the weaker might be made more powerful than the fironger, and the whole focicty benefited in every refpec. * By what I have said here,' I would. not beunderftood to retract what I have said above in opposition to Mr Hobbes, that tlih state of ntture was not a fiate.of war: fr: I pcrfcctly agree with Mons:. Rous- fe'ti!;that there are 'in that state much fewic;Lr occasions of quarrel than initlic:ftate o'focicety; for, ii the natural flate;,'men cah quarrel only ''aib6ot the' necearfi'es of,*r ' ~' life,
life, and the gratifications of natural ap- Ch, 7. petite; whereas,: in, the civil flatc, ,en;c ^ .quarr1, about fame, power, pre-eminence, and all the numberless gratifications of vanity and luxury. But what I maintain is, that when men grow numerous, a!id the necesSarics of life scanty, they imrUt, like all other animals, prefer cach himfiilf to another, and that will of neccflity pro- duce strife and contention. But this is not: the confcqucnce of the natural flatc in itself, but of the cxceflive multiplica- tion of the fipecics; against which nature has provided several remedies, fiuch as fa- mine, pestilence, inundation, extraordina- ry fcverity of weather, and, among o- thers, the deh'ruCtion of the animals "by one another, when provisions become scan ty.,The third rcafon of this kind I men- tioned was protection againit foreign in- vaders. This proceeds upon the fuppofi- tion of associations being already formed by some herds in the neighbourhood for inyading their neighbours, either from mere wantonness, and a liirit of conquest, which has produced many cruel wars a- mong men; or for want of the necessaries of life, which has obliged men very often,L 1 z to
to'leave their own' country; and try to find out another. This would naturally lead the people of the country invaded to aflbciate themselves, in order to take com- mon measures for their defence. : 'One or other of these reasons appears to me to have made men first affociate:for the fake of felf-defence; and this, joined with the want of the necessaries of ilife, accounts for the origin of society among men. ;,C H A P. VIII. Aifwer to the objection, That inftincit was fitfficient to provide men with all the ne- cetjiiies of life, and to defend them agaiitl their enemies. Ch. 8. IT may be objected, That all the necefli-,ties I have mentioned,' whether of sus- tenance or defence, might be supplied by inflinct, with which 1 have fuppofed;man to be originally provided by nature, as well as other animals, for whose wants we fee it is sufficient; so that the reasons I have mentioned did not give rife to focie-,ty;
ty; which therefore may still be from na- Ch. 8. ture;, and not an adventitious state, as I ' suppose it, introduced by the necessities of 1ife.,This objeeion is pretty much the fame with the argument which I stated in the first book, and endeavoured to refute, tending to prove, that our ideas are from inftind *; and if it be true, as I think I have ihewn, that our ideas are not from inftint, it will follow of necessary confe- quence, that those arts of sustenance and felf-defence, which cannot be without i- deas, are likewise not from intfind. I will, however, without repeating what I there said, add some' further observations concerning the difference betwixt infcind and art.,But, in thefitf place, it is to be observed, that I do not deny, that nature has made sufficient provision for the preservation of the race of men, as well as of other ani- .mals:. but fie has not made provision for that extraordinary multiplication of the fpe- cies, which makes society and arts necessary. For nature appears to me to have kept the,' Pag. 154.,balance
Ch. 8 balance pretty even among her, children;,and therefore flic has provided, that-no species of animal should increase= very much ; because that could not be without prejidice to the other specieses: for this reafbn, when any one increases irmmode- rately, it is cither reduced by famine, and the other calamities above mcntionedl, or by being preyed upon by themielves or o- ther animals; and, by these means, the equilibrium is restored. Now, this' would certainly have happened with refped to our species, if it had continued in the'na- tural state, and those arts of fufienance and defence above mentioned, had not been invented. And the queLtion at pre- sent is, Whether those arts could have proceeded from initini , or must have been the effecd of art?,Betwixt there two there is this material difference, that inflinlc is a principle of adion implanted in us as in other animals, by which we are directed to what is ne- ceffary for the preservation either of the individual or the species; but without any knowledge of the end, or how the means conduce tr the end; and, conlequently, without a'il/, which never can be but,where
tvhere there is an end in view. Art, on Ch. S. the other hand, acts with knowledge of- the end, and of the means by which it is attained; and consequently its operations are voluntary, proceeding fiom motives influencing the will. But besides this ca- pital difference, there are the following.,fl, All animals are direded by in- ftind -to search for, to find out, and to makclufe of the food which nature has provided for them. But it has not diret- ed nor,inflrucded them to multiply that food,,.and to make the earth produce more of;it than it naturally produces. In other words, inftind does not teach us to till, sow, ,or plant.,2dlj,, Intfind has directed us to make the bedl use of all the parts or members of our body for procuring our subsistence; but it has not directed us to make artifi- cial instruments, either for increasing the quantity of food which nature has provi- ded for us, or for bringing within our reach food which otherwise would, by. our natural faculties, be inaccessible to us. * 3ay, 'Nature has direded every animal to the best use of t}ofe .arms, ofenlive. or defensive, with which {he has provided the,animal;
Ch. 8. animal; but fihe has not taught us either,to make or to use any other; so that whenever we fee an animal using adventi- tious aids of that kind, we may be sure that it is the effed of art. And if there were nothing clfe to convince me that the Ouran Outang belongs to our species, his using sticks as a weapon would be alone iifficient. Horace therefore appears to have been very well inftrueted by his phi- lofophy in the progress of man, from in- flind to art, and from natural to acquired faculties, when he tells us, that men, as long as they were nmuturn et turpe pecus, that is, altogether in the natural or brute state, fought, unguibus et pzglis, glandema et cubi- lia propter;-deini fiibus, that is, when they came to be a little advanced towards humanity, and in the state the Ouran Ou- tangsare at present; and then, almis qzue pof fabricaverat igts, that is, when they were so far advanced in civil life as to invent arts ".,The ' ." Cum prorcpferunt primis anihnalia terris, " Mutum et turpe pecus, glardemi atque cubilia propter, "Uilguibus et pugnis, d:in filtibus, atque ita porro " Pgnabant armis, quz polt fabricaverat ufus." I will subjoin the reftof the paflage, as it flews that,Hlorace's
The fitm of these differenccs betwixt art Ch. 8. and inftinft seems to amount to this, that ' ' inlinc't goes direc'ly to the end it pro- poses, or does not go fnr about; whereas art takes a round, and performs its ope- r:tions by tfudying the nature of things, comparing ideas, and drawing confequen- ces from premiffcs; cx. gr. Nothing ap- pears to us more simple than the use of a tfick for a weapon, yet the animal who uses it must know, if/, the nature of wood, That it is a hard body; 2dly, That any Horace's philosophy perfecaly agrees with mine with rc- spec to the invention of language: "Donec verba, quibus voces fenflifque notarcnlt, "Nominaqnie invencre: dehinc abfifte:e bello, "Oppida ccmpcrnuit munire, et ponere leges, "Ne quis fur cifet, ncu latro, neu quis adultcr.",Satir. III. v. 99. et fegq, The diftinflion that Horace makes here betwixt verld and n1sinta I flall afterwards explain ; but what I quo- ted the paillrge for at present is, to observe, that the pro- grefs according to Horace was, first the natural or brute iate, widiout language or arts of any kind; then the invention of certain arts, particularly the arts of attack ;md defence; - then language ; and laflly government ;nd ltaws, and every other art of life, connected with, and dcpnmdent upon thcfe. This fyllem, I believe, will, pann the lri tcs examination, be fitind the true fyfiem of hinlian n natur ; and a hiflory of man would be no- Qiing cief than a commentary upon there few lines. VOL. I. M nm hard
Ch. 8. hard body, impelled upon another.body ^*^ with force, will make an impression whicl,may very much hurt or destroy that other body; 3dl', That the manner in. which the human hand can make this impreflion in the moll forcible way is, by taking. a flick of a moderate length, and suitable thickness, by the one end, and in that way making the blow. All these ideas the Ou- ran Outang must have formed from ob- lcrrvation and experience, before hc ufec.a stick as a weapon-offenfive. Whether, he be so far advanced in tile art of cudgel- playing as to use it likewise by way of de- fencc, and for warding blows, 1 cannot tell.,Another difLerence which we may ob- iervc betwixt art alnd inilinct is, that as art is founded upon experience and obfer- vation, Ib it is improved by. them; and it is by gradual improvements in that way that arts are pcrfeeted: but inifinc,, as it does not arilf friom experience, fb it is not iiproved by it. And accordingly: a fial- low builds her nelt, and a fIider weaves his web, as well the firll year as any.ycar thereaftcr. . ;,ThIus it appears1,.thlat inftinc.and art,are
arc' ii'thieir natures" different, tlhiughi in Ch. 8. their' oderations they fometimcs feein ro' bc the faie.; The bee, for example, f6i.ns 'her hexagon: cells 'as accurately as ififhe had bdeen initruded by Euclid; yet- i'is 'imp'6ffble to believe, tliat file nnderfrnds geometry, and knows the rules by wtich Ihe' works, or even the end for vhich ihe works. It is therefore only inftin&t, but an imftinct of an extraordinary kind, in whlidh the wisdom of the great Author of n'atrrc:inamnifelrs itself more than it usually does"'ii the operations of brutes. Now there' is not the least reason to think that we ever had such an' uncommon inildnai, or any other than what we observe in hor- sis, cattle, and other quadrupeds of this country. Such inflin& certainly niver could have taught us to till, sow, or hunt, or to invent arms, either for attack or dc- fencc.' 'It appears therefore evident, -that our ififind could not have supplied those wants' which made society necessary.,Before -I conclude this chapter, 'I' will make some observations upon the 'confe- quen'e which the introduction of art has had with rcfpect to the numbers, both, of men and. of other animals. And, ini' the,Mm2 fslz
Ch. 8. f)y2!place, as I have already observed, It is,by; the means of art that man has. pread himflf over the earth more than any o- ther animal known, so as to be of all cli- matcs, and to inhabit countries which o- therwile could not support him. d1il*, It is by the fame means that he has multi- plied in the several countries much more in proportion than any other animal of the fame size. But, 3d/y, This I think could not have happened without the destruction of many other animals. With refpe' indeed to such as we have tamed, it may be thought that we take so much care to pro- vide food for them, which they would not have without our fliil and industry, that they fnould multiply more under our go- vernment than in their natural state. But it is to be confidered, on the other hand, what numbers we consume of them in food, and how many more we destroy of them by hard labour, and by ulng them cruelly or untiilfully. Becidcs, they do not propagate ib much, and are not so healthy under cur care, being housed, and kept in a way not unlike that in which we keep ourselves, as they would be in the natural state. But with refiect tothe wild,animals,
animals, I think there can be no doubt Ch. S. that they are greatly decreased by the em- pire which man has obtained over them: for in certain countries we have destroyed whole specieses of them, such as we found troublesome or dangerous to us; as wolves, for example, in Great Britain and Ireland, and lions in every part of Europe. What remains of them, we preserve for our sport and pleasure: but though they be under the protection of the laws in all the kingdoms, I believe, of Europe; yet those laws ;have been so much neglected or e- vaded, and so many ways have been fallen upon of destroying them, that I hold the fad to be certain, that their numbers are decreasing daily, even in Europe, and much more so in other countries, where the men iubfift upon them, as in North America. I am persuaded therefore, that with refpet to us and the brutes, the ge- neral law of nature takes place, that no species can be increased beyond its na- tural proportion, but at the expcnce of o- thers'.,* Ian, fays iliomus, is tle plit,-t/ing of Jove, (Tr Ty. mTy T a7fi), or, as Mr Pope has rendered it, the fianding,itfi
Cl S. j es of leacve. But if Momus, quitting his sportive vein,,Ihould allilme a tone of keen fitilre, and virulent in- vcclive, and if M. Roulffea fliould lend him words, lie would fay, that man is the mot inifchievous animal that God has made ;--that he has already alhnol dlepo- pulated the earth, having in many countries dellroyed whole specieses of animals, and continuing daily to de- stroy thole that remain, not only to gratify his luxury ;and vanity, but for mere sport and pallime. " What "atonement, most pernicious bipecd, or quadrnped, or "whatever other appellation moll offenlds thine car, "'what atonement canst thou make for this so great alb- " use of thy fupcrior faculties, and this deftrnaion of the creatures of God ? None other, except to dellroy " thyself next, and so avenge the reft of the animal race. "This thou art doing as fafl as poflible; and for this " only I can commend thee. When this work is ac- " complilied, then lhall the true state of nature; be re- " tored, and the real golden age return. Then 1ihall " flrxa vilit the earth again, whose latest footfleps are " now no longer to be Icen : so Ihall the animal crea- " tion, freed from a tyrannical and capricious master, ,' live the life which niature Iilas dcp.incd for thcmi, and ' acconmplifh the end of their hling: so 1I:|ll even man hlilnfelf, if any of the wretched race yet remali, ;c- Y, quit providence of the imputations he has thrown up- " on it, and fllew /hai he .m,,li made upl'ig, tlioitgh he " havc found o:t maty9 i:v;e:ie!In.",C H A P.
C H A P. IX. Ol.je;ltio aftwered, That there coull, be no,Society witlout Langllage.- Ilhances of such Sscicties. W Vill now try to solve Mons. Ptoufcau's Ch. 9. ;'rcat difiicuklcy with rcfpet to the in- vention of language. He is convinced that focicry is aiboiutcly ncccflary for this invention; but he seems to think that language was as necessary for the conftitu- tion of focicty. Now I will endeavour to shew, both from theory and frac!, that a- nimals may afobciate together, form a community, and carry on in concert one common bufincls, without the ufc of speech.,For this purpoil nothing eife is neccfl fary than that there should be among fich animals some method of communication. If therefore there be other mrnethods of communicatiion, befidcs that cf articulate iounds, thel;e is nothilng to hinder a so- cicnr to be conflitutcd without the ulf of PI)ccch. Now that there are other methods of commui cation, is a fact that cannot,be
Ch. 9. be d6ubted: for there are inarticulate,cries, by which we fee the brutes com- municate to one another their sentiments anld paflions; there are imitative cries; and,, lastly, there is the expreflion of looks:;. that is, the action of the face; and the geflures of the body. ,In one or o- ther, or all of there ways, it is evident that, animals may understand one another so far at lcaft as to ad in concerts and carry on foine common business, which, according to Aristotle, is the definiti6on of a political animal.:,As to instances of animals acting ii this way, without the use of speech, I. W2illihot inifit upon such aniiials as the bee'oirant, beciufe I hold, that 'they aat by'ihifintc rierely; that is, by a receifary deter.ni- nation of their nature, without any'will or choice, and without any knoWlede' of the operations of One another, or e''vti'of theii own; but I will give examples 'n- cxceptionable, of aiimals that aA ii' con- cert, and by communication, and''yet havic ho use of speech. ';Ani I will begini'x'th the beaver'; which, asI'li' 'rve observed ;already, resembles our species i'n 'this,- that it is of an ambighous,: . .. .'" * * nature,
nature, between the solitary and the so- Ch. 9. cial, without any nccelary determination to either way of life; lb that he fume- times lives in society, and bomctimes by himself, according to the circumftanccs and situation in which he finds hinifelf. In such an animal there mufC ncceflarily be choice and deliberation, not initinl merely ; and therefore 1 think his example will apply most appositely to our fi)ecies. This animal is truly political, in the com- mon. sense of the word, at leait when they arc in their social itate; for they live in what may be properly enoughcalledvillages, consisting sometimes of twenty or five and twenty cabanes, or little houses, and hlefe inhabited each by five or fix and sometimes to the number of ten pairs; for they are all coupled in that way, male and female to- gether. These several families compolt a community or ftatc, consisting commonly of an hundred and fifty or two hundred beavers, who work together in concert in all their public works, flch as felling trees, and building the dam of their pond. And of this great community each cabane is a part, forming a lcffer community, which works together, in every thing rela- ting to the cabane, such as building it,,VOL. I. N n and
Ch. 9. and laying up a magazine of provisions," for it: for they have property among o-,ther things appertaining to the political life; and not property belonging to the tfate only, which is commonly the cafe of the Indians of North America, but pro- perty belonging to each cabane. The con- firudion of their dikes and cabanes, as de- fcribed by Mons. Buffon, from whom I take this account *, is really wonderful, particularly that of the dike, which is a tfupendous work for an animal of so small a size, and built with so much {kill, that I do not think human art could build it better. They have not however that mark of humanity which I observe in the Ou- ran Outangs, of using any instrument be- fides those which nature has furnifled them, viz. the members of their own body; for though they have very short fore-legs, with the feet of them ihaped like a hand, having five fingers divided, with which they feel any thing, lay hold of it, and carry it to their mouths; and though they can easily erea themselves upon their hinder parts, and very often do so; yet they never use a flick, or any, other in- ftrument of art. But except in this par-,Hiftoire Naturedl, toir. 8. p. 289.,k1' tticular,
ticular, and that they have no use of Ch. 9. *speech, they are as much a political ani- .- mal as man, only much better policed than any community of men that we know at present: for they live together, and carry on their public affairs in the greatest peace and harmony, and with the exadeft observation of justice, never in- juring one another, either in their persons or properties. What signs or methods of communication they use in carrying on their works Mons. Buffon does not men- tion, but it is certain that they must use some; and if their policy were carefully observed, I am persuaded it would be found, that there is an established go- .vernment among them of one kind or an- other, without which I think it is impof- fible that the affairs of their community could be so regularly conducted.,In such a state I imagine men were, and must have been, perhaps for ages, before a language was invented. They must, I think, have been associated as the beavers are, living together in cabanes or huts *,,The huts of the New-Hollanders are not near so well built as those of the beavers, and serve only for a cover to the head and Shoulders, as I am informed by the tra- Yellers who havc.lately been inthat country.,N n 2 and
Ch,'9. and'coarrying on'of'concert..fome corhmon,work, either for their fuftenancei itbdh as hunting or fifaing,' or in the :way of' de- fence or attack. In 4hort, they must have been united in the political life ;,:for.,the mere herding together, without such 'union;, would not :be sufficient for ::the ·invention of so difficult an art,as lan- guage, or indeed of any thing whicj!de- serves the name of art. For though.l do not,deny, that man, by his naturalf.ga- city, and by experience and obeir.vation, might perhaps, towards the clofi of,along life, form some .imperfect idcas,,.,even 'without the help of political union,..I tlhink: it is impoflible!that he could. invent any thing deterving the name of art. -But it is-needlers to dwell. lngger upon this in- quiry.: for, as I have already said,. l do not think there is any reafoni to :bclievej that men ever herded together withdut aAing in concert.,Of so difficult invention does this art of language appear'.to me, that I.imagine mei-:muft previously. have invented land priatiLifed' more difficult arts than thle fish- ing praclifed by thlo.f inhabitants of New Holland whom Dampier mentions, or,.,-I ,t':: bYby
by. the fifh-eaters .of .Diodortus Siculus. Ch. 9. And though those New-Hollanders have the use of speech, I can hardly believe that they have invented it, but have learned it by intercourse with some other nation ; .and this I believe to be true of all the.nations that ,have been found in a very barbarous Rtate,- and yet having the use of fpeechw:,The next animal I shall mention living in a -political Rate, without the use of speech, is an animal not so well known'as the beaver, and mentioned only by one author, so far as I know, but an author of good credit, I mean Cardinal Polig- nac ", in his Anti-Lucretius. And he is the more to be credited in this particular, that the instance, as he confesses himself, makes against his system, of the brutes being no more than machines, according to the philosophy of Des Cartes, which he follows; This animal, he fays, he saw,* This author flourilhed about the end of the lal cen- tury, and was a man of great eminence, not only for leariing,'but'for political abilities; and was accordingly' much employed in public buiners, such as embassies; arid. negotiations of peace., In this poem, though lhe refuts Lucrcitsu, he has imitated his (yle and manner very ex- aCtly; and I think the diction of it is the bes mibodernh philosophic Latin extant. ",himself
Ch. 9. hiinfelf somewhere in the Ukraite, upon,the banks of a river he calls DanaJfris. It is named, he fays, by the Poles Baubacis; and is like a fox in appearance; but subsists upon herbage. They live associated in caverns under ground; and the business they carry on is, foraging in the fields, and making magazines for their provision during the winter; and it is about their fields and pasture that they quarrel and go to war. Their battles, as our author has described them, are very orderly and regular; for they have a kind of military discipline, and are formed into corps un- der certain leaders. But the most extra- ordinary circumstance he tells of them, is their manner of treating their prisoners of war, of whom they make saves, obliging them to work in the business of foraging, and laying up provisions against winter. And particularly he fays, that they make those slaves lie down upon their back, and hold up their legs, and then they pack the hay upon them, which their legs keep together, and having thus loaded there living carts, as our author calls them, they drag them along by the tail ". I,* nti.Lucretiut, lib. 6. verf. 175.,·-.." ';~ ~think
think it can hardly be doubted, but that Ch. 9. this animal, with so much sagacity, if it v had likewise the organs of speech, would in process of time invent a language.,The last animal of the brute kind I ihall mention living in this way, without lan- guage, is an animal they call afea-cat, of which we have an account, that I think may be depended upon, from the Ruffian academicians in the description they have published of Kanfichatka, which they went to visit by orders and at the expence of the Czarina. This animal is amphibious, and, so far as appears, does not form states or republics like the beaver, but lives in families, which are sometimes very numerous, amounting to a hundred and twenty, old and young: for the male keeps a seraglio, sometimes of fifty fe- males, of whom he is as jealous as the Grand Signior is of his. They keep up a very ftrit family-difcipline, punishing their wives severely for neglecting any point of duty, such as the care of the off- spring, for which they Ihew great love and tenderness; and the consequence: of this discipline is, on the part of the wives5- very great fubrmifion to their lord and,master,
Gh. 9. master, whom they endeavour to pacify,when they have offended him, by every mark of humiliation and contrition; all which he receives with the utmost ftateli- ness and sullenness. They have almost all the passions and sentiments of men. They are jealous, proud, quarrelsome, and re- vengeful; and when they have. suffered any injury, and cannot resent it, they, like Achilles in Homer ', fled tears. They are as brave as any Spartan, and will ra- ther die upon the spot than yield, or quit their ground; and their military difci- pline in this point is so severe, that if any of them runs away, or even is fufpeeted of doing so, the reft fall upon him as fiercely as they would upon an enemy, and destroy him t. Yet this animal has no use of speech, nor, so far as I know, organs proper for it: but it appears, that without-it he can praCife the most difficult of human arts, that of govern- ment, and of government over females,,*Iliadb. . v. 357. t Natur. HiJf. of KinafcJhatha, p. i2s. It is translated from the Ruffian languagc by James Grieve, and printed at Gltcefler, 1764.,in
in which most men have failed; and even Ch. 9, the legislator of Sparta, who, as Aristotle tells us, wanted to regulate the lives of the women as he had done those of the men, but found it so difficult a work that he was obliged to give it over.,But I think it is unnecelcary to give more examples of this kind from the brute creatiol, since it appears to me that our own species furnilhes fuflicicnt for my purpose. And, first, there are the Ouran Outangs, who, as I have said, are proved to be of our species by marcs of huma- nity that I think are incontcllable; and they have one property more of tie fipeciea than thn e quadruped savages above men- tioned, which have been found in differ- ent parts of Europe, that they walk credt. They live in society, build huts, joined in companies attack elephants, and no doubt carry on other joint undertakings for their fultenance and preservation; but have not yet attained the use of fpiccch.,But flould any one, after all that is said, still doubt of the humanity of the Ouran Outangs,_vwhat can be said to the example of dumb pcrfons among us, Vwhom no body will deny e cabe of toe capale of to-,\oL. I.0 o getdie'
gether in society, and carrying on jointly any fort of business; since we fee both men and women with that defeCt, not only ca- pable of acing in concert with others, but of governing and diredcing.,And thus I hope I have removed Mons. Rouflieau's chief difficulty concerning the invention of language, by flewing that ibciety, and even the political life, which he judges rightly to be neceilary for the in- vention of language, may exist without language. \,C H I P. X. Objecl:ion, That the of nature, as it is,t, eated of by modern 'writers, fiippo/es mlc to hI.e' beCL oIrineally rational and politi cal.-A iJ.zwcr to that o!;7ion. C. Io. T Cannot conclude this book without an-,i fwering another objection, which will readily occur to those who have fludied the law of nature and nations ; a study that was very falhionable some years ago, but I think has become leGs so of late. It will be said, That, according to my system of,human
human nature, it is impoflible to fuppofi, C. io. that man, in his natural state, can be sub- - jed to any law or obligation, not being conscious of any rule of adion, nor ha- ving any ideas of right or wrong, because he has no ideas of any kind. If this be so, they will fay, what are we to think of those volumes that have been written within these last hundred years upon the law of nature, all supposing, that man is by nature, and in his original flatc, ra- tional and social, and therefore subjed to certain laws and rules, which are laid down in those authors 'at great length?,My short anfwer,to this is, That those gentlemen plainly .,g the question, and suppose, what I think is clearly disproved by fat and experience, as well as argu- ment, that man, in his original tate, is rational and political. I think I have {hewn, that his natural late is no other than that of the mere animal; and there- fore he can be only fuibject to that com- mon law of the animal nature, well known by the name of iijZint7; a law much superior to all laws of human infti- tution, or founded upon human inflitu-,0 o z tions,
C. io. tions, and proceeding from a much high-,er original.,As to the authorities quoted against me, the firil who reduced this law of nature into a s),ysem, and gave it the form of a fcicnce, was Hugo Grotius, a name well known in tlhe learned world. This he did in his excellent trcatife Dje jre belli a pacis, written with a molf commendable inten- tion, to try if he could establish any rule of right and wrong '' among persons who may be said indeed to live in a state of nature, fhch as Hobbes has described, of nwar of every one aganilf evely one, and a slate infinitely more terrible than the state which he fuppolfios: for there only single savages fight,,- Glanlldem et cuebilia propter; but here leviathans t' indeed of enormous,s That fiuch was the intention of his work, is evident from what Grotius hilinelf lhys in his -i:cyo.=,,I, § 3. "Videbani per Chridianum orbem vel harbaris gelltibus,pudendam bellandi licenliam : levibus aut nuliis de " causis ad arma procurri; quibus femel lunlptis, nullam ' jam divini, nuilanm lhumani juris reverentiain, plane "quasi uno cdiatn ad o:mni:t fcclera cmillb furore.",TIh Tlis is the name whlich -Hoobes gives to the great corporations or political bodies we call (lutes.,size
size take the field, having not hundreds of C. io. hands only, like the giant of the poets, but hundreds of thousands, armed with deadly weapons, with which they wage moif cruel war. To speak without a si- gure, the dellrucionl of modern war is ib prodigious, by the great armies brought into the field, and which are likewise kept up in time of peace, and by the extraoridi- nary waste of men by fatigue, difcafes, and unwholesome provisions, more than by the sword, while the internal policy of Eu- rope at present is so little fitted to supply such deftrudion, that unlcfs the princes either fall upon some other way of deci- ding their quarrels, or provide better for the multiplication of people, Europe is in the utmost hazard of being againi depo- pulated, as it once was under the Romans, but without the resource which it then had of barbarous nations to repeople it. -- But to return to our subjed.,In this work, Grotius understands by the law of nature, a law which is common to the rational and social nature ¢, in con- tradiftindion to what is called civil laI7w,,* Li[. I. cap. I. § io, 12.,rwhich
C. Io. which is peculiar to each society or nation,of men. It is the fame with the law of nations, at least in the common use of au- thors; though Grotius has made the dif- tinction betwixt them, making the law of nature to arise immediately from the dic- tates of reason, and to be of universal ob- ligation, without any consent or com- pact; whereas the law of nations is found- ed upon the consent of nations ". But he confesses, that the terms are used promif- cuoufly even by the best authors t'. Now, I acknowledge, that Grotius, as well as Puffendorf, Barbeyrac, and many other later writers upon the fubjedt of the law of nature and nations, does fuppofc, that men are by nature rational, and were al- ways associated in flates or communities of one kind or another. But they only filppofe it, without proving it; and it is plain, they have taken it for granted, with- out so much as making a question of it.,But if their authority were more dccifive upon this point, I appeal from them to a,* Proleg. § 6. t Cicero, in a passage quoted by Grotius, lib. I. cap. r. § 12. fays, In re C ols l.fi: om t;imi gentium jar ,;alur.e putanda efI.,much
much greater authority; I mean that of C. io. those philosophers who formed the system of the Roman law: for it is well known to those who have itudied that law, that they were really philosophers, who, being at the fame time great men in the slate, and intrusted with the administration of public justice, did apply the principles of philosophy, and the method of fcicnce by definition and division, to the laws of private property among their countrymen; a thing that never had been before done in any nation. In laying the foundation of their fyflem, they have begun with the law of nature, as that from which every other law is ultimately derived. But what is the law of nature, according to them ? Is it the law of the rational and social na- ture only, as the modern writers upon the law of nature and nations have defined it ? No: it is a law common to the whole a- nimal race. " Jus nature," fay they, "eft quod natura omnia animalia docuit.,Nam jus iftud non humani generis pro- ;' prium; fed omnium animalium qux in "terra, qua in mari nafcuntur, aviumn "' quoque commune. Hinc defcendit ma-,ris atque fenmiina conjuntio, quam nos," matrimoniumi'n
C. -o. " matrimonium appellamus; hine libero-,rum procrcatio, hinc cducatio. Videmus " etcnim cmetera quoque auimalia, seras e- "tiam, iflius juris peritit cenferi.",Thus it appears, that as we, giving an account of the origin of language, have gone back to that original (Rate of our na- ture when we were no more than mere a- nimals; so those philosophers, in giving the origin of law, have likewise gone back to the Iame original state, when we were subjected only to that universal law which governs the whole animal nature, and is antecedent to rcafon, focicty, and 'all hu- man institutions. This is their law of nature. As to the law of nations, they define it thus: "Jus gentium eft quo "gentes humalnx utuntur; quod a natu-,ra;li recedere ficile intclligere licet: quia " illud omnibus animalibus, hoc solis ho-,mIinibus inter ti commune fit; veluti erga Deum religio, ut.parentibus et pa- " tria. parcamus.-- Ex hoc jure gentium "introducta bella, dilcretax gentes, regna,condita, dominia (diflinda, agris tcrmi- "ni i ofiti, ..'dificia collata, commercium, " cnt:iones, venditiones, locationes, con- " ducdiones, obligationes, iliftituta; ex-,'.' ceptis
" ceptis quibufdam qua a jure Civili in- C. Io. " troducze sint '*.",Thus those founders of the Roman law have diftinguifiled accurately what other writers have confounded, the law of nature and the law of nations; making the law of nature to be that which is common to the whole animal race, directing every thing that is neceirary for the preservation of the race; and they mention particularly the conjunction of the male and female, the procreation and education of the off- spring ; and law here is used in the fame sense as when we speak of the laws of na- ture which govern the inanimate parts of the creation. The law of nations, on the other hand, is not the constitution of na- ture, but arises from human reason, and the institution of society and political life; and it is called the law of nations, because it is the general law of the rational and social nature, and consequently of nations, which being independent of one another, can be subjec to no other law, at least of human institution. From this law, these authors derive religion, duty to our pa-,Panda' , liT . li . ti. I. VOL. I. P p rents
C. Io, rents 'nd our country, diftindion of pro-,perty, commerce, and, in fliort, all the rights 'that men enjoy, either in war or in peace. For our authors do not, like Mr Hobbes,' make war the natural state of man, but derive it from this law of na- tions : Ex hoc jure gentiun, introd2ala bella, O·c.' And this is the law of the rational nature, different from the laws of inanimate nature above mentioned, and alf';f'frbm the' laws of animal nature, in so far as the word law, when we speak of the' law of nations, is used, in the proper and' or- dinary signification, to denote a rule'of ac- tion prfccribed to a free agent, of 'hliich he is conflcious, and wilh which he'volun- tarily complies.,T!he rules of this law of nations,' as it ought to be called, I hold to be binding upon all rational men living. in fobciety, princes as well as fubjc's, andc'to' be fouindcd in nature; not' indeed the' origi- nril nature of man, but that secondary and acqu'ired nature of a rational and political creature, which he himself has £iormd; and therefore this law is not improperly called by tome later writ-rs, a ~fecoz'dary lbitw of nature, in con'traditihlction 'to the - "-' ' ;. p rilmnaty
priimaiy law mentioned by the Roman C. io. lawyers. I hold also, that the obligation of this law is as much founded upon compact, as the obligation of any private citizen to submit to the laws of the parti- cular society of which he is a member. For every man, by living in society, and enjoying the protection and other benefits of it, is underltood to have agrced to sub- mit to the general laws of the rational and social nature, without the observation of whichl, society could not subsist; and there- fore, if a man will not submit to this law, he muit fairly do as the Hottentot did, of whom Mons. Rousseau tells the story, that is, throw off his cloaths, and run to the woods and fields, renouncing all the be- nefits of society, as well as fubjecion to its laws.,And thus I have endeavoured to 'flew, that though society be absolutely necefi'ary for the invention of language, yet lan- guage is not necessary for the constitution of. society; and having thus prepared matters for the invention, I proceed, ii the next book, to ihew in what manner it pro- bably was invented, and of what nature the first languages were.,P p BOOK
B 0 K III.,C H A P. I. i?/hat uwas required for the invention of Lan- guage, besides the coiflitution of Society. Ch. I. N the preceding book, we have placed,man in a idate of society and of politi- cal union, carrying on of common con- sent, and with joint labour, some work necessary for defence, or the support of life. In this situation, and this only, couldl language have been invented. But more was necessary for the invention of so ditihult an art. And, in the frJl place, The proper organs of pronunciation were inmlilpenfably required. These are given to ibme few animals besides man; but I believe they are in noine so perfect.,2d1', They mufft have been a very long time in this political state; so long at'leaft as to have impros;ed into an art the bufiriefs tlicy were carrying on: by whicli I d6 not mean to rcquire, that they lhould have,been
been regular artists, knowing the caures Ch. i. and principles of their art, and operating by certain rules which they could demon- ftrate from those principles; but my mean- ing is, that they must have improved their rude practice at firfl into a better practice by observation and experience; and, in that way, have fixed a certain method of doing the thing, whliich, when it is done by de- grees, and from observation and expe- rience, may not improperly be called an art. For, as I have already observed, one of the great differences betwixt inftind and art is, that what is done by inflina, is performed as well at first as at last; whereas art is necessarily formed by gra- dual improvements. In Ihort, before man could have invented a language, he must have been perhaps for many ages in the fame state the beaver is in, as I have de- fcribed it above. For the beaver, of all the animals we know, that are not, like the Ouran Outangs, of our species, comes the nearest to us in sagacity, and, as I have already observed, appears to have tome o- ther principle of aAion beside inflinci; of which there is a proof that I have not mentioned, arising from the form of their,huts
CGh.:. huts or cabanes; which, as Monf.,Buffon,tells us, is not always the fame; fo,that it would appear they have different opinions of things as well as we: whereas inftind *performs every thing in the fame inva- riable manner. I am therefore persuaded, that the beaver did, from experience and observation, the old teaching the young, learn the architecure of his dike and. hi.s hut, as we have learned our architecure and other arts.,3d/y, Another thing absolutely requiied, as preparatory to the invention of a lan- guage, is, that men should previously have formed ideas. to be expressed by language: .for it is impossible to conceive a language .of proper names only without general terins. Now, ideas must have been form- ed by an animal, such as man, carrying on any common business, and operating, not'by inftint, but learning by obferva- tion and experience. For such an animal must have an idea of the end for which he ads, and of the means for attaining that end. For, as I have {hewn, every a- *nimial that does not ad from infinrid; like the-bee'or the spider, must ad't with know- .ledge of the end:. Besides, man, in the,. -/;9 - - . , -; . hfate
ftate-ih which I havedefcribed him,: nmuft Ch. I. necessarily have had ideas, however im- perfete; of trees and animals, and other obje&s, with which he was conversant: and he must have had more perfect ideas of the infiruments of art which he used; especially if they were of his own inven- tion.,LJfIly, It appears to me to have required an extraordinary degree of sagacity, to in- vent so artificial a thing as fpcech; nor do I think that there is any animal other than man yet discovered, unless perhaps it be the beaver, that has sagacity enough to have invented it: for however easy the invention may seem, now that it is discovered, and so commonly pracifecd; yet it was truly far from being obvious, but, on the con- trary, very far removed from common apprehension. For, in theffio place, Man, as we have seen, does not naturally form articulate founds; but, on the contrary, it is a great work of art, difficult to, be learned, even after it is invented, but infi- nitely more difficult to be invented, .2dly, Suppose this first difficulty got over, and!ar- ticulate founds invented, it was by no means an obvious thought, to apply them to the exprcffon of ideas, with the greater,part
Clh. I. part of which they have no connedion,,. at least that is easily difcovcred; for though,there be words exprcffing certain founds, which are imitations of those founds, it is certain that by far the greater part of words are not natural signs of ideas. And how is it poflible they flould ? for what natural connceion is there betwixt the i- dea of a tree, ex. gr. the earth, the fun, the moon, and any articulation of found? And indeed the making ideas in this way audible, appears to me to have been full as great a refinement of art, as the fo-much- boafled discovery of making founds vi- jiblc, I mean the invention of alphabetical characters; and so much the more won- derful, that it was invented in a much earlier age of mankind. And it must ap- pear Rtill more wonderful when we con- fider, that it is not the only method of communication, and therefore not abfo- lutely necefaryfor the purposes of.political life; but that there are other methods, as we:have seen, which in great part answer those. purposes, .and. with which accor- Uingly other animals that live in the poli- ticalllate, as well.as man, remained: fa- ti:ficd. Of these other methods we are,~...~. -~ .now
now to speak more particularly, in order to try whether from these we cannot trace the progress to the invention of language.,C H A P. II. Of the several hlethods of Coimmunication in,iife among men before the Invention of Lan- guage. T HE only ways that I can think of by Ch. 2,which men could communicate to- gether, before the invention of speech, are four: firjf, Inarticulate cries, expressive of sentiments and passions; zdly, Geflures, and the expression of the countenance; 3dly, liitative founds, by which audible things may be exprefled; and, lastly, Paintiig, by which visible objets may be Teprefented. The two first are common to us with the brutes; the two last are pe- culiar to man; and all the four may be said to be natural signs of what they ex- press; for even the connetion betwixt inarticulate cries and the things exprefled by them, though it appear to be the moRi,VOL. . Qq remote,
Ch.;2. remote, is so eltabliflled in nature, that it '- ' is.. understood by every. animal, without,any previous .compact or agreement ,..: -,,Of those inarticulate cries there is, a very great .variety; and it is really surprising ihq'yFmany different passions, fuchas.love, joy, anger, grief,. fear, the brutes ex- press. by them ; and I am persuaded,. the nerer the ceconomy of any of themicomes to ours, the greater variety will be. ;f und in their cries, because they have the,,more to.expr.efs by them.L The Ruffian.;.c.ade- micians fay, that the fca-caat above men- tioned, which has so much of human na- ture init, can low like a cow, growlilike abear, and chirp like a cricket,; .which lafitis a fong.of triumph after.he hasl van- quiflhed his enemy ";: and if tejbeaver living in a social. state was accurately observed, there would:be found:'!a.,reat variety of this kind; of language;-nmong themni When the brutes.are tamed, and b'ecomie familiar. wvith ' us, they. acquire v'i~6es and tones that. they had i'ot b'eibre, Thus i Porphyry 'tl::' 'hilofopher' tellsI us, liat.lhis partridge learned to.coriverfe,-witli him in a voice very different..,froim what,* Hit:lry trfcl.:t ,fi/ltk,,pi, l.8. , s- ',;,.;1 ' *p ' Ihe
{he.ufed in commuiication with her fel- Ch. z. lows','*; and some of'them, as it is 'well known,' may be taught to articulate. Biit it is evident, that all'this variety of cries, thoigh it were much greater than it really is,' would not answer the purposes of'hti man'life, when it came to be enlarged and exteldddl to many different arts and occti- pati0ons: which the growing wants of mien rendered riceffary. ' The next kind of expreflion I mention- d 'was that of looks and geflures, which is alfoVtery fsrong, antd -various among the brutes, and it is a language which they per- fec'tly well underfiand; The only use they make, of: it is to express their paflions ald feelings; but we know certainly, from the-example of dumb persons among us, that: it may be used to express ideas:,! and we, learn from history, that they may' be. expresed in this language with theiut- nmot accuracy and precision;. for in Rome therpw.as an art of this kind formed, call- cd:thlei pantomime art,- which was brought. to: tlhiurmoft perfection about the tinmpeof Auguftus-'Cafar t; An artist of this kind: ..:!;'" See'before, book r 'p. i. 6. ; ',t Sce Lucian, rip; E'X pIC. ;':'' Qq . c.EaulIdc
Ch. 2. could express by signs, not only every.fen- 'e' tim'eht and passion of the human nind,,but 'every idea, with as great accuracyi and as great variety- too, as any'-orator could do by words; and it is a noted story of Roscius the player in Rome, that' he u- fed to contend with Cicero, which ofithem could express the fame thing, he by looks and! gefiures, or Cicero by words, :.with the greatest variety and copiousness . . There can be no doubt but that, before the ,invention of language, this kindfiof expreftion, as well as the other by'inarti- culate cries, would be much ufedi iThat savage nation which; Diodorms Siculus, in the pafiage I quoted. before, calls. the In-- Jfefibles, converted in no other way ;: and the savages in North America do at this day'fupply thie leftcts of their language by, a great deal of action and gesticulation. But it is impossible to suppose, that this art of speaking to the eyes could be bi'ought to such perfeeion among savages as it was by Roscius at Rome, or by the panto- fiiimn'es in after times, who danced 'whole theatrical pieces,; according to the expref- ion' in antient laingage; that is, repre- sented them by geflures and movements pCrifrmcd to music, without one word,being
beingiuttered*. Even in Greece, where Ch. 2. all:the other arts of pleasure and enter- tainment were cultivated, and brought,to the highest degree of perfection, the arc of the. pantomime. was not carried so far as in Rome. For although their players did lo doubt exprcfs a great deal by their action, .particularly in the move- ments of their choruses, and their mdno- dies, there was no filch thing, so far, as I can:learn, praftifed among them as dan- cinga whole piece, or even acting a single monody, without speaking; at least not in the better days of Greece. For in the later times it is not improbable that they may have adopted the pantomimes of the Romans.; and Lucian appears to me to,*Before the Romans had pantomimes, their actors, such as Roscius, played certain parts in dumb fliow. Those parts were the nlionodies, or cantica, as the La. tins call them, which were foliloquies spoken in recila- tivo tomunfic. In fich parts of the play the ator among the Romans only gelticulated, ind expressed the sense by his aftioi, that is, danced, 'as they called it, wihileI an: other .fltig, or pronounced, the swords to music: :so that it was only in the diverbium or dialogue that the Rom: a actor used his voice. HowS this 'frange cuflom of divi. ding tlie a&ting ahd fpeakihg; such as never was pactifed in n,y; other nation, so far I, as know, came to be intro- duced among the Romans, Livy has informed us, lib. 7. f. 2. '*;'**- * Ispeak ' , !
Ch.;2. fppilko f it as aa entertainment, among the <r^ Greeks in his times.. , ,/,,np:£o r friom being,:brought to this;iftate . (jTih-ave often wondered.;thlat Horace, in his; lepillle to Anglttis, where he flatters that prince so much. as to compare the arts of Rome in his time to the arts of GrCece, in thee lines, "' l'.ini:tir ad finmtoz f/rluiutr'; spigimiru., alqute ; * Pflllmnusz, el Iuramur /Ichivis dlnij . ,tni, .ij .::, doesinot mention this pantominme art, which I believe' as the ornly one in which the Romans of those days:e:tdtled the Greeks. And this perhaps was one of the reasons. which 'made the people of Rome so passionately fond oF it:' for as to painting and music, mentioned by 'Thorce, I cannot believe that there. i'as the least degree ofcom- parison betwixt those arts, as prafifed in Rome, and as pradclfed in Greece, and particularly painting; for, so far 'as': I know, the Roma'ns never produced one good paipter; or Rfatuary. And: iith refpec to wnreflinig:; as the sirs pal.rjlra in Rome was, as I remember, no ear-. lierithan the days of Augnltus Ccfar, I think it is hardly possible that the Romans flhuld all of a sudden liave J-.' come filch expert wrelilers,, As therefore he flatters Au- gulus so much at the expence of truth, I can agllig ,jl, realbn why he omitted this pantomime art, in which he migbt;have truly said the Romans excelled the G'reek excep t hat he did not efleem it, either as a ufefualnta7 which it certainly is not among persons who can undesF fiard one another by language, or of any natural grace anod beality. And indeed it appears from what Ltiiari:' fays ';ip is dialogue upon;dancing, that the meh of (geal vity asnd corret taste condemned this mimical re¥prefe-,- ttiQon, as fit only for the lower fort of people,p ' ! :,' ' . , ' " l ' [ s J . : ' .,.,
ofj perfection among-,favages in thledlfirft Ch.;. Rtage of humanity, I am persuaded it wotldnot go the length of serving the pur- poses of common intercourse, where there was any number of wants to be supplied by mutual assistance: or if we could make lb wild a supposition, as that it would be car- ried to the fame degree of perfection as in the polite age of Augustus, till it is in sundry refpets far inferior to the method of communication by speech; for, first, it speaks only to the eyes, so that it can be of noufe but in the light; and then we cannot converse in that way at such a di- ftarice as by words; which alone makes it a very improper vehicle of our thoughts in carrying on any business without doors, such as fishing and hunting, which iare the chief occupations of savages. : ' .,:,The third method of communication I mentioned was by imitative or mlimic founds, which, I doubt not, was pracifed before the invention of language, as it has been firine, but the expression of it could 'iot go, a.nygreat length; no farther than,to. denote founds, or objcts which were dif- tinuillled 'by particular founds, fci 'as beasts and birds of different kinds.,As
Ch. 2. As to the Iqaf method I mentioned, LY"i painting, or delineating any objea by,drawing the figure of it, it may have been used before the invention of language; but it could go no farther than to cornm municate the notion of visible objects; and, besides, it is of flow and difficult practice, and not at all of so ready use as language.,Of these four ways of communica- tion, it is plain, that only two have any connecion with language, viz. inarticu- late cries and imitative founds, which are both modifications of the human voices as well as language, and could alone,lead the way to the invention of language. And we are now..to inquire, whether, from one or other, or both of these, -that invention can be traced.,C H A P.
C H A P. III. iWhether there m~ig3ht lnot be a lar:guage of,miyic jhinly, wcithout an1'y articulation. B UT there is a third modification of the Ch. 3.,human voice which deserves to be con- fidered before we proceed further, and that is musical modulation. There is an inge- niols: man, an acquaintance of mine *, that has beltowed a good deal of thought upon this fubjedC, who conjecdures, that the first language among men was mific, and that before our 'ideas were cxprefied by articulate founds,, they were commut. nicated by tones, varied according to dif- ferent degrees of gravity or acuteiefs : for he confiders language to be of so difficult invention, that it could not have been at-,* The man I mean is Dr Blaclloc; of4Edinburgh; a person of great genius, and wonderful learning, if we confider, that with him knowledge is ftlnt out at one of its principal entrances; for le has been blind since his infancy. He is well known by fcveral works that he has publi;ned, both in prose and verse.,VOL. T. R r tained
Ch. :. tamredi to at once,: without tryingi evcry,more obvious variation of the voice, .filuc as':that of mufical-tones, whicl we :firfl Icarn by imitation of the birds; .whereas articulation we could not learn by, imita- tion. Having tlerefore in that way learn- ed to sing, it was natural enough to think of'aplplying the variation of tones to a purpolc of utility as well as pleailfre, namely, the communication of ideas. And he adds, that when it was found necefliry to enlarge the cxpreflion of language,,by the additiion of articulation, the tones were Ifill, preserved.,llThe thoug t, I own. is very ingenious; and ,thus far it is ih;pported by faa, that I. believe all the antient and ori:ginal lan- guages, without exceptlon, have a great deal of accent or tone in rthe -'; a'nd the want of ichl tones is but a modern cor-,'" I use ncca;,t in the nntient fnC of tlic wnl' . to fig- nify Ai miufical'i .nio.itliIion , -f t'he voice, by whii:l it is nid hi ieiler or lowevr wVith rchi.''t to gravity or acute- ne ':!. T'ls is the mc;il,;i; of tls e L,: tilln w rd acccnlztu, ;and los the (;r.:c T. ... Whiereas thc worid in l. ,!il ll hs na enfc v,:rv dli'rent. c loenting only lhic clcvalior or the wiice up on e lyllal'lle (f a voord :i'tc t:he r-l, wvithout .an; cl:::g: as to gra:vity or aicutcrins.,rupdon
ruption of language, of which I flall have Ch. 3. occasion to speak afterwards. Thus the .'-' Greek has its tones, by which one fvllable of a wvord is raided above another in re- spec of acutencel; and the interval has been'marked by their grammarians, as I fiiial explain more particularly in the tE- quel. In the Latin language likewifc there are the tlne tones, though with some va- riations vwith refpec% to the fyilablcs upon w.hicd they are placed. The Chinefc, whicli, though an imperfect language, is ceriaiily a very antient one; anid for that very reason, it is likely so imperfect, is full;'of tones, insomuch that sometimes the fame monosyllable significs nine or ten different things, according to its different accents. The Indians too in North A- merica, as I have been informed by gen- tlemen who have tludicd their languages, have tones by which they make the laime word signify diffircnt things, of !which they have given me inllances; and'parti- cularly one of those nations, the Hurons, according to the account given us of their language by Gabriel Sagard, an author whom 1 {hall have occarfon frequently to,R r z mention
Ch. 3. mention in the sequel ', supply the de-,\ ' fc.ees of their language, particularly the,want. of tenses, perlins, numbers, and genders, by accents only. Thefefacits convince me, that the variation of the' humlan voice by tones or musical modu- lation was, if not prior to language, at !cast coeval with it; for which reason it is taken into the composition, and made a part of all original languages; and yet I dare not venture to aflirm, that there ever was a language of singing merely before there was a language of ijeaking. And I,* This Gabriel Sagard was a religious of the order of St Francis, who was fcnt on a million to the country of thie Hlnons in the year I626, and publilhed his travels at Piaris in the ye:ar 163 i, under the title of Le Grand vo)age du pa'!s des JHtrcn, tc.; to which he has added a die- tionary of the iHlriin la;:gu;age, with ;a preface to it, con- taining many p:lrtici!.: r conccrning, that language. The hook is extrecmclv r:a;c, and I never could hear but of two copiies of it; one in the .il;fi/ri at London, and an- Oih.'r ill the French Ki:lg's library in Paris. This lall I had the ife of by the f.tvour of i1L. CL',jro.ier, the keep- er of that librarry. who' was ib cbliging as to allow Ime the privilege !f t:lking it ont onl the library, arnd keeping it for so)me weeks by ne. it xv.lt. the pcrufalt of this dic- tionary, and the account of th e panu refixed to it, that fit. m.ade mmehink: of this woS: ; in which, if the public finis any 'ting enletrl.dlnin : or inRrtruii!ig, they owe it to the pohlire,:, s .':d cl:llin,; dilj(;fi;ion of Mionf. Caperoiier, to whom I take t;is; opportunity of return- ing my sincere thaiuks.,fliould
fliould rather incline to think that there Ch. 3. was not. One thing at least is certain, ,- that such a language would be altogether iniufficient for the purpofcs even of i.t- vage life: for the music of savages is of very finall compass; that of the Hurons, according to a fpecimcn of it given by the author I juit now mentioned, does not rife above a fourth, which is all the compass of the music of the birds, fiom which, in all probability, it was copied ". And we know, that the ancient Greek lyre had no note above a fourth, and they had no in- terval so finall as a semitone, which is alib the cafe of the Huron music. There muff therefore have been in such a music so little variety of exprefilon, that I can hardly be- lieve it ever was used as a language.,Quitting therefore this hypotlelis, we must try if we can deduce language from inarticulate cries, or imitative founds.,* The tunes which the birds sing are very high set, that is, the fundamental note is very high, compared with any of the notes of our music. The lowet note of a linnet, for example, is much higher than any note we can found upon any instrument. But then they rife by very finall intervals; so finali, as to be hardly diflin- guifhab.e by our ears, never higher than a Jfiurt;, sil- doin above a thirl, as I am informed by the gentleman above mentioned, Dr Blacklock, who has the fineul ear perhaps of any man living, and has observed with parti- cular attention the music of the birds.,C I-I A P.
C H A P. IV. That Lalnguaoe arofefrom natural Iharticulatl,Cries. C'4. '~'Ih refpcIt to mimic founds, '1;am,of the fame opinion as with refpcL to musical notes, that there never iwas' a language entire!y, or even for tie gret.l- cr part, cocmnolid( of them ; and I am confirmed in this opinion by obicrisig, that there are no such words, at leaftib far as I have observcd, in the barbarous lai:ngraes; so that I am disposed to be- lieve, that the framing words with an a- nalogy to the found of the things exprel'- ecl by them,- verba exJ/oi fuli, -as the grammnlariatiS c.aii them, belongs rather to !nOlng:iges of art, than to the first languages fnoken by rude and barbarous nations: It is tilrerorCj inarticulate cries only-that must have given rife to language; and:, as every thing of art inuft be founded on na.. ture, it appears at first fight very proba-- b!, that languag fllould be nothing but an iIrr'.':aene't or refinement upon the,natural
natural cries of the animal, more cfpe- Ch. 4. cially as it is evident, that language does no more than enlarge the cxpreilion of thole natural cries: for filch cries are used by all animals who have any use of voice, to express their wants; and the fadr is, that all the barbarous nations have cries cx- pressing diffrent things, such as cries of joy, grief, terror, iurprife, and the like. The- unar-ct' of the Indians of North America is well known to those that have been among them; and they have a cry when they return from any expedition, by which they signify, before they enter their village, what success they have had. The savage girl whom I have ib often men- tioned, entertained me with several such cries belonging to her nation; and flie told me, that while flie was travelling through the woods with the negro girl who had escaped the fllipwrcck with her, as they did not understand one another's lalguage, they converted together by signs and cries; and in that way they under- flood each other so well, that they made a fl{ifc to live upon what they could catch hunting together. These two methods of *communication were undoubtedly the firaf,' .:.'~ 'Il ~used
C.h. 4. used by men; and we have but to sup-,pose a great number of biur species in the fame situation as those two girls, carrying on some common business, and conver- sing together by signs and cries, and ive have men just in a state proper for themin- vention of language. For if we suppose their numbers to increase, their waits would increase also; and then those two methods of communication would become too confined for that larger sphere of life which their wants would make necefaIry. What then was to be done ? I have fliewn already, that signs alone would not do, unless they were to acquire the panto- mime art, which cannot be supposed. The only thing then that remained to be done was, to give a greater variety to the natural cries. The queflion then is, What lbrt of variation was first made npon them ? And here I agree with Dr Blacklock, -that as the natural progress is from what is easy to'what is more difficult, they would first make the more obvious and simple variation by tones, before they diftin- guifled them by the more difficult'opera- tion of articulation. And I am the more inclined to be of this opinion, that I ob-,fcrve
serve a difference of tone in the natural Ch. 4. cries of other animals, of which I have no doubt but a fidlful musician could mark the intervals: so that, though I cannot agree with the Doitor, that there ever was a singing language, entirely composed of different musical notes; yet I think it is highly probable, that the natural cries were varied by tones, before they were diftinguiflhed by articulation.,But this variety, as I have obfcrved, could not go far; and therefore another method of variation was to be thoulght or. And being advanced so far, it was natural that so sagacious an animal as man should go on farther, and come at last to the on- ly other variation remaining, namely, ar- ticulation.: for that there was such a pro- grefs in the formation of language, as in all other things belonging to man, I can- not doubt; and I am persuaded, that the most barbarous and imperfec language extant is at the distance of many stages from its first origin.,The first cries that would be articulated were probably those by which animals call upon one another, and exhort or com- mand one another to do certain things:,VOL. I. S f for
Ch. 4. for such cries are necessary in carrying on,any work by joint content, such as, we muff suppose men to be engaged in before a language could be invented. And the first articuiation nmult have been very simple, the voice being broken, and dif- tinguifhed only by a few vowels and con- sonants, but not so exceedingly diverificd by various articulation as we fee. it is in the languages of art: for if in any thing the progress of man was flow, and from fiall beginnings, it must1 have been so in the invention of this most difficult art.,Further, as all natural cries, even tho' modulated by music, are from the throat, and l/ao'x, or knot of the throat, with little or no operation of the organs of the mouth; it is natural to suppose, that the first languages were for the greater part spoken from the throat, and that what conibnants were ufdl to vary the cries were mostly guttural; and that the or- gans of the mouth would at first be but very little employed.,And this theory of mine is confirmed by what the above-mentioned author, Gabriel Sagard, tells us of the language of the Hurons, of which I fallal make,much
much use in this inquiry, because it is Ch. 4. more imperfect, and therefore nearer to the origin of the art, than any language, so far as I lnow, that has hitherto been discovered. He fays, that they have a form of address or salutation, which is no more than a vocal cry aifpirated, that is, pronounced from the throat. It is Ho, ho, ho; and in calling upon one another they use the founds, Ii', ha, and halouct, which are very frequent in their songs, when they call upon one another to be merry; andit may be observed, that we have in our language words of much the fame fig- nifcation, fich as, hollow, halloo, huzza,.-t,: whunra, and such like, which are no o- ther but cries, calling or exhorting, a little articulated.,This author also informs us, that they have but very few consonants in their lan- guage ; and particularly they want the labial consonants, such as b, p, f; the consonants v, m, n; and even the vowel it, becauSe it is pronounced by the lips; and with refi)e t to the consonants of this kind La Hontan fans the fa:ne thing, and he adds, what indeed is a neceflary confe- quence, that they never ihut their lips in,S f 3 speaking
Ch.'4. speaking *; which 'is the cafe of every'a-,nimal that utters only natural cries. qNei- ther have they the lingual "'consonants g and r ; and accordingly our author tells *us;'' that they could not pronourte','his naiie, Gabriet, otherwise than Aliuiel: *for- it seems, that though they have not the pure vocal found u, which I take 'to be tlat of the French i, they have such as come near to what is exprefled 'by' the dipllthongs cu and oGt, which last is also uined in setting down their words. ''In flhort, the consonants they mostly ife' are gutturals, such as 'k, q, x; and they make very much' use of the afpir:ite h, 'which is also pronounced from the throat; and La Hontan fays, that almost all their words have a veryi frong aspiration '-, 'And their language,'upon the whole, seems to be little better than animal cries from 'the throat, of different tones, a little bro- ken and divided by some guttural confo- 'ialits. And with this account of the Hu- 'roi'language agrees perfefly the account,* La Hontan' Travel in North America, vol. 2. p. 219. 't Ibid. p. 220.,which
which the wild girl I have so often men- Ch. 4, tioned, Mademoiselle Ie Blanc, as they call J *her in France, gave me of the language of her country; and which, for any thing I.know, may be a dialet of the Huron language: for fie said, it was all spoken in, the throat; and. that there was no use of the. tongue or lips in it; and, to con- vince me that it was so, she pronounced some words that fle remembered of it.,From this account of the origin of lan- guage it appears, that the first founds ar- ticulated were the natural cries of men, by which they signified their wants and deiires to one another, fuh as calling one another for certain purposes, and o- ther fuich things as were most necessary for carrying on any joint work. Then inpro- cess of time other cries would be articula- ted, to signify that such and fuch:acions had been performed, or were performing, or ,that such and fucl events had happen- cdrrelative to the common business. Then names would be invented of such objects as they were conversant with. This in- creafc :of words would make more articu- lation necessary. And thus the language would grow by degrees; and as it grew,,it
it wvould be more and more broken and articulated by consonants; but frill the words would retain a great deal of their original nature of animal cries: and thus things would go on, words flill multiply- ing, till at last the language became too cumbersome for ufi; and then art was obliged to interpose, and form a language according to rule and method; of which we flall endeavour in the sequel to give fbme account; but in the mean time we mutt explain more particularly the nature of those firft-invented languages which the necessities of human life produced without any art at all.,C H A P. V. General Observations upon the flfi Langua-,ges.--Divi/ion of them into the Maltter and the Form-T.-The ntature of Articula- tion, and the Divjfion of Elemnental Sounds into Vowels and Coifinants. Ch. 5. BEfore I enter into particulars upon this k~v ijfubjed, I will make one or two gene-,ral obfcrvations. 'And, fInfi, In such lan-,guages
guages as I have described, being nothing Ch. 5. but the natural and infindive cries of the animal, a little varied and diftinguifled by articulation, no art or regularity can be expected. And accordingly Sagard tells us, that the Huron language is so very imperfect and irregular, that it is impof- fible to form a grammar of it; that is, to reduce it to any rule. 2dl/', A confe- quence of this is, that those languages can have no standard, or any thing fixed and eftablilhed in the use of them, such as we fee in formed languages; but must be dif- ferently spoken by the different families or tribes of which the nation is compo- fed, and must also be constantly chan- ging and fluctuating: for it is art only that gives any constancy or Liability to pracice; which, till the art is invented, must be various and capricious. Thus, till the orders were invented, and archi- telture formed into an art, every man built, his house according to his own fancy; and even in nations where there appears to have been some taste of build- ing eftablifled, as among the Goths, it is remarked in their buildings, that there are nq proportions constantly observed,,nor
Ch. 5. nor any uniformity in the ornaments, no,capital of one pillar being exatly like an- other, nor any two doors or windows or- namented in the fame manner. In music likewise, till it became an art, there could be no regularity or uniformity in the com- positions, as may be seen in the music of balbarous nations. In painting albf, and sculpture, till they were formed into arts, and the standard of beauty fixed, as it was among the antients, the taste of beauty would be as. various as the untaught fan- cies and apprehensions of the several ar- tifts, as we may perceive with refped to the painters and sculptors among us who have not formed their taste upon the an- tient models. And in this very matter of language Gabriel Sagard informs us, that hardly any one village of the Hurons speaks the fame language as another; nay two families of the fame village do not speak exactly the fame language.,But in order to confider more particu- larly the nature of th6fe primitive langua- ges, we must return to thedivifion of lan- guage with which we set out, into its matter and form. And I will *begin with the matter of the languagesof savages ;,that
that is, the founds of which they are corn- Ch. 5. posed: with refpec to which I have anti- cipated a good deal of what I had to iay, in the account I have given of the origin of them; and I hope what I have fur- ther to fay, will naturally follow from that account. But first I must fay some- thing in general of articulation; for it is that which distinguishes - language from any other found.,The breath which comes from the lungs, and passes through the wind-pipe, is the fubjet-matter both of singing and speak- ing. In singing, this breath is modified by different contrations and dilatations of the wind-pipe, and of the rilmula, or little hole of the larynx, which produce the several degrees of gravity and acutcnefs of found, such as form 'he different notes of music. After the breath has passed the la- rynx, it receives a further modification by the several poiitions and aCtions of the several organs of the mouth, such as the tongue, the teeth, the palate, and the lips; to which also we may. add the throatand the nose, which have a great share in the pronunciation of some languages, and: more or less in the pronunciation of all- The alteration made,VOL. I. T t by
Ch. 5. by thof otrgans upon the voice is ,what we,call articulation; a inetaphor takel,f!;iom the artic/li or joints of the limbl;'?r any animnal: for as, the'e divide the limib into parts, lb articulation .breaks and diyides tIe'.ontinulity of. the 'oice, which other- wife would go on in the fame tenor,i vith- out any diflinguillable parts. And it is inl this way that all the variety of !xld is produced, by which men have been en- abled to express their conceptions, and to mark every conception by a, diflfeent found. To analyse, all this variety of fund into its Ifeveiral elemental parts, was Ibund into osits . ' i ''e ', 'L ; wsmf ', a work of art of very great diiciilty, which certainly wa not.performed by the firit savages who, fooke, nor for nany'a- ges after. Whattherefore we have to fay uipon this iubjet, we flall refer till we come to fpcak of languages of art. It Will on, be neceffary,,at ;present, w in.,qrir to nlnderifand what follows,, to obfere, thac fonm; of thcf elelmental founds are. rpdu- ced by the pofitioa o., configuratiplln.fi ,the feverl organs, with, litte, or no ion.of thlen while ot1,er, a p,rc poduced, bylthe adion of thole organs. The firfl kiinda.rc liltt .:v .:..' .-l . ,,'' ^; ,' ;-ii . :,1; ! '[.i . calleld voels; makins'a found by them- ,. . ... £ ielves:
fclves: 'for they are nothing else bbuit the Ch. S$ blowinig of the breath'with a tremulous concuifion of the wind-pipe and larynx, (wlich is abfolurely neceflury in ordcr to produce any found), 'through the organs of tlhe mouth in a certain position. The other ,class is called coiotnants; a name im- portingt that they cannot be founded by themselves without the aid of the vowels. For it is evident, that the aCtion of the organs 'alone can produce no vocal found withlout the expiration of the breath, tho' it may make some kind of beating or chopping, which is the'found of those let- ters tiey call liquids. The consonants therefore are nothing eife but vocal founis, or vowels modified and divcfified by tie several a'tions of the different org'ans of pronujciation.,And here we may observe how compl'ex and'd'flicult a business articulation is, tho' byj corlftant practice 'it appears so *easy. For;' leti s; take the fimplcft syllable, which is 'tlit';made by a tingle confonant:ahid' vowel,' fich as ba, or'a'b, there mut':'be compilcated together in'the faiie' enun- ciatioii, the blowing of the breathi, witi Ihe trcmvilous concuflion above mcntioni-,T t edl
Ch. 5. ed; the position of the organs necessary to,produce the vocal found; and the action of the organs, by which the consonant is founded: which action must be either be- fore or after the position of the organs foriming the vowel, according as the con- bonant is founded first or last in the fylla- blc. But the business becomes much more difficult, when we compound vowels, ma- king what we call cliphtholngs, and when we throw into the fame syllable two or three consonants, as in the English word fJrcg'tb. In flort, the more accurately and minutely we confider language, the greater the difficulty of the invention ap- pears, and iildeed the absolute impoffibi- lity of it, unless we fuppole it to be in- vented by very flow degrees, froni very fnall beginnings, and in a very long course of time.,C - A P.
C H A P. VI. Of the Matter of the frfl Languages.--That,the .Words of them are long, and full. of Vowels. - Aifwer to Oljecion. AS those who know no more of men Ch. 6,,than what is to be seen in the fevcral countries of Europe, will form very false judgements of human nature; so those who have fludied only the regular langua- ges of art, without having recourse to the barbarous languages, which are so much nearer the origin of speech, will be apt to form an hypothesis concerning the found of the first languages very different from that which I flall endeavour to maintain, and for which, I hope, I have already pre- pared my readers. They will suppose, that the first languages, being very rude and barbarous, as no doubt they were, would be crouded with consonants, and therefore of very harsh found, like some of the northern languages in Europe, such as the German, and other dialects of the Teuto- nic. And, ,^dly, They will suppose, that,the
Ch. 6. thqcfirf :lailguages cdnfifted mostly :o.f-mo-,nofyllables, or very flhrt words; and that it would be only in process of. time'iiatt tlieyiv erc lengthened,:and in confequeiice of, tli' ipi.provemerit of the grammatical art, by rwhich composition, derivation,'and intlotion, were introduced into langitage. In ihors, they will be apt to imagine, tliat what we call now the rocls of a language, were truly the original words, and 'at firfl thcronly words. ',Thcil fihppolitions may at firlt fight' ap-: pear -not improbable; but if my -hypo- thleis. concerning the origin of language be. well founded, thec direct contrary of both. suppositions is the trutlh. *.:And,; Jirl,, With refpe' to the niiufbei: of consonants in those primitive languai- gcs, it is the ne.ceffiryco'nfequence of"'my hecory, that the words of those primitive languages must have been very vocal, 'be- ing nothing clfe but tlhe natural cries .,of the animal, ,a little varied and diftinguifli- cd. by articulation'. And from what we have said in the preceding'cliapter, of the nature of articulation, it is evident, that the consonants, being formed bytlie'ac- tion cf tie organs 'of the mouth, and,consequently
consequently of much more difficult ipfro- Ch. 6. nunciation than thl, vowels, whicih are fotunded by the fimple.-pofition of the 4or- galns,,it was imposlible that they couldl be much used at firit. And so difficult is,, the, .pronunciation of them, that. at this day, as was before obifevcd, there is haridly.ay language to be found which has,the .uli of them all. I know none, ex- cep th e Greek; which in this refpcel, as well as in every other, is the imolt perfcte lanaguagethalt I am acquainted with*'. And thofc.: who have not learned early in life to prlonounce anyxconfonant, even such as are of:moft eaty pronunciation, caniot, as- terwards, without, tle greatest diffiulty, betaught to found(,them; as' appearafrgom wlhat;La Hontan tells, us of a Huralup- o; :whom he. beflowed four days to no.,By this I. mean only. toliy, that the Greel: has a ll the conlbnants comnlol;ll used in the langlua;gs cf. Eu- rope. 'But I will not venture to affirln, that it has all thdimlfon:iatd Ihich tile 'htlimln; mouthl is capaile '6 propnouncilg, or,evel all, tlofe that ar eaannliy utfe in the barbarous lanigages 1 am v-,ell infrolnred, (hat tle inll:tbiiants of 'Otaitee, the nesw-difcovelrei ifirid in the SoYqtl sea, hi.ve a found in tlheir languaie betwai:t lind r, which ,the gentl]manw)hl9gave me thelliri!'irmltion (oil r.ot pronounce ,nor I believe ;lny man in Ei'ope. *,l, t1- ; -:' purpose,
Ch. 6. purpose, in endeavouring to teach him the,J pronunciation of the labial consonants ':,,such as b, p, vi, which are the firit that our children learn to articulate. But, on the other hand, the five vowels are to be found, I believe, in all languages, though not all founded in the fame way -in every language. For even the Huron language, though it have not, as I have observed, the pure found of the vowel u; yet it has the mixed found of it in composition with other vowels, such as the diphthongs eat and out. And the reason is very plain upon my hypothesis, viz. that the vowels are the iimpleft and easiest modification of the natural cries, being a very small alte- ration of them, compared with what is made by the consonants; and the found of some of them very much resembles the cries of certain animals.,If there were any doubt in this theory, which I think there is not, it is entirely removed by the fat. For all the barba- rous languages that have hitherto been discovered, without exception of one, are full of vowels, with very few consonants.,* Izl'. , /. 219.,I
I have already mentioned the -Huron lan- Ch. 6. guage, the molt original of any that I know; and to it I may add another lan- guage'of North America, viz. the Algon- kin!-, and, in gencral, all the languages of North America, which are dialcccs of ei- ther the Huron or Algonkin. The lan- guage of the C alibi, a people ox'"outh A- merica -*, aflbrds another exampil: for il that language likewise the wordsl are very vocal. A third example is furnifi:cd. by the language of the Caribs, inhabiting the Caribbee islands, which appears to have a confidcrable aflinity wkh the langua ge afl mentioned +. A fourth, by the language ',of * See a vocabulary of it in La 2io/tan, v'.. z . 2oz. j- Tiie: people inh:llit ;a p:'wl:.Ice of South America, near to thie itlinmus wherlIe t Fre llech hlave lhal a 1 t- tlecent abuout a hundred yealrs, whicll thyll ;tvc cIuli- vated and improved muclih ince the lall peace. They have been Iat the pains to learn th: liangiaig ° of the na- tives; and they have publhledc a di'lionary of it, and a kind of grammar, l:intcd at Paris in the year 1763, colleicd from: the obfelvations of severa.l Fprlfbns who have been in that country. From tllat work I have ta- ken wlehat I h:ave laid here, and fiall fay aft;rwards, of that lanl ital .,T There is an account of this language, and of the people who fpeail; it, p.bllied at /iarrrec in tle year i66;, lundr tihe titlc of Di£r'is':aire Caraib. FranCiaii, by VoL. I.. U u Fadter
C1; 6. of the Peruvians, as appears from the 'T^^ specimens of it given us by an author,befbre quoted, viz. Garcilaflb de la Vega's hiflory of the Incas of Peru. A fifth in- flance is the language of the Ef1uimaux in North America, of which Mr Dobbs has given us a vocabulary, in the accounts he has published of the attempts to dif- cover the north-west passage. And, lastly, the specimens that have been lately pu- blifled of the language of the new-dif- covcied island of the South sea, Otahitce, ihew, that this language likewise is ex- tremely vocal. Father 1½'ym:dl BrettIn, miflionary in the Cariilee islands. lie fiys, that the langu.lage spoken by the :n',,' in ;hose ill:uid is quite different from the langilage of the AJrt5:n!. And the tradition is, that thlefe ifn.ll.s w;ere ori'h:ilnally inhabited by a colony fro Fllorida, but were invaded by a tribe of Galili from Sotithi America, who detrovcd ;tll tlh! ma.!cs, but prfer-ved the women, whoi lill speak the langiuige of Florida. For pronf of this, our author fays, that there fill f1ibfilts an alliance and friendly intercollrl:c hetwixt the Caribs and Galibi. One Davies, who publilied an account of the Caribbec inands in the reign of Q(een Elizabeth, gives the fatme account, if I am not mistaken, of the origin of that people. In this way our author accounts for the affinity which ap- pears to be betwixt the two languages. His account of that of the Caril; is full and accurate; and I fliall make a good deeal of use of it in the sequel.,All
All those barbarous languages want Ch. 6. many consonants, as well as that of the l^- IIurons; but even of those contbnants wich they have, they never ibund two together in the ifme syllable. This is ob- frrved by Garcilaifo de la Vega; who, as- ter telling us, that the Peruvian language wants the consonants f, b, d, f, g, and x, adds, that when two of the other confo- nants happen to stand together in the fame word, they divide them in the pronuncia- tion into different fyllablcs. Thus they pronounce roc-ro, not ro-cro. And I have had occasion to obfcrve, that a black that came from a country in Africa near to the settlement of Goree, wheni he was so old that he never learned Englifli well, could not pronounce two mute consonants together; so that, instead of Jfable, he al- ways said table; inilead of sconce, colce, &'c.,Thus we fee, the progress has been from the use of single consonants in fyllablcs to the use of two or more. But is there not a futhier progress in this matter ? And was there not a time when no consonants at all werc uscd, and when the only articu- lation was by vowels ? And indeed, when I,U u z confider
5;!. 6. confider the great difficulty in the pro- ^^V^^ nunciation of the consonants, and in com-,bining them in the fame enunciation witih the vowels, I think it is highly probable, that men did -begin to articulate in that manner, and did not at once arrive at the more dhiiicult articulation by consonants. There are indeed no fadcs to support this hypothllcis; for we have not yet discover- ed, so far as I know, any language so much in the infantine state. But we find words in thofc barbarous languages that come very near to the fimplelt kind of ar- ticulation, ifch as the word clcouzeliim, men- tioned by La Hontan in his vocabulary of the Algonkin language , and tranI: lated, vcJiit (,qi ft bieln. This word, and many others of the lame kind that might be initanccd, is plainly a cry articulated by two consonants only, one in the end of it, and one towards the end of it. I think it probable, that the language of those Ourail GCltac.s of Abyflinia, whom I mentioned bcbore, is all of that kind, coniifing of words articulated by vowels,* ol . p. p.203.,only,
only, or at least with very few confo- Ch. 6. nants '.,The next thing to be confidered is, the length of the words in the primitive lan- guages. And I fay, that instead of being Ihort, and consisting of monosyllables, they were of great length : and this too is a consequence of those languages being derived from natural cries; for such cries of almost all animals have a certain tra. and extension, such as the lowing of an ox, the neighing of a horse, the braying of an ass, the roar of a lion, &c. And that we may not think man an exception from this rule, we need only attend to the dumb persons among us, who ut- ter inarticulate cries, fobmetimes very loud, but always of a considerable length.,There is another reason why the words of those languages should be long, name- ly, that having very little articulation by consonants, and none at all at first, ac- cording to my supposition, it was necef-,* I may be observed, that there are in Greek some words consisting altogether of vowels, fuchl as ,i, Iae, :an, ;', ,;; which I confider as vefliges frill remaining of the antient savage language, out of which the Greek was formed by men of art.,fary
Ch. 6. fary that they fihould have a certain length,,in order to distinguish them from one an- other, and give them that variety which was neceflary to express various things; whereas we that have so many conibnants, can by their means give a considerable variety even to: one syllable, and a very great variety to two or more.,And this theory too is strongly support- ed by the sac ; for all the barbarous lan- guages have their words of a remarkable length. Some of them indeed have them longer than others, because all of them are not equally near to the original fourc ; and fomne of them, as I Ihall have occasion afterwards, to oblerve, begin to be lan- guages of art: but all of them without exception have a much greater length of words than is to be found in the langua- ges of civilized nations. All the langua- ges above mentioned plainly prove this; and particularly the language of the Hu- rons, the words of whvich, as they are set down in Sagard's Dicionary, are of an enormous length. The language of the Carlbs, according to the account of it given by the miflionary above mentioned, exceeds even the Huron ill this particu-,lar;
lar; and Mr Dobbs, in his vocabulary of Ch. 6. the Efquimaux language, has given us the word 'woUn-a-i'wc-ik-tlick-luit, figni- fving r*much; and a word but a little ihort- er, signifying litt!e, viz. mik-ke-u-ank- rook. But the language of a barbarous people that Mons. la Condamine met with upon the banks of the river Amazons, cx- ceeds all others in length of found, of which he gives a specimen in their word for the number three, viz. petazzarorizl- couioac .,And thus it appears, that the length, as well as the vocality of the words, is a common property of all barbarous lan- guages. Now whatever is general must have a general caui ; and let any man who is not satisfied with my hypothesis, confider what other cause he can aflign.,There is an objection will occur to this hypothesis of mine, from the example of the Hebrew and the Chinese languages. The firt of these is undoubtedly a inoft antient language, and by .ome thought the parent of all others ; yet it has no ex- traordinary length of words, and abounds,* Condam. Voyag. p. 66.,with
Ch. 6. with consonants; particularly the roots of C~yJ it have all three consonants and but two,vowels. The Chinese is likewise a lan- guage of great antiquity; and yet all its words are monosyllables.,I answer, first, with respect to the He- brew, That it is no doubt a language of very great antiquity; and, as it is likely, the parent of many others: but it does not from thence follow, that it is one of those first languages which grew out of the first attempts of savages to articulate, and were formed without any rule or art, which are the subjea of our present inquiry; but, on the contrary, if what is the general opinion of the learned in that language be true, it must be a language of very great art; for they tell us, that the roots of it consist of triads of the several consonants variously combined. This ihdws evident- ly, that the language is the work, not of savages, but of men of art, who knew the power of the letters, and the effe& of the several combinations of them; and in that way formed the radical words of the language, from which all the reft are de- rived, according to certain rules: so that the language is a complete system, which,never
never could arise out of the rude and ca- Ch. 6. fual essays of men first beginning to speak.,And as to the objection arising from the Chinese language, there is no evidence neither that it is one of those languages concerning which we are inquiring ; but, on the contrary, as the language among the Chinese is so great a part of their learning, there is reason to think that it was the work of learned men; more efpe-. cially as it bears none of those marks of a rude and artless language, which I flall take notice of afterwards when I come to speak of the formal part of such langua- ges: for it is a language, so far as I canl be informed, full and accurate in its ex- pression, with all the parts of speech as diftincd as in our European languages. For what reason the artifis of this lan- guage stopped Ihort in the formation of it, and did not enlarge their words by com- position, derivation, and inflection, is a curious enough question, of which we may take occasion to fay something after- wards; but it does not belong to our pre- sent subjet.,VOL. I X x It
Ch. 6. It may also be objeyted, That the lan-,guage of the.new-difcovered island of O- tahitee, mentioned above, is not so re- markable for the length of its words, as for their being full of vowels, and of very fbft pronunciation. As to which, I was in- formed by one of those gentlemen to whom the learned world, and indeed all mankind, is so much obliged for the toils and dangers they have gone through in search of knowledge, that it is far from being a barbarous language; for they have cafes of nouns, and tcnfes of verbs, which they form as we do, the cafes by prcofiltions, and the tenics by auxiliary verbs; and they have all the parts of i)peech that we have, without exception even of the acljecive, which is not to be found in any barbarous language, as I ihall take occasion afterwards to observe. There is likewise etymology in their lan- guage; that is, derivation and compofi- tion: and as to the length of their words, he tolil me, they were generally of several fllables; and !he could recollect but one moaofiyllable in the whole language, tho' he had applied himself particularly to the,fludy
study of it, and had made so great pro- ficiency as to be able to speak it with to- lerable ease.,C I A P. VII. Of the Fo)rmal part of Barbarous Languages.,- An account of it from Theory. I Come now to confider the fo/rmal part Ch. 7.,of barbarous languages; that is, the founds of them as significant; a subject much more curious, and more worthy of the attention of a philofophcr, than mere founds in any language, but particularly in the language of fava.gcs: for as there is a necefatry connection betwixt thinking and speaking, we trace there the progres of the human mind in its slate of infancy; a faA'of the greatest importance in the history of man, but of which there can be no other record except the languages of barbarous nations.,In treating of this subjec I will follow the fane method that I have followed with refped to the material part of fich lan- guages.-I will begin with the theory:,X x z Not
Cli. 7. Not that I pretend to have discovered t pri-,ori, and fiom fpeeulation merely, what I am to deliver upon this fiibjecl; for as I fltould have known nothing of the origi- nal state of man, without having fludicd the manners of barbarous nations; so I flould have been equally ignorant of the origin and progreis of language, if I had not fludied the algtt.upe of barbarous na- tions: but becaunf the method of science requires, that we thould begin with the principles and causes, and from them de- duce the sacs, though the order of inve- ffigation arid discovery be just the reverse: and if it Imall appear, that from the sacs the theory naturally ariies, and that again the theory explains and illufirates the fads, it is hoped very little doubt will re- main of the truth of my system.,Whatever is exprelied by language, may be reduced to two general heads; things themselves, and the relations or connections of things. We will begin with the' things confidered ablblutely in'rth'amiLlves, and as unconnected with one'another. And, in this view, they are either jibfiances, and their properties; or i.t.ions, and their tcircujialllces; or, in the,:*,' :': grammatical
graimmatical language, they are either Ch. 7. nouns fubflantive, and adjetives, or they are verbs and adverbs. I will begin with substances, and their properties. And in treating this matter I require only one posJulatun, which certainly will be grant- ed me, That men never would give a name:to that of which they had no idea;. and if they had not a separate idea of any thing as diftinguiihedl from other things, they would not give it a separate name.,That there can be no language without ideas, is evident; and it is as evident, that there can be no ideas without abftradion, We have therefore thought it necefiary, in this philosophical inquiry into the nature of language, to explain at some length the doctrine of abftra'tion; and however so- reign to the purpose it might appear at the time, we hope it will now be found of use in explaining the nature of those pri- mitive languages. We have there fliewn, that this operation of abftradion is per- formed in a greater or less degree of per- fecion; that when.it is most perfectly performed, every quality of the indivi- dual is confidered separately by itself: then it is confidered, what of those qua-,lities
Ch. 7. lities it has in common with other indi- Cysj viduals, and what it has peculiar to itself.,When the mind perceives what is com- mon in any subjed, then it is said to ge- nwralizc; and when it unites together the qualities in any subjet that are common to other fubjeds, and makes one of them, then it rccognifes the species, and is said to have the idea of the thing; and that idea is pefeRt, if it takes in all that is common to that thing with other things of the fame species, and nothing more.,That savages fllould perform accurate- ly this double operation, of firit fepara- ting and then uniting, and should in that way form those perfect ideas which only men of lcience form, must be allowed to be a thing impossible. They will no doubt have some general notion of the spccies, such as we have seen even brutes have; and consequently tome obscure perception of the difference betwixt what is common to the species and what is pe- culiar to the individual, and making no part of the idea of the species; but they will not make this diftintion accurately, tb as to take nothing into their idea but what belongs only to the species. To be,convinced
convinced of this, we need only recolled, Ch. 7. that all our ideas arise from perceptions ,.V' of sense, and that the lense presents cvcry thing to us as it exifis in nature; that is, with all its qualities, both those belong- ing to the species, and those which are pe- culiar to the individual. Now, can we suppose, that the savage, in forming his idea of the species, will take in only what belongs to it, rejecting all the qualities of the individual, which are often more itriking and obvious to the sense than the specific differences ? If we could conceive his notion to be so correct, then no doubt the name he would impose would be the proper name of the species; but as it is impoflible to suppose in a savage such justness of thought as can only be the es- fe& of much thinking and observation, it is evident that the name with whlich he marks any thing must denote, betide the qualities common to the species, some that belong only to individuals. Thus he will not denote a bear by a name signifying only that species of animal, but he will ife a word signifying a great bear, or a fiJall bcar, a firo;ig bear, or a wak bear, .or any other quality of the individual bear,that
Ch. 7. that affects his senses or imagination most. ^~ They will not have a word denoting a,house, or a hut, in general, but they will have a word signifying a great or a little hut, or my hut, or your hut.,Thus it appears, that at first there would be no name of any fubltance confidered abfllratly by itself, because there would be no such abftrad idea of it; but the word exprefling any such fubifance would always denote oimething more than the substance itself. And as to the qualities of fubftan- ces, the matter is still clearer; for it is impossible to conceive, that savages flould have any idea at all of qualities abstracted from the iubftance in which they are ne- cefarily inherent. It is evident, therefore, that the words of those primitive langua- ges, exprefling qualities, would only de- note them as they exist in nature; that is, inherent in the fubjecs to which they be- long: b that the names of qualities would be blended with the names of sub- stances.,When I was upon the fubje& of ideas, 1 observed, that some were more general, and some less general ; and accordingly in all-the languages of civilized men there,are
are terms more or lcs general. Thus a- Ch. 7. v;:nzl is a more general name than m lan, conprlchcnding under it, besides man, all other fccief:s of animals. In like man- ncr, animated bord/ is more general than ann.ia;l,-- bo.y than animated body,,--Jjb- fiance than body ; and there the pr1ogreflion ends, fibfla:zce being one of thole univer- fals of the highcet order, known by the name of categories '. The question is, Iow far our savage will proceed in this afeent ? That he will go up to the top of the ladder, must appear impofible '-'. But,how ' See boo i. c. 6.p. 67. t To remove all doubt in this matter, it may not be improper, by way of addition to what I have said upon this fi)jera in my first book, to Rate a little more parti- cularrly the steps by which the mind rifes from ffe and iJ.atr, where it begins, to those ideas of IViieJtl alJirac- tion. In the first place, by comparing together the fe- vcral individuals of a flecies, and abllraaing what is cmmion to them all from what is peculiar to each, we fo-m the idea of what the logicians call the l/vqje :fe. cirs; as, for example, of nan:. Then we compare this fpecic with olher specieses of animals, and by fepara. ting v:i:,t is peculiar to each f;dcies, from what is com- mon to them all; we form the more general idea of a- tiimial. In the fame manner,, from particular fpecieces of vegetables we form the gencral idea of *oZetailr. Then, comparing together- the animal and vegetable, VOL. I. 3 Y we
Ch. 7. how far will he proceed ? Will he go the .v, length of animal in the inflance given,? I,think not; and my reason is, that the,wants we observe what is peculiar to each ; and fcparating that fiom what is common to both, we in this way attain to the Htill -ore gencral idea of the T; Ittlvo, or arni mated boldy. From thence, by the fame procels, we ascend to Icd)., and from body to fulslancce; wherc, as I have said, the progrels ends. - And with refpelt to accidents oli qualiies of fubqlances, there is the fame progress from the aI:'cit fpccies to the higheit renrs; as, for exa;nple, from extension in particular objels we rile to the idea of extenifi)n in genelr;l, or quantit) continnues. In the fame Inainntr, frmin particular numbers of tlinlgs we gt the idea of n,:b.'uer in general, or quanti)t di/crete ; and, by com- paring those two kinds of quantity together, we attain to the general ideaw of quantiiy. In this way we ascend in the scrics both of j'jijlances and acciderts; and these two comprehend the whole of things. That it is impof- fi!le a lfvage llhould go far in this progrellion mult ap. pear evident, if we confider, J7l, That such ideas are formed ly repeated abltra;aions, which carry us mucil farther fiom tfenlc and matter than we can suppose the unpranlilfed intellea of savages to go. 2dly, The formna- tion of iuch ideas requires a more extensive knowledge, and n:ore cnl::rged views of things, than it is puofible for savages to be poffelfed of. And ere we have got to a fimmit, from which we may fee the.whole ec.tent of human knowledge, according to the do'clrine of the Pythagorean and AriHlotelian school: for thoic philofnphecrs did not flop at the categories, which, accordilg to the account I have given of them, arc all fpe- ciclcs of things formed and complete of their kind. See AIImmon. in 6Catgr. fol. 47. But they inquired further,,whether
wants of life, from which we are to dc- Ch. 7. duce all the improvemenlts or the human mind, would only make it nccclliry fbr,llim whether there were not certain things in nature, which were not themselves catieories, but the principles or elements of categories: for they conceived, that tile fpeciefcs of things were not at once ibnrmed by nature, but that there was a progression in the formation of tlem from what was impcrfcA to what was perfec; that is, from the elemental principles to the things them- selves. Of this kind of elements they found the point, the monad, and the inf7ant, to be; none of which be- long to the category of quantity, being neither magni- tnde, number, nor time. See ,lnmon. ibi ji, ra, sI/. 46. But they are the principles of all the three ; 'he point being that of magnitude, or quantity continuous; the mo. nad, that of number; and the instant, that of time. Be- fides theltc, there is one elemental principle much more general, being the foundation, orfidlJiratum, as we may call it, of all the categories, I mean vmatter; the s'vcral categories being different forms, which, joined to this u- niverfal matter, confitute the whole vifobie world. Lu: how does this union happen ? hov do matter and fomil join together to produce the several fubilanees and tl;ir qualities ? Or, in other words, How vre things genera. ted ? The annfer is, By motion. Here then i another wuiverfal, which is not a category neither, but muay be said to be the road or passage to all the categorisc, as no species of thing here balow can exilf witiout motion, A,4mmon. ibid.7.47 Matter then mua be mioved, and mull undergo some change, before it can rcccive thlole forms which coinfitute the nature of thilgs. If so, it must have in itself tie capacity of being moved, which, when brought into exertion, is what we call mcioon, as [,Y y 2 hlave
Ch, 7. him to have an idea of the several fpe-,ciefes of animals with which he was col- verfint, not to form a more general idea,comprehending have explained in a former note, p. x6.; and, according to Aritlotle, is in the body that i mnjoved, not in wha: mjovrs; and therefore he has defined a natural boly to be that which h;s in itfilf the principtl of otison. And this naturally leads us to a flill higger order of being. Ior if there be motion, there mull be a mover. And what can this mover be ? It cannot he body, which is only paflise of motion, and may communicate it by im- pulse to other bodies, but cannot begin it. What then is it that moves or begins motion ? My anfivcr is, That it is not matter or body. It is therefore an immaterial filbftance, and this substance I call mind. Of which, if we require a definition, I think the belt that can be given is, that it is a substance which has in itself the power of mCting; and in this way it is properly diftinguilied by Ariltotle from body; vwhich, as I have aid, lie has de. fined to be that which has the power of motion, that is, of being iosed. But neither did this philosophy flop here; but they in- quired further, whether every mind had eri ina/ll in it- self this power of moving; and they found, that there was but one mind that had this power origin:lly and in- de mndently in itself, and that all other minds had it by derivation from this firfi mind, which therefore is the firt caule, the author of all motion, and of all genera- tion and prodnlhion of every ikind, and which Aiiftotle, in the concluf.on of his Phylics, has proved to be eternal and unchangeable,. immatci;ll, and without parts. This philosophy, fb noble at leat in appearance, and so extensive, which pretends to lead us from the percep- tions of sense, by gradual removes, from matter, to the,moc
com-prehending them all. Such an idea Ch. 7. would come only in process of time, and Y' after, his sphere of life was so much en- larged, and reasoning so far advanced, as to make it necefiary for him to ditfin- guifh betwixt animals in general, and the vegetable or inanimate nature; and it would not be till all the necessaries of life were supplied, and till men had found leisure to philosophise, that they would find out those remote likeneffies which constitute filch ideas as those of body, Jitb- Jfance, matter, Japace, and the like. And thus it appears, that the ideas of savages, and by consequence their language, would nmoR general and abftraa properties of material things, such as are at a great dillancc from particular objcts of lense ; and from thence to conduc us to the principles or elements of tlofe general properties, and which are Rill more removed from matter and sense: and when we have gone thus far, fiuppofes us capable of appre- hending that which is not abltraacd from matter, or existing in matter, such as the universals we have been speaking of; but what, by its nature, is entirely separated fiom matter, or, in one word, mind: and from mind in general, leads us to the contemplation of the supreme mind, and firEf cause of all things.--This philosophy, I fay, which, from what is Icive/ in nature, conducas us to what is higlejif, and ends in the fablimeft theology, should at least excite the curiosity of speculative men a- mong us to look a little more into it, and fee whether it anfwcrs to this idea that I lave endeavoured to give of it.,at
Ch. 7. at firftl be confined to the lowest specieses,,unless where it happened that the fpeci- sic differences of such specieses were not so readily to be distinguished. In that cafe it is natural to suppose, that they would leap over the lowest specieses, and ascend at once to the genus immediately above them. Thus, ex. gr. they would have the idea of a tree, before they had the i- deas of the different specieses, such as ash, oak, beach, &c.; but where the specific differences are obvious, as in the cafe of such animals as man, horse, dog, &c. it is impossible to iuppofe that they would not form the idea of those several specieses before they formed the more general idea of animal.,'The last thing I have to observe, with respect to the names of fubflances and their qualities, is, that many -substances, as well as their qualities, have a similitude one to another; and therefore they are expressed in the languages of art by words which have likewise a resemblance: which resemblance is produced by derivation or composition. These make a considerable part of the grammatical art, known by the name of etymology, but which we can-,not
not suppose the savages to be poffefTed of. Ch. 7. The consequence of this will be, that e- very thing, however like to another, will be expreifed by a word quite different; which will occasion a great multiplication of words entirely new, that are saved by the two artifices above mentioned, of compo- fition and derivation; and it will make all the words of the language unconnected with one another; so that there will not be what we call roots in it, nor any thing like a system of a language. And what will occasion a further multiplication of words in such a language, is the necef- fity of denoting the fame fubltance joined to a different quality by a different name, and the fame quality joined to different fubitances, also by a different name. Whereas, in languages of art, the fame substance, with how many soever different qualities, is always known by the fame name; and likewise the fame quality is expressed by the fame word, whatever different substances it is joined with.,I come now to speak of actions and their circumstances. With refpecd to which, accurate abitraction confiders four things separately: imo, The action itself; 2do,,The
Cl. 7. The agent; 3tio, The subject of the ac-,'tion, or that which fiisers; and, Lifsly, The manner in which the action is per- formed. Let us take, for example, the verb signifying to beat, there is first the ation of beating, then the agent or per- son who beats, then the person or thing which suffers, or is beaten, and, lafily, there is the manner of beating, whether quickly or slowly, severely or gently, &c. Buit all there exist together in nature, and therefore the savage confiders them all in tile lump, as it were, without difcrimina- tion, and so forms his idea of the adion, and according to this idea expresses it in words. Whereas, in languages formed by rule, all those things are expressed by dif- ferent words, or by variations of the fame word, if that can be conveniently done. Further, there are some necessary adjunds of the action, such as time. This too, thlough inseparably joined with it in na- ture, accurate abflradion separates, and exjicffes. either by a different word, or by a certain variation of the fame word : but this the savage likewise throws into the lump, and cxpreifes all by the fame word without variation, or by a word quite dif-,ferent,
ferent. There is also the difpofiior 'or Ch. 7. affection of the mind of the fpealer, with refpec to the adlion affirming or denying it, commanding it, or wilhing it. These dispositions, in regular languages, are ex- pressed, either by cifferent words, or by a variation of the word denoting the adion; whereas, in the languages we speak of, they are either not expressed at all, or by a word altogether different. And this will produce n further increase of words not *neceiTary:. for as there is no word express- ing the acdion simply by itself, if there be the least change in any circumstance of the adion; nay, if there be but an alte- ration in person, number, or time, or in the disposition of the mind of'the speaker with refped to the adion, there must be a new word. For as they have no ideas of those circumfiances separate from the ac- tion, they can have neither separate words to express them, nor variations of the fanme word, even if they knew that great secret of artificial languages, I mean infledion.,The last thing I proposed to confider was, the expreflion of the relation or con- nedion of things, and of the words ex- pressing them, with one another; which,VOL.. I. Z z makes
Ch. 7. makes. what we call f/ntax, and is the ^~1 principal part of the grammatical art, be-,ing that for the fake of which all other parts of grammar are intended, and with- out which they would be of no use '*: for the end of grammar is to produce speech or discourse. Now, let ever so many words be thrown together of the molr clear and determinate meaning; yet if they are not some way connected, they will never make discourse, nor form so much as a lingle proposition. This con- nction of the parts of speech in languages of art is either by separate words, iuch as prepositions and conjunCtions; or by cafes, genders, and numbers, in nouns; and in verbs, by numbers and persons, and also by voices and moods, such as the infini- tive and fibjuncRive, which, in the more perfect languages, are all cxprcfied by in- liedion or variation of the principal word. But in lefsperfcc languages, the most ot them are denoted by separate words. Now, as every kind of relation is a pure idea of intellect, which never can be apprehended by sense, and as Ifme of those relations,,S, Sec Trgcidr. Gagze Gramiiat, Gr.C. part,,, ini!io.,particularly
particularly such of them as are exprcffed Ch. 7. by cafes, are very abftracO and metaphyfi- cal, it is not to be expecLed, that fa-ages Ihould have any separate and dirtinc idea of those relations. They will therefore not express them by separate words, or by the variation of the fame word, but will throw them into the lump with the things themselves. This will make their fynta: wretchedly imperfect, and very much re- fembiing the language which they ufedc before they had words; I mean, the lan- guage of J;;ls. For we may observe, that the greatest defeL in the language of our dumb perlbns is the want of signs of con- netlion betwixt the ideas which they ex- press by their gestures. And we may ob- ierve the lame defcct in the language of our children while they are learning to speak : for though they have the words, tiley do not know how to join them toge- ther in syntax.,This is my notion of the nature of the first languages, deduced, as the reader will perceive *roan my philosophy of the hu- manl mind, laid down in the sirs book of this work. And we are now to examine whether th'is theory is fuipported by faS.,Z % 2 C H AP.
C H. A P. VIII. The preceding Theory iliuijerated by Examplec from the Barbarous Languages. Ch. 8. THere are nly three barbarous lan-,guages, so far as I know, of which we have any particular account published that can be depended upon. The three are those I mentioned above; the Htron, the Galibi, and the Caribbee; of which we have dic- tionaries, and grammars also, so far as it is possible to make a grammar of them, given us by men of letters who had ftu- died them. The Huron is the rudest and most imperfect of the three, and therefore it is from it chiefly that I flall take my examples.,And, in thesis place, There is no such thing in this language as derivation or composition: so that, whatever analogy words may have in their fignificatlon, they have none at all in their found. The Hn- rons therefore have not attained to that art by which a language is connected to- gether, and the number of different fourds,very
very much abridged. The confequcnce of Ch. 8. which is, that if their sphere of life were not very narrow, there would be such a multiplicity of words entirely different from one another, that the memory would be overburdened, .and the language be- come too bulky and cumbersome for use *. - 2dly, Substances are commonly not ex- pressed by themselves, but in company with their qualities, and often with ac- tions concerning them, as ihall be after- wards observed. Even the common rela- tions of father, mother, uncle, aunt, are,* There is so little connecfion betwvixt the words of their language, and so little art or regularity in it, that the addition of a negation changes the word entirely. Thus there is one word which fignifizs, a thing ii hand. fime; another quite different, signifying, it is not ha,:d- Jois. There is one word which figaifies, Thou hajf beat im ; another quite different, which exprells:, I han nIt beaten him. There is a word which fignifcs, I knos, it ,,ell; another, altogether unlike it, signifying, I d not kniun it. And any the least change of circuinl;ance makes the expreflion quite cifferent. This the word which signifies .sounded qwith a hatfcht, is quite different from the word which denotes simply Totunlded. In the hrt, is cxprelitd by a word quite different frio- the word signifying hut; and there is a word difFcrent friom eilher, which lignifies "/m' hut. Nay, there is n word which fig- nifies twsoyearl, altogether different from that which fig- nilies ot: )car, fxr yarls, or tn Cs.JIr.,not
Ch. 8. not expressed simply by themselves, but,with the adjuncts of minte, thine, his, and by words entirely different one from ano- ther.,3d1y, There is no fich thing in the lan- guage as a quality 'expressed without the particular substance in which it is inhe- rent: for there is not in the whole lan- guage one adjetivc, that is, a word de- noting a quality inherent in some undeter- mined subject; far less have they abftrad nouns, as they are called, derived from adjedives, such as goodness, badnles, and the like. They have not therefore a word which expresses good or bad; but they have words which signify you are good, or you are bad.,4thly, In ations, they do not com- monly make the diftinCions above men- tioned, betwixt the adtion, the agent, the Jituet7 of the action, and the manner of it; but very often express all together by the fame word. And hence it is, as our author observes in his preface, that they have a great many words which are so many fen- tences. Thus thcyexprefs by one word, There is water in the bucket; by another word quite different, There is a great deal,of
of water; by a third, different from ei- Ch. 8. ther, You have overturned the water in the fire. But by one and the fame word they express, Thou flalt be very glad of it, and Thou art very glad of it. Their verbs com- monly express the aciion with the subjed of the action, and but very few denote the aCtion simply by itself.. Thus there is no word which signifies simply to cut, but many that denote cutting Jfij, cut- ting wood, cutting cloatbs, cutting the head, the arm, 6c. In like manner, they have no word that denotes the simple idea of givilg; but there are two or three pages in our author's dictionary filled with words signifying to give different things. This again multiplies their words ib much, that, if it were not for the reason above mentioned, their language could not ierve the ordinary purposes of lice.,5thly, As to tenses, numbers, and per- sons, our author tells us in his preface, that they commonly do not diftinguifll them otherwise than by the accent or tone; and in the fame way they diftin- gui{h, whether the verb affirms or inter- rogates. The different tenses, therefore, numbers, and persons, are commonly ex-,presscd
Ch. 8. pressed by. the fame word; or if they are ClVy expressed by different words, it is by words,altogether different, and unconnec&ed with one another. Thus, I havefaid, Thou hnba ,fid, He bath aid,' are all expressed by words quite different;-I have said it, by a fourth word, not at all like any of the o- ther three; and I have fidl to him, by a fifth word, likewise entirely different.,6thly, There is not in the Huron lan- guage, nor in either of the other two, so far as I can discover, any word denoting a higher genus, such as animal or vegetable, and far less matter, Jpace, being, or such like metaphysical entities. This is ob- served by M. la Condamine of the lan- guage of the savages that he saw upon the banks of the river Amazons, who have words of such an enormous length ; and it is true of all the barbarous languages without exception. In what I have said above, I hope I have fufiiciently explained the reafob of this io general property of those languages.,LanJly, With refpet to syntax, they ap- pear to have none at all; for they have not prepositions or conjunctions. They have no genders, numbers, or cafes, for,their
their nouns, nor moods for their verbs. Ch. 8. In flhort, they have not, so far as I canl discover, any way of conncaing together the words of their discourse. Nor is this a peculiarity in their language; but it is the fame in the languages of the Galibi and Caribbces, as-we are informed by the authors who have given an account of those languages, though neither of them be so rude and imperrfet as the Huron. Thole savages therefore, though they have invented words, use them as our children do when they begin to speak, without con- nedting them together ; from which we may infer, that syntax, which completes the work of language, comes last in the order of invention, and perhaps is the most difficult part of language. It would seem however, that persons may make themselves understood without syntax. This I think can be done no other way but by the arrangement of the words, (which is a considerable part of the syntax in modern languages that have not cafes), by accents or tones, or by gefturcs and signs. The Hurons, and I believe all the barbarous nations, have a great variety,VOL. I. 3 A of
Ch. 8. of tones; they have also much action in,' their speaking; and there can be no doubt,but that the position of the word will com- monly determine what other word in the sentence it is connected with.,And thus I think it appears from fad, as well as theory, that those primitive languages are natural cries, a little varied and distinguished by articulation, signify- ing things as they are conceived by sava- ges; that is, mixed together as they are in nature, without being divided into cer- tain classes, commonly known by the name of the parts ofj peech, and without being connected together in syntax.,CHAP;
C H A P. IX. Progress of the Barbarous Languages towards,Improvement. - Account of Languages that are not barbarous fpokel by Barbarous Nations;--Jich as that of the Garani, -of the Algonkins,-of the Goths,- of the Albinaquois. -This laJt too artif- cial. DBUT although the Huron language be, Ch. 9.,as I have said, the most rude and < imperfect of any that have come to my knowledge, yet even in it we can fee be- ginnings of improvement; which are the more to be attended to, that they are so many steps of the progress of the human mind in the art of thinking.,And, in the fi/t place, as the great de- sect of all barbarous 'languages is, the ex- pressing different things by the fame word, without abftrafting and separating them one from another; where-ever we fee any one thing expressed by a diftinc word, it is to be reckoned an improvement of the people in the faculty of thinking, and by,3 A z consequence
Ch. 9. consequence of their language : for if they,had not firit formed a separate idea of the thing, they never would have expressed it by a separate word. I have observed al- ready, that they are not so far advanced in abflraclion as to divide the quality from the substance in which it is inherent, and to exprcfs it by a diftint word; but they have made an abftracoion left violent, and with which it was natural they should begin; I mean, of the fubitance from the qualities; and confidered the substance as existing by itself, without any particular quality, and have given it a, separate name. This, I think, mufi necessarily have been the firfi abftra&c idea that was in any degree perfect, formed by men; and ac- cordingly the Hurons have come the length of forming some such ideas, and giving names to them. For example, they have a word which denotes trees simply; others which denote certain specieses of trees, of fruits, and of animals; others that denote works of art, without the ad- dition of any quality.,2d//, In generalization they have begun to go beyond the lowefl ipccics, not only in trees, but in animals : for though they,have
have not a word, as I have already ob- Ch. 9. served, to express the genus animal, yet they come pretty near it, having a gene- ral word which denotes the quadrupeds of the foref, and another which denotes the tame quadrupeds, such as dogs and cats.,3dly, They have made some progress in that most artificial part of speech, the verb; for, in the fri place, they have carried abftradion so far in some few in- stances, that they have abfl!rac-cd the ac- tion from the agent, and from every cir- cumitance accompanying it, and have in- vented a word to express it simply by it- self. Then they have made the diftindion of the three persons ; and in some few of their verbs this dillinion is marked by a variation or infleclion of the word, as in the expreflion, I am hJur t, -Thou art hurt, -IHe is hurt, the fame word, with a dif- ferent inflection in the beginning, cx- prefies all the three persons. This indeed is uncommon; but it is not so uncom- mon that one of the persons should be diflinguiiced from the reft by a variation of the word; as in the word which fig- nifics to frieezc, the second person of the present is diftinguillcd from the first per-,son
Ch. 9. son by the addition of the letter f to the,beginning of the word. Thus the first person, Ifileeze, is atfonfla, and it is the fame with the third; but the second per- son isfJitfoila. And in this very verb there is a mood, namely the infinitive, viz. at- JfolijIa, denoting the acion by itself, with- out any person. I have found too one verb, and but one, where there is a dif- tindtion of the time by a variation of the word; it is the verb signifying to fay, in which the present, Ifay, is dillinguiflied from the perfet, I have said, by a dif- ferent form of the word.,But these are all improvements that have been made upon the language: for the original state of it, as is evident from what frill remains of it, was as I have represented it, and still continues so with refpeect to the cafes of nouns, and the fyn- tax; which inclines me to believe, that these two parts of language are of most difficult invention.,There is one thing concerning these H-urons which deserves our notice; that although they are but very little advan- ced in the arts of life, and their language particularly is, as we have fecn, so im-,perfc,
perfe&c, yet they have a decimal arithme- Ch. 9, tic such as we have; for they count to ten, and then turn back again as we do. Our author has given us the names of the principal numbers up to two thousand, which I have fct .down below for the en- tertainment of the curious, and at the -fame time to serve as a specimen of their language . Whether their arithmetic,goes * I, Efcate; 2, Tcni; 3, Hachin; 4, Dac; 5, 0- nyche; 6, Houhahe.; 7, Sotarct; 8, Aterct; 9, Ne- chon; io, AlIan; 1l, AliSn-fcate-efcarhet; 12, Alsan- teni-efcarhet; 13, Aflln-hacllin-efarhet; 14, Alfan- 1ac-efcarhet; 15, Affan-onyche-efcarhct; 16, Affan- houhahea efcarhet; 17, Alihn-fotaret-efcarhet; I8, Affan-ateret efcarhet; 19, Afln.-nechon-efcarhet; 20, Teni-quivoifan ; 2i, Teni-quivoiffinefcate-efcalrhet ; 30, Hachin-quivoifan; 40, Dac quivoilan ; o, 0- nyche-quivoiffan; 60, Houhahea-quivoilran; 70, So- taret-quivoiffan; 80, Ateret-quivoillrn; 90, Nechon- quivoiffan; loo, Egyo-tivoifian; 200, Teni-tevoigna- voy; 0ooo, Aflen-attevoignavoy; 2000, Teni-tivoil'an- attevoignavoy.- And their arithmetic goes no farther; at least our author fays nothing more of it. I will also give the names of numbers among the il- gonkins, another nation in North America, from the Ba- ron Hontan'r oJ'rage, v.ol. 2. p. 217. , Pegik ; 2, Ninch; 3, Niffoue; 4, Neon; 5, Narau; 6, Ningou- touaffobu; 7, Ninchoualfou; 8, Niflbouatbu ; 9, Chan- gaffou; lo, Mitaffou; II, Ilitlfflou-achi-pegik; 12, Mitaflbu-achli-ninch ; I3, Mitaffou-aclli.nliffoue; 14, l1itafl'u-achi-necu; 5, MIitaflou-achi-narau; i6, Mitaf-,fou-
Ch. 9. goes farther our author does not. fay;,but I imagine it does not, as I do not think their sphere of life does require any,further fou-achi n;notnu3fflu; 17, lMitaffou-achi-ninchoualtou; ix, .'iit.aTo-achi-sni:fouffou ; 1, Mirafou-achi-chang- afifm: 2a, Ninchtana; 21, Ninchtana-achi.pegik ; 22, Ninchti.aach i-nnch; :3, Ninchlana-achi-niirpue; 24, Ninchtu.na achi-neou; 2j, Niachtanaaehi-narau ; 26, Niach:.lia- achi-ningotou;trfou ; 27, Ninchtana-achi- nincbojla)u:; -:, Ninchtana achi-nlffo.ffou; 29, Ninch- ta.na-achi-ch.lng'To; 5o, Nifrouemitana; 31, Nilroue- mi:a; acihi-pegik, &c.; 4c, Neoumitana; So, Narao- miiut; 6o, 'Nin outoua:iTu-mitana; 70, Ninchoualfou- mnitarM; e:. Ns;:!uaiouu-mitina; 0o, Changafou-mita- na; ice, Mita.drou-n;t.ana; ICCO, Mitaffou-mitaflou- From t'his account, I think it is evident, that in the language of the Algou'ins, they have two words deno. tin' tle niimnber t:.', viz. :italir, and m.ilana; and therefore it i; an error of Hontan, or of hi< printer, when he n.ak:s the name of t.enitiv to he :.incttana; for it should be r.i;:-trltan.r; tbat is, t.vice tan, in the fame manner as 1;i.;:j.r.itana, thrirc ten, and so on, till we comne to a thousand, which is ten ter-timcJ and ten- :i.':C; tnat is, the cui: or itird p':er of ten. For the further entertainment of the curious, I will fu!jnin an account of the arithmetic of the inhabitants of the-i'te-difcovered iflmnd of Otaiit:c in the South sea, furn:llcd mn by Mr Banks, whose travels in search of knov ledge do honour to the age in which he lives, as vell as to his country. The Otahitans count to lo, and then turn bacl, as.the Hurons anrd Algonkins do. The names of the crdhinal numbers are as follows. 1, Ta- hi; :, Rua; 3, Torou; 4, Ita; 5, Rima; 6, Whe-,nu;
further use of numbers; and I observe, Ch. j. that men in that slate of human nature V very seldom go farther in any thing than the necessities of human life require. The people of Kamfchatka go no farther than the number twenty, the number of their toes and fingers, and then they afl, T'What Jhall we do next * ? And the arithmetic nu; 7, Hetu; 8, Warow; 9, Iva; Io, Ahourou. When they have got thus far, they turn back as we do, and fay, ona-tabal, that is, one more, or i ; ma-rua, 2 ; and so on, till they come to 20, for which they have a new word, talai-taou, that is, one score. Then they pro- ceed, not by tens, but byfcores, faying, tahai-taou-talai, tahai-tatu-rua ; that is, one score and one, one /core and Iqwo, and so on, not flopping as we do, and turning back at 30, but going on, and faying, one core and ten, one fore and eleven,' onefcore and twelve, and so on, till they come to forty, which' they call rua-taou, that is, twio- score. Then they go on, counting in the fame way, till they come to iorou-taou, that is, three-score, or 60; and so they go on till they come to tenfcore, which they call aou-manna. Then they go on in the fame manner till they come to ten times ten/core, that is, 2000, which they call manniu-tine; and' then they go on till they come to ten times that number, or twenty totofand, which they call torou-tiine; and after this they have no new name for any number, though Mr Banks believes they inay count farther. * This fa' is taken from the Annual Regifler for the jear 1764, p. 4. where there is an account given of the inhabitants of Kamfciatka, taken from the Ruflian cif- coveries in that country.,VOL. 1. 3 B' bs
Ch. 9. of the Caribbees, we are told, goes no far-,ther than that of the Cyclops in Homer, viz. to the number Jive; and yet these people have made greater progress, as we fihall fee preimntly, in the art of language, than tle I-Iurons. This I think makes it very probable, that the Hurons have learned their knowledge of numbers from some other nation more advanced in the arts of life: and it is not unlikely that the Carib- bees have got their language in the fame way; for there have been itrange migrations and mixtures of nations at different times; and indeed there is hardly any thing that we can conceive to'be possible that has not happened in a long course of time '.,The language of the Galibi, according to the account of it given in the grammar and diionarly before mentioned, is much less inmpcrifc than that of the Hurons; for they have come the length of dividing flcech into parts, as we do. They noe,' This is an obfcrvation of Herodotus, li. S. c. 9. wherc he mentions a colony of Medes in the middle of Scythia. This no doubt is a very extraordinary thing; l ut, fiys he, ,i/ lI o , T. y.f, ~., x;s; an observation thiat could be made only by a man who had fludied as much as Hlcrodotus the hiitory of manuind.,nlly
only mark the different persons in their Ch. 9, verbs by a variation of the word, but ,- they have also diftint names for them; so that they have pronouns; and theyl have even adjeiives. They have lik-cvif' tiho!f pegs or nails in the firucture of language which we call conjunitions. But they have very little of composition or lderiva- tion. They want cafes altogether, as well as the Hurons ; and their i'ntax, except that they have conjunctions, and fbme prepositions, is as impcrftct.,The Caribbee language has an aflinity, as I observed before, with that of the Galibi; but from the account given of it by the missionary above mentioned, it ap- pears to be more imperfect, though not fb imperfect as that of the Hurons ; for they have some kind of derivation and compo- fition, and more tenses for their verbs than the Hurons: but they often express a whole fentencc by a word ; which is not the cafe of the Galibi languagc.,So far therefore we may fee thle progress of the art of language among the Galibi and Caribbces, and even among the IHu- rons; but we arc not to imagine, that even among the nations that are accounted bar-,3 B 2 barous,
Ch. 9. barons, the art of language has not gone,fa£rther: for there is a people that they. call Garani, in the country of Paraguay in South America, of whose language I have seen a Spanish dictionary and grammar, printed at Madrid in 1639, written by a Jesuit, and dedicated to the Virgin Mary. It is very accurate, and the work of a learned grammarian; and from the ac- count he gives of this language, it is a rcgular-formed language, as much as a- ny that is spoken at present in Europe, and preferable to them all in this refped, that it has declensions of nouns by in- flecion, and conjugations of verbs, ex- prefling likewise by flection the ten- fesj numbers, persons, and voices. And they have a peculiarity in the first persons plural of their verbs, such as is not to be found in any other language that I know, but is likewise in the language of the peo- ple of Brazil, as I was informed by Mons. de la Condamine at Paris, to whom I was obliged for the use of the grammar and didionary of the Garani: for they have a first person plural inchfive, that is, in- cluding both the person who speaks, and the person to whom he speaks; and ano- ther eclhisve, that is, excluding the per-,son
son to whom you speak; both marked by Ch. 9. different infletions of the word. In V French, they make the diftindion by the expression nous autres, which is the exclu- five plural; and in English, by a greater circumlocution. This is an accuracy of thinking, which ihews them to be far ad- vanced in the grammatical art, and makes me have the {ime conjceture concerning them that I mentioned witll rcfpect to the Galibi. For I think it is impoflible that they who have made so little progress in the other arts of life, lhould have invented. so complete a language; and as they could not have learned it from any of the na- tions presently in their neighbourhood, I think it is very probable, that, some time or other, by one of the many changes and revolutions that have happened in this earth, they have been conneced with some more civilized nation, from whom they have learned to speak.,There is another language, from the name of which we flould expec nothing but rudeness and barbarity, and yet it is a great work of art, such as may be com- pared even to the Greek,. and in many re- speds is preferable to the Latin. The lan-,guage
,Ch. 9. guage I mean is the Gothic, the parent of,all the different dialccts of t-he Teutonic, fi:h as the German, the Dutch, Swedifi, Daniih, Icclandifll, and'of the Englifll a- mong the reft. There is only one book of it extant, and that but a short one, viz. a translation of the four gospels, which is prefcrvcd in the university of Upfal in Sweden. There are allb prefcrvcd some fragments of the epistle of Paul to the Romans. From these remains, small as they are, we difcovcr that it is a complete language in iticlf, having its roots all of its own growth, fiom which it forms the reft of its words by derivation and com- poficion; and it is copious enough to ex- prcfs every thing in those translations by words of its own, without borrowing one from the original Creek, as I have bcen afurdcc by a gentleman learned in lan- guage, and who has studied this very diligently. It has all the several parts of Ipeecl difiinguiihed from one another, and among others the adjective of three genders. it forms the cales of its nouns by fliecon, and has five declenflons as well as the Latin; in all which, there are four cafes, diftinguifled from one ano-,ther
ther by the difference of termination, viz. Chl. 9.' the nominative, genitive, dative, and ac- cufative. It has an article of three genders, as the Greeli has, and also a dual num- ber in the two first pronouns, and in their verbs. Thcfe have four moods, as well as the Latin verbs, formed by the change of termination, and three tcnfes, with the variety of persons and numbers, all form- ed in the fame way. And, lastly, it has prepositions, conjunctions, and a regular syntax ".,The last language I fllall mention dc- serves particular notice, being the most artificial, if not the most perfect language of anythat I have hitherto mentioned. It is the language of the illgonkins, once a great and flourifling nation in North America, till they were almost entirely destroyed by the Iroquois. It is one of the two mo- ther-tongues in that part of the world, the Huron being the other; and all the other languages of North America are di- aleds of one or other of there two. La,* See Edward L.,:'s Saxcn and Goll'ic Dililnar', late- ly publiflied, with a grammar of there languages, by &Ovcn illanning.,Ionta;n
Ch. g. Hontan fays, that the Algonkin is the,' learned language of Canada, as much e-,fleeined there as the Greek and Latin are in Europe ', and he has given us some' account of it, but a very imperfed one. I have had occasion to be better informed concerning it by the French Jesuit whom I mentioned before, who had a much bet- ter opportunity of knowing it than the Baron Hontan, for he was seven years miffidnary aniong the Albinaquois, a na- sion of Indians who speak a dialedt of this language, of which he was perfedtly' master, as otherwise he could not have dif- charged the duty of his miflion. What he' told me of it was in substance as follows.',Althogh it be, as'I have said, a very artificial language, as will afterwards ap- pear, it still retains several marks of a pri-' mitive language, though much farther removed from the origin of the art than: the other mother-tongue of North Ame- rica. For example, it has not that part of fpecch we call an adjedive, that is, a word denoting a quality, exifling in an in- definite subjec ; but they supply it by the,# Vol. 2.. . 220.,verb,'
verb, as if il Engliill I said, instead of a Ch. 9. juifz' man, a maln ,whlo is wiiJ'; or, to bring it nearer to the idiom of their language, as if, intca(d of iaying in Latin, vir fa- piens, I ihould iay, vir quli filpit.,zdo, lThey have no word to express the acion fitiply and absolutely; ex. .,r. they have rio word denoting the abftrac adion of doiing; but it must be doing some par- ticular thing, or kind of thing. In like manner, they have no word to express simply goiing; but they have one denoting going b/y land, and another expressing go- ing by water. And there is in all their verbs a distinCtion, which shall be after- wards explained, whether the subject of the action is definite or indefinite: so that the verb always comprehends in some fort the subjeA, and never denotes the aclion simply and abftraacdly.,3rio, They have no pofleflive pronouns, but only a primitive one, which they like- wti/f ufc for a pofflcive.,4to, They had not originally in their langulgce any abflraa nouns, that is, sub- ilantives expressing abflrad qualities of fibi:ances, though they have now got,VC L. 3 C such
Ch. 9. such words, as flall be afterwards' ex-,plained.,5so, They have not yet got words ex- pressing abftrac relations, such as fatlher orJon; but they have words which cx- pres mny father, or m;y filn.,These are the marks of rudeness and simplicity in their language. But .he fol- lowing {hew a great deal of art and con- trivance. For, In the sirs place, as to the found of their language, they have a great deal of variety, using all the letters we ule, except only the f and the v, which none of the North-American languages use: whereas the Huron, besides wanting the f, has none of the labial consonants. Then they have several aspirates, and also long and ihort syllables. And Mr Roubaud mentioned some words signifying different things, which are only ditiiinguinled one from another by the length or shortness of the syllables. Further, the language is far fiom being harih, or of unpleasant found: but, on the contrary, is sweet and flowing; for you very feldomi find in it two conifnants together; and by elisions, where it is nccefiary, they prevent the gaping of vowels upon one another.,With
With refpec to the words confidered as Ch 9. significant, they ute those three great ar- tifices of language which I have so often mentioned, viz. composition, derivation, and inflection.,With refpeca to composition, they have as much of it as any other language, and by far the greater part of the words are composed of verbs and adverbs, (the ad- verb being a part of speech much uscd by them), exprelling in a very ingenious manner the nature of the thing signified. Derivation also is used by them as in other languages; and particularly they have a great number of derivatives from the third person singular of the present of the verbs, by which they cxprefs the abicrat ation of the verb, as from curro, clufirs.,As to inflection, they have more of it than any other language I have heard of. For not only in that way do they form the cafes of their nouns and the tenses of their verbs, but they form verbs expressing so many different modifications of the action, that it is difficult to ascertain the number and variety of them.,With refpea to the cafes of their nouns, they have three formed by different inflec-,3 C 2 tions,
Ch. 9. rions, viz. the nominative, accufativc, and,ablative, if the noun be noble, that is, if it express a living thilg, or 'what be/ongs to a living thing: but if it be ignoble, that is, exprefling an inanimaite thigr, it h1as oily two cafes, a nominative and accuiitive.,The verbs, in the first place, form their tenses by infiection: I mean their present and their pall; for as to the future, they formit as we do, by auxiliaries, such asjlj7il and will. They have two forms of thc per- fecd, both diftinguifled by infledion; the one denoting, that they thcmnfelves saw the aclion that is palt, and that therefore it may be depended upon as certain; the other exprefiing, that they have it only by report.,The voices and moods they form also by inflecion; by which I would be un- derllood to mean, an alteration of, or an addition to, the final ifllable of the word.,As to the persons of their verbs, they form two of them, viz. the firfi and fe- cond, by prefixing to the verb the pro- noun; but as there is only one other per- son, they fay that needs no mark of dif- tindion; and therefore they give you on- ly the simple tense of the verb, without,any
any thing prefixed. They have, like some Ch. 9. other of thole barbarous languages whichl I have observed, two first persons plural, ditingiiilhedl by inilcion; the one in- cluding the perlbn to whom the iipeech is addrlcfld, as when we stay, we are a(/1 :leii; the other excluding him, as when an Eng- liihman, speaking to a Frenchman, fays, ive Engithiu'en dlojo anrlbo. This in French is denoted by the expreflion, no:ts auhles.,But beiides what is commonly cxpreftcd by inflection of verbs, the Albinaquois de- note in that way the subjec of the ation, or the noun that is governed by the verb, whether it be noble or ignoble, and alib whether it be in the accusative or the ab- lative; so that the verb is truly drcli/ncd, as well as the noun, and agrees with the noun it governs, much in the fame way that noun and adjeive agree in the learn- ed languages: and further, they express by infledion a diflindion not known in any other language that I am acquainted with, whether the subjec of the action be a definite and particular thing, or an inde- finite.,But besides all this, they express, by in- fledion of or addition to the termina-,tion,
Ch. 9. tion, the various modes of the action: and C'~ in this way they create derivative verbs al-,most without number. Thus they have not only frequentative verbs, like those of the Latin, and verbs which denote that the action is reflected upon the actor, fome-i thing like the Greek middle verbs; bilt they have verbs which denote the poffibi- lity of doing or suffering the action, 'in place of whom it is done, whether in my own place, in your place, or in the place of a third person; and, in like manner, for whose behoof, &c. And further, by the addition of a syllable, they express whether the action is to be confidered as 'a great action, or contrarywife; and whe- ther a fad or doleful one; and, laffly, they have a derivative verb which expreffcs the negation of the action.,By this variety of expression, the forms of their verbs become almost infinite, so that Mons. Roubaud reckons, that from a single present of a verb there may be some hundreds of different forms derived, and many more if the verb be noble; and as the different forms are commonly ex- pressed by addition of syllables, this makes their verb run out into a prodigious length,of
of word. He gave me for example the Ch. 9. verb neteberdan, which signifies, I govern some indefinite thing; and he ihowed me more inflections and changes of that verb than I could well number, besides very many more which he could upon recollection add. I observed, that in all those changes the two fyllables-teber always remained invariable, and they were the only part of the verb that did o ; from whence I was apt to conclude, that these syllables de- noted the action of the verb absolutely and simply. But he said, there was no such thing in the language, and that -te- ber, though it may be called the theme or radical verb, had no signification at all by itself.,He assured me at the fame time, that this almost infinite variety of their verbs was all according to the exaceft rule and firiccft analogy, without those irregulari- ties and anomalies to be observed even in our learned languages. And if you once know the rules by which those different verbs are formed, you may form as many of them as you have occasion for with great facility. One day, in conversation with a savage of his miflion, he observed,to
C:h. 9. to him the great order and regularity of _v' ]his language, with which he seemed to be,much liirprifcd, as a thing he had never before attended to. I-Ie aid, the inven- tion of a language appeared to him an ex- traordinary thing, and wondered who had invented his language. You Europeans, fays he, have much more wit than We; but has any of you invented a language ?,The women among them, as they are their hiflorians, who preserve the memory of their families and genealogies, so they may be also called the keepers or prefer- vcrs of their language: for they really underfland so much of the grammatical art, that they not only know the rules of ipeaking, but can render a reason for them; while the men are contented to learn from them the pracsicc, without troubling thcmfelves much about the reason for it.,Mir Roubaud, observed while he was a- mong them, that the miflionaries had made considerable alterations in their lan- guage, not only by giving them new mnamcs for things, but by introducing new forms of speech ; and particularly, that they had tatght them to form from their verbs abftraci substantives; that is, sub-,itantives
ftantives expressing the abftrad quality, Ch. 9. such, as we form from our adjectives, as r from good, goodre/f, and the like. And he fufpeds, that they have learned in like manner from the millionaries to form verbal nouns, i. . f.ubltantives exprcfling the action of the verb abfiraccdly, as firom curro, clljits; and his reaion fbr thinking so is, that they do not use this way of speaking in convcrfation among them- selves, but only with the millionaries. And this, and other alterations which the miflionaries have introduced, makes the language they speak with one another so different from what they speak with the mifiionarics, that he was often at a loss to undcrftand them conversing with one another.,From this account of the language of the Albinaquois I am disposed to conjec- ture, that in the progress of language, which I imagine has been very long, there has been invented a language too artificial, such as this of the Albinaquois, and such as it is said the Armenian language is *,,* See Dr Smith on the formation of languages, p. 4:2. where he fays, that the Armenian language has no lels than ten cales. VoL. . 3 D before
Ch. . before a language of complete art;was,formed, which is always as simple as the nature of the thing will permit. First there was a language altogether rude and barbarous, such as we have defcribedi then was formed a language of art; but by very flow degrees, as we have also seen. Before the art was completed, there was an intermediate stage of a language, too intricate and complex in its ftruature, And in this refpet I imagine the invention of language resembles the invention of machines. At firfi a machine is contrived very clumsy, and answering very ill the purpose for which it is intended; then art falls to work with it, and makes it better; but io complex, and with so many springs and movements, that it is not ea- fily used. But art still proceeding, and observing the defets and inconveniencies, at last devises a way of simplifying the ma- chine, and malking it perform its operations with as few powers and movements as pof- fible: and this is what I call the perfection of art. To this perfection the language of the Albinaquois is not yet arrived: but I cannot doubt, that if the Albinaquois were to cultivate arts and sciences as much,a;?
as the. antient Greeks did, and among o- ther arts the art of language, they would come at last to simplify their language, and make it perhaps as perfect as the Greek.,C H A P. X. Several queflions concerning the sirs Langua-,ges.--'Vhat words of them wiere fifJ in- vented, or what names of things. - Whe- ther they have any Radical Words.--WZhe- ther there be only one primitive Language. IT may be asked concerning those primi- C, ro.,tive languages, What words in them were first invented ? My answer is, That if by zuords are meant what are commonly called parts offpeech, no words at all were first in- vented; but the first articulate founds that were formed denoted whole sentences; and those sentences expressed some appe- tite, desire, or inclination, relating either to the individual, or to the common bu- finess which I suppose muff have been carrying on by a herd of savages, before language was invented. And in this way,3Dz I
C. o0. I believe language continued, perhapsl for,many ages, before names were invented *, For that the first articulate cries expressed the names of things, I can no more be- lieve than that the neighing of a horse,,And now I will give the explication I promised of the pallage above quoted fiom Horace. "Donec verba quihus voces fenfufque notarent, " Nominaque invenre."- Where -orace makes a difiiniflon betwixt verba and nrminia, which has not been explained by any commen- -tator, so far as I know; but which, if rightly underrtood, .agrees perfelly with my system; for by verba he means, as Iundlcrlnd him, those articulate founds cxpreffing only appetites and desires ; and this I think he has sus- ficicitiy explained himself by the deilription he has given ol them, - quibus vo eJn / fiitjqu! niotare;t; im- porting, that the firit words marked the inarticulate cries formerly ul'e, which 1 underiltand to be meant by voces, and by conliquence the inclinations and feelings of the mind cxprelecd by thole cries, which I take to be the meaning of the word fljusr: for that word in Latin 'does not denote iltcar, or the operations of the intellct, .but the movements of that part of our mind which is the feat of defite and inclination, and is called by the Greek philofoplhers the oreflic, (,a Zp.K;O). If the words be underliood in this eiinl', (and I do not fee in what other .they can be underflood), Horace very properly places tle verbi first, as being undoubtedly firll invented; and then tle inowial, which came next in order, and which undoubtedly signify the names of things, not whole fen- tences exprefling some dfire or volition.,or
or the lowing of a cow, is a name for any C. Io. thing.,If it be further asked, What names were first invented ? My answer is, The names of the objecs that they were most conversant with, and had most frequent occasion to name. Thus we fee the Hu- rons first gave names to trees, and to those animals that they hunted or tamed.,It is an ingenious conjecure of the au- thor before quoted %,. and I think a very probable one, that the first names of ob- jec's were proper names denoting the in- dividual; but afterwards, by being ap- plied to objects of the fame kind, on ac- count of their resemblance, they became general names of the species. For the na- tural progress of the human mind, with which language always keeps pace, is from individuals to generals; and therefore, as individuals must necessarily have been first known.. it is likely that they were first named.,The radical words in a formed language may be said, in one sense, to be the first,* Dr Smith on the formation of language, in the be- ginning.,words
C. io. words of the language, and accordingly,,are called primitives. But such wordsare far from being the first invented words: for the barbarous languages having no coinpofition or derivation, can have no roots; but they belong only to artificial languages, and are the invention of the grammatical art, to make the words, of .a language connec and hang together, and to ifve the too great multiplication of them, as ffiall be afterwards ihewn. And in general, it is in vain to seek for any thing like art in the truly primitive lan- guages; which being produced by the ne- ceffities of life, and used only to serve those necessities, had at first no rule or a- nalogy of any kind: so that, whatever we find like art or regularity in them, we are i;re is an improvement of the original jargon.,There is another question concerning language that has been much agitated, namely, Which is the truly primitive lan- guage. from whence all the others are de- rived ? But first I think it ought to be determined, whether there be any one pri- mitive language. Upon. the supposition indeed, that language could not have been,invented
invented by man, but was revealed from C. Io. heaven, it is evident, that this revealed lariguage is the only primitive one, 'and that all the other languages of the world are only dialects of it, more or less pure. And then the question will be, Whether that first language is yet extant? or, if it be loft, What language now remaining comes the nearest to it ? But, on the o- ther hand, supposing language to be the invention of man, (and it is upon' that fuppofiton I proceed), I fee no rcafon to believe, that it was invented only by one nation, and in one part of the earth; and that all the many different languages fpo- ken in Europe, Asia, America, and the new world that we have now discovered in the South sea, are derived all from this common parent. And accordingly I have all along spoken, not of one primitive lan- guage, but of primitive languages in ge- neral. At the fame time, I am far fiom being of opinion, that every nation has invented the language it uses: on the con- trary, I am persuaded, that so difficult an art as language has not been the invention of very many nations; but having been pnce invented, and being of its nature,of
of long duration, as well as easy com-. municatiun, it has been propagated to countries very distant from those where it was first invented. But the duration and propagation of language is a cu- rious subjea, which deserves to be con- fidered and explained at some length; as- ter which, we ihall be better able to judge whether one language could be spread all over the face of the earth.,C H A P. XI. Of the duration of Language, and the fa-,cility of its propagation. -Of the Celtic, and the great extent of country over which it is spread. - Of the Teutonic, and its propagation. -Of the Greek and Latin, and their conneftion with the Teutonic. -That the Latin is the fame Langunge with the antient Pelagic; and of the qaffiity betwixt the Latin and Hebrew ;-- al betwixt the Latin and Hetrufcan. C. I . AS language is among the first arts in- ' S V .J vented by men, so it is among the,last that are loft. It cannot be totally and at once loft, except by the total deitruc-,tion
tion of the nation, either by some natural C. I . calamity, like that of the Atlantic island finking, as it is said, into the sea, or by the extirpation of war. In this last way the Celtic language was loft in England, when it was conquered by the Saxons, and preserved only in the mountains of Wales, which were not conquered by them. But in the cafe of most other con- quests, the language of a country has not been totally loft, but mixed with that of the conquerors; and out of that mixture a corrupt language produced. This was the cafe of the conquest of the several pro- vinces of the Roman empire by the north- ern nations. In Italy, for example, the language that took place after it was sub- dued by the Lombards, was a mixture of Latin and the language of that people, which is the present Italian. In France, after the conquest of the Franks, the lan- guage was mixed of Latin, of Tudefque, or Teutonic, which was the language of the Franks, and of what still remained of the antient language of the country, viz. the Celtic; and of those three languages the. modern French is composed , but principally of Latin.,* See Alo;f. Btllet's preface to his Celtic Dictionary. VOL. I. 3 E, But
C. I. But it has sometimes happened, that the,conquered retained their language entire, and that even the conquerors adopted it. This was the cafe when the conquered na- tion was much more numerous than the conquerors. For example, when the Nor- mans conquered England; as they did not, like the Saxons, extirpate the people, and as they were but a small number, compa- red with the body of the Englifll nation, iEnglifl continued to be the language of the country, notwithstanding that the Norman was the language of the court and of the law, and 'that the Normans, for many years after the conquest, were possessed of all the great baronies, and held all the offices of dignity and trufl in the kingdom; yet, under all those dif- advantages, the Englifl language stood its ground, and at lat prevailed over the Norman, and came to be the general lan- guage of the country. In like manner, and for the fame reason, the Tartars, tho' they have conquered China thrice, and are now, and have been for many years, in poflfffion of it, have not eftabliihed their' languige there; but, on the contrary, the Chhincfe is not only the language of the,country,
country; but even of the court, and of all C. I . kinds of public business. Tle Romans iikewife, when they conquered Greece, did not make their language triumph there as well as their arms ; not only for the reason I have mentioned, viz. the finall- ness of their numbers; but for anothcr reason, as I imagine, namely, the greater excellency of the Greek tongue, which made it in time prevail even over the lan- guage of their conquerors. This happen- ed after the feat of the empire was remo- ved to Constantinople: for though Latin continued to be the language of the court at Conflantinople, and was the language of the law for more than two hundred years after, down to the time of Juftiniai the Emperor, who compiled a great body of law in that language, which is the Ro- manr law that we use at this day; yet the Greek at last prevailed, infomluch that within less than a hundred years, they were obliged to tranfllate Justinian's col- leftion into Greek e. And when Conf-an-~,* This translation is what is called the Bfl1ica; andl has been much uscd by Cijaltiu;, and other learned law- yers, in c.pliini ng, and correcting, JuLtiniiii's collction.,3 E z tinolpl'
C. I. tinople was taken by the Turks, the Latin,was as much loft in the Eastern empire, as the Greek was in the Weft.,For the reason last mentioned, the very reverie has happened in fbme instances,. (such is the variety of human affairs in "the matter of language, as well as in e- vrcry thing clfe), and the language.of the conquerors, though few in number, has become thelanguage of the conquered na- tion. Thus, when the Incas of Peru con- quered the several provinces of that coun- try, they introduced,. with their other arts, their language, which the people learned instead of the barbarous jargon that they pWoke before ; and the fame,: I am per- fuaded, was the cafe of the barbarous in- habitants of Greece when they were con- quered, or rather tamed and civilized, by the Pelafgi.-But of this -I will speak more hereafter. The Romans too endea- voured to make their language universal through the whole orbis Romaius ; and in. some of the provinces, particularly in Gaul, they did make the Latin the pre-,* CGarcilaa de la Vega's Royal Commentaries of Peru, lib. 7. c. I. p. 249.; c. 3. Pa 253. e: f'qq.,vailing,
vailing language. But fill the Celtic con- C. II. tinued to be spoken, at least among the lower fort of people; and it is for this rea- son that, As I have just now observed, the French has at this day some Celtic in its composition.,And not only is language the longest lived of all the arts of men, but it may be said to live even after its death: for by the writing-art languages have been pre- served many hundred years after they ceased to be living. In this way the learn- ed languages of Greek and Latin continue till to be the admiration and delight of the scholar; and the Hebrew, which has ceased to be spoken these two thouflnd years, (for it appears to me that the ge- nuine Hebrew was loft among the Jews as a living language during the Babylonifl captivity), is still to be underitood. And what is yet more extraordinary, fbme lan- guages, even without literary monuments, have been preserved in the countries where they were spoken, long after they ceased to be spoken. This happens by the names of places; for in this way the Celtic is preserved, both in France and Spain, without any written monuments:,and
C. I . and indeed there are very few such mo-,numents of that language to be found any where. As language therefore is the most lasting of all the memorials of men, bo of language itself the names of places are what last the longest.,Another observation I will here make concerning language is; that it is not on- ly most permanent and durable, but it is of those arts which men easily carry about with them, and perhaps is that of all o- thers which is the most Cafily communi- cated, elpecially to those who have been in the use of speaking any other language; for to a mute savage it would, I believe, be of very dfficult communication. It is by this property of language that the fame languages have been propagated to so many parts of this earth: for where-ever the people who spoke them went, there also the language would go. Now as in the early ages of the world the migrations of nations, or of colonies from them, were very frequent, it happened in that way that languages were very far spread: ib that there is nothing more certain, than that every country has not invented a lan-1,guagc
guage for itself; but, on the contrary, C, I. there is the greatest reason, as I have faiid, to believc, that language has been the in- vention but of few countries, and that from those countries it has been propa- gated to many others. It is of this pro- pagation of language that I am now to speak; and I will begin with the language of the Celts, who certainly, if not the most antient, were among the moit an- ticnt inhabitants of Europe.,The Celtic, if I can believe the accounts I have heard of it, is spread over a great part of the world, and is to be found in places so remote fiom one another, as Ihews, that there must have been a most extraordinary intercoursc and communi- cation among men in antient times. The French Jesuit above mentioned, from whom I got my information concerning the language of the Albinaquois, told me as a fad which he himself could attest, that one of his milion having loft his way in the woods, and firolled into the coun- try of the Efquimaux, flaid long enough there to learn the language of that people; after which he came back again to his,country-
C. I. countrymen; and happening one day to,r go aboard a French ship at Quebec, he,found there among the sailors a Basque, that is, a native of the country at the foot of the Pyrenean mountains on the fide of France, whom, by his knowledge of the Efquimaux language, he underRtood very well, and the Basque likewise un- deritood him, so that they converted to- gether. Now the language that the Basques speak is undoubtedly a dialet of the Celtic; and it is now discovered, that the Efquimaux language is the fame which is spoken by the natives of Greenland. So it appears, that the Celtic was not only the antient language of France, Spain, Britain, and Ireland, but that it has spread itself over the northern parts of Europe and America.,And further, with refpec. to this lan- gualg, I am informed by a gentleman friom the highlands of Scotland, who was Ibme years in Florida in a public charac- ter, that the language of the natives there has a great affinity with that dialec of the Celtic which is spoken in those highlands; and particularly, that their form of faluta-,tion,
tion, by which they aflY you, Are you well? C. I r. is the very fame. 's,Those who would desire to know more of this very antient language, and of the,many * It seems very extraordinary how the Celtic language liould have found its way from Europe, or the north- most parts of America, to a country ib very remote as Florida, through so many nations, who, lb far as we know, speak languages altogether different. But there is a sac related by one Ifer.brl, a Welchman, that will account for it. This Herbert was a great traveller in the last century, and has publilhed a book of travels, in which he has taken occasion to relate, that a dispute ha- ving happened about the fucceflion of the kingdom of Wales in the twelfth century, the party that was wort- ed, with their prince at their head, inbarked, and went in search of a country where they might live quietly; and, having direted their course westward, after a long navigation they landed somewhere in the gulf of Mexico, and made a settlement there. After whlcl; a part of them having returned to Wales, came back again with more flhips, and a greater number of men, in order to reinforce the colony, which had been much weakened by the attacks of the natives. This, our author fays, is recorded by several Welch hiltorians; and he speaks of it as a fact that cannot be conteued. And indeed the truth of it is strongly supported by the affinity which the gen- tleman above mentioned observcd betwixt the language of Florida and the Celtic, of which the Welch is a dia- leet: for it would appear, that this colony of Welch, after having in vain tried to support themfelvcs aginllt the natives, haev mixed and incorporated themselves with them, and at last been totally loft in them. There are other proofs of the fah alledged by our author, VOL,. 3 F such
C. Ii. many languages that are supposcd to be M'^' dcrived fiom it, may consult M. BuIlet's,memoirs of the Celtic language, publimcd fich as tile names of capes and promontories in Florida, and of beafcs and birds, which le affirms to be Welcl. And a further proof of fi)me European nation having madc a fcttlcment in Florida many years ago, is a fa& lhat I have fiom information which I think I can trust to, that there are regular rows of trees to be found in that country, carried on in firaight lines for a great way. All this, I know, will appear incredible to those who ire prepossessed wvitli the opinion, that Columbus and Amcer-u.; Veipucius were the first dilfcoverers of America and tlhe adjacent iflalids. But the faf& truly is, that be- fore thi, dilcvcery by the Welch, America had been found out by Iome Norwegians from Greenland : for the Norwegians having made a fetIenmcnt in Greenland in the end of the tenth century, some adventurers from thence, in the bceg;nning of the eleventh, discovered North America, and made a fittlement f)mewhere, as it is coinjuclred, about the month of the river St Lau- rence; where having found the vine growing, they from thence called the country 11inland. This is re- corded in the annals of Iceland, which was flrl( peopled frori Ndorwaly, and from whence the colony came that made the ftltlement in Greenlland. Sec a HiJflot of Dteiimik; pulililed by one AlN/et, in French, in lJ65. In Ihort. it appears from the whole hillory of mankind, that wonderful migrations of people have happened in diiTercnt ages of the world, and by that means languages have been propagated to countries very remote from those where they were first spoken.,in
in French, in three volumes in folio, at C. i . Bajanfon, in 1759.,The Teutonic also is a language vcry far spread. It is at preflnt tile language of all Germany, Holland, Denmark, Swe- den, Norway, and Iceland; and the nug- lifh is a diale of it. The parent of this language is the Gothic ; of which, besides some infcrilptions, there is only extant a translation of the four gofpiels, preservcd in the university of Upfal in Sweden, and some fragments of the epiile of Paul to the Romans. But we know it was once the language, not only of the Goths, but of the Vandals, the Lombards, and the Jepida: for Procopius, a contemporary historian, tells us, that all thole nations spoke the fame language '. Now, as the Goths, and in general all the conquerors. of the Roman empire, came from the an- tient Scythia and Samatia, that is, the north-east parts of Europe and north-west of Asia, comprehending all the country now known by the name of Tartary, an(l a considerable part of Mufiovy and Si- beria, it is evident, that, sone time or,* See Prc.p. d: l.-lo 1'.:,iidli.-, lit;. i. cap. 2.; and Cr:t. prcf;:c: :(o .:h :r- :flation of Procopius,,3 F 2 another,
C. I . another, the Gothic mufi have been the,language of all that great trac of country. And accordingly there are still remains of it there to be found. For there is so great a resemblance betwixt the language pre- fently spoken in Persia ' and the Teutonic, that it is impossible it can be accidental And Bufbequius the German, who in the sixteenth century was sent ambassador by the Emperor to Conflantinople, relates t, that he there conversed with two men from Crim-Tartary, and found, that the language there had a great affinity with the German. For proof of which, he has given us their names of numbers, which are plainly Teutonic; and also several o- ther words, out of many more, that he heard, which any man who knows Eng- lifli may understand. And not only have they those vestiges of the language of the Goths still remaining in the east; but their characters, I mean the .Runic letters, are to be found there. For Strahlemberg, the Swcdifh officer, who has written an ac-,* That country is at present inhabited by a Tartar 'nation; and fitch were the Pa.irhians, who poffcffed them- felvcs of it fo;rme time after the death of Alexander the (Great. Sece /erov,'i.n's I//Jfiry.,, EtiJ,. , '. 136.,count
count of Siberia and Tartary, relates, that C. I I. he found Runic inscriptions in the deserts 'V of Tartary .,If it could be further proved, that the Celtic, and Teutonic, or its parent the Go- thic, were originally the fame language, which is the opinion of M. Bullet above mentioned, it would, I think, establish this proposition, That there was but one language antiently spoken all over the north, north-east, and weft of Europe, and the northern and western parts of Asia. Now, I should think it might be discover- ed with pretty great certainty, whether there was any affinity betwixt the Celtic and Teutonic, by comparing the most an- tient remains of the Celtic, which I be- lieve the poems of Offan are, with the most antient remains of the Teutonic, such as the Edda, and other old Icelandiiih poems, and with what is still more antient, the remains of the Gothic. This would be a very fine field of criticism, by which I think a great discovery might be made, not only in the matter of language, but,* See Mallet's Hillory of Denmark, book i. cap. 13. P. 345.,witl
C. 11. with refpeat to the hitfory of mankind: ^^ for if it could be proved, that the Celtic,and Teutonic languages were originally the fame, it would go far to prove, that the two races of people were likewise the fame originally.,That Greece was inhabited in very an- tient times by a race of people that came from the East, and particularly from Asia, is a faa that 1 think cannot be contro- verted. The Pelafgi, who, if not the first inhabitants, were at least the first who in- troduced civility and arts into Greece, and efrablithedl rule and government there *, we can hcw from good authority, came originally from Asia, where some of them were at the time of the Trojan war, into Greece -. And betides the testimony of,authors, * 'O Ji nshacoil Tzy .rFi liv £E.\zxn Jl..tc Eurwr-v apXaIoroar:; z.ioyrras. Slrao, It'b. 7. t This fact is proved by no less authority than that of Homer, who, in what relates to geography and the inhabi- tants of the several countries he speaks of, may be accounted a most authentic hil[orian. He reckons the Pelafgi among the Trojan auxiliarics, Iliad. 2. vret 8.to. and speaks of them as very numerous; for he mentions them in tie plu- ral number, ;t..; nl;lc;. And as to their migration from Ali.. to Greece, we know, that the people palled fiomn the one continent to the other two cfveral ways; eilier,by
authors, we have flill a stronger proof C. I. from, the names of places, by which we,cal by sea, and then they commonly took the island of Crete in their way; or they palled the Hellespont, and came into Greece by land through Thrace, Macedonia, and ThesSaly. Now, it appears, that the Pelafgi came into Greece both ways; at leapt it is evident fiom Homer, that they were in Crete about the time of the Trojan var, Od): 19. verf. 172. elfeqq. And by the fame au- thority it is proved, that they were at that time, or had been, in Theflily: for he mentions a traa of country there, which he calls nlxaoY AeyOr, I/lid. 2. v:rf. 68I. in contradifRincion to the Argos in Pcloponaefiis. And it is to be observed, that he dignifies the Pelafgi with an epithet which he bellows upon no other nation, though very frequently upon individuals: for he calls them ·,os noxas .i, Odgf. 19. verf. 177. The reason his com- mentator Euflathius gives for this epithet is, that they were the only people in Greece who, after Deucalion's flood, preserved the use of letters. That they had the use of letters before the people of Greece, and brought them firt into that country, I have no doubt; but as they brought with them likewise many other more ne- ceflary arts of life, and taught them to the savages of Greece, that of itself was a tiflicient reason for Homer's giving them this title of superiority and excellence. But further, by the afliftance of Herodotus, the moll antient, and, I think, the molt diligent and accurate Greek hi- florian that is preserved to us, we can trace their progress all the way fiom the Hellespont into Peloponnefus; for lie freaks of them as having been once fettled near the Hellespont, the fame Pelafgi, he fays, who afterwards inhabited Attica. Then he mentions them as dwelling in Samothracia, and there inflituting the Samothracian,mylteries,
C. I. can trace their progress all the way from,Asia into Greece, through Thrace, Mace- donia, and Theflaly -. Now, as they,came myIteries. Next, he speaks of them as poffefling that part of Thelfaly called Philiotir, which no doubt is the nleaylxov 'Ap;oc above mentioned of Homer. This was in the time of Deucalion. The third generation after that they inhabited, fays HIerodotus, the country under the mountains, Olympus and Offa, called HeJliaiotis. From thence being driven by the Cadmeans, they moved to the country near to Pindus in Macedonia, and took the name of jlacedonians. From thence to Dryopis, and from Dryopis they came into Peloponnefus, where they took the name of Dorians, lib. I. cap. 56. e 57. And not only are the Pelafgi to be in this manner traced from A- fia, but there are other nations, or, as I rather believe, other tribes of the fame nation, to be found upon the road from thence. Thus the 'Ex;,rc and the Axm, at the time of the Trojan war, inhabited that part of Thessaly where Achilles reigned, and are mentioned by Homer as his lubjels, Iliad.-2. verf. 684. But these, we know well, in after times spread therfelves all over Greece. The fellenJ particularly came to be the governing people in Greece, and at last gave their name to the country and the people. And even in Homer's time we fee that the Acib.ri had got into Peloponnefus; and were so powerful there, that he calls by their name, as well as by the name of Danai, the whole Greeks. * Homer tells us, that there was in Asia a Pelafgic city of the name of LariOa, Iliad. 2. verf 841. There was a city of the fame name in Macedonia, another in Thessaly, one in Attica, and a fourth in Peloponnefus. For it fcems, that the Pelafgi from Lariffa in Asia gave the,name
came from the East, there is all the reason C. I i. in the world to believe, that their language was some dialet of the Gothic, Celtic, or whatever other language was fpokcn in the western parts of Alia, or eastern parts of Europe; and as I ihall show, that the antient Greek and Pelafgic were the fame language, what is here said of the Pelafgic must be understood likewise of the Greek. I know, that the vanity of the genera- lity of the Greeks made their language, as well as themselves, the growth of their country. But the more learned and wife of them were above this vulgar prejudice; and particularly, Ephorus the hiltorian *, and Plato the philosopher,,acknowledged, name of their mother-city, as was very natural, to the new cities which they founded in the different countries where they fettled. Thus Helenus, in Virgil, built in Epirus, - parvam nrojatn, Jifiulatague magnit Pergama. VI o; For the fame reason, they called the rivers and moun- tains in the new country by the names of those in the old. Thus there was an Olympus in TheiTaly and in Peloponnefus; and, in like manner, there was an Eu- rotas in Thefraly and in Laconia. See, upon this sub- jec, Saltas. De Hellenif. part 2. p. 361. where he gives more examples of the like kind. * This Ephorus, as Polybius tells us, was a very did ligent inquirer into the origin of nations and cities, and VOL. I. 3 G wrote
C. Ii. acknowledged, that the barbarians xwere',more antient than they: and if so, their language must have been more antient too. And accordingly Plato- admits, that there are many words in the Greek lan- guage which they got from the barba- rians; and particularly the words .v and ;'t. denoting fire and water, and many others *, he fays, are Phrygian. And there is the highelt probability, that their iames for the other two elements came from the fame source.,Now if it be admitted, that the Greek' Wrote a book upon the subject. He fays, not only that the barbarians were more antient tll;n the Greeks, but that Greece, in antient times, was inhibited by various' barbarous nations. With him agrees Strabo, who men- tions several of those antient inhabitants of Greece, such as the Caurcone, tile Lekges, and the Drycpe, befided the Pelafgi, p. 491. After this, how ridiculous nuft tie vanity appear of some of the later Greeks, particu- larly of Diogenes Laertius, who, in his proemiitm, fcru- ples not to afiert, that Greece was the native country, not only of philosophy and arts, but even of the human race ! * Cratllirr, ton. .. 4p1. 41 edi. Ser'rani; where lie fays; that the word «;>, signifying dogs, is also a Phrygian word. Pow as the dog appears to be among the first animals that were tamed by incn, and is to be found in countries where there are hardly any other tame animals, as in North A- merica, the name of this animal mufl be supposed to have been among the sirs words of the language of every na-' sion where the animal is found.,derive~s
derives from the Phrygian, or any other C. II. language in Asia, such words as the namcs of the elements, which must have been among the firit names in every language, it is, I think, a convincing proof that the whole language mufft have come originally from that country; and the name of one of those elements, viz. sp, is clearly the fame with the German or Teutonic name for that clement, sy'r, or fire, as we call it in our dialect of the Teutonic, the . be- ing only changed, as is very common, in- to its aspirate ,. marked by the charaters.,Another set of capital words in every language are the names of numbers, which mufl have been coeval with every language, as it is impoflible to conceive, that a na- tion flould pradife the art of language, or indeed any art, without the uie of numbers. And accordingly we find in the most barbarous and imperfect languages, such as the Huron, the names of num- bers. Now it appears to me evident, that those names in the Teutonic, the Persian, the Greek, and its most antient dialect the Latin, are the fame words, with lces variation than could be expeted in dia- leds spoken by nations living in countries,3 G
C. 1 I. so remote from one another, and that must ^v'' have come off from the parent-ftock at,times so different *.,Those words also which denote the re- lations of consanguinity among men, such as falher, mother, brother, mufft have been among the first words in every language. Now it appears, that these names are the fame in all the four languages, I mean, the Teutonic, Persian, Greek, and Latin: for as to the Greek names rxnp and ,rp, or mater, as it is in the Latin, we may know from our own dialec of the Teutonic, that they are the fame in that language; and the Persian bader and riader are evi- dently the fame. And the Latin wordfra- ter, or f,,arp, the old word in Greek, from whence a word flill in use, prpa, is clear- ly the fame word with the German btyder, the Persian brader, and our word brother t.,Since therefore such capital words as the names of the elements, of numbers, and of fiuch near relations, are common to the Greek, Teutonic, or Gothic, and Persian, besides a great many other words of which,i See the proof of this in that very learned work of Salmafius, De Idlerl.ijica, p. 384. t See Saltmia urbifirpra, p. 394. et seq.,we
we can still trace the resemblance *, one C. i . of three things, I think, must necessarily be " true, Either the Greek must be derived from those other languages; or, secondly, those other languages mutt be derived from the Greek; or, Iq/lly, they must be all dialects of the fame parent-language. That those other languages are not derived from the Greek, is confessed by the Greeks them- selves, when they admit, that the barba- rians are more antient than they, and that they borrowed many words from them; and without such admission it is evident, from the account I have given of the mi- grations of the Pelafgi, that the first who imported arts into Greece, and, among o- ther arts, as may be supposed, the art of language, were a people who came from the east. And to me it appears evident, both from the reason of the thing, and from history, that not only all arts and sciences came from the east, but even the race of men who peopled Europe, and brought with them those arts, and, a- mong others, language, without which they could not subsist in the ruder climate and more barren foil of Europe, as I have,* See many others of them mentioned by Salmaf. ubi,pfupi~eran,,{hewn,
C.I i. flien in thle preceding book. It remains,,J therefore, either that they are all thrc,e,dialecs of the limne mother-language, or, what I think more probable, the Greek is immediately deri'ed from the Teutonic or Gothic. But whichever of these two is the truth ; or even if we flould suppose that the Teutonic, or its parent the Gothic, is derived from the Greek; if the affinity be- twixt those languages be such as I am en- deavouring to ffiew it is, and if the Celtic be originaily the fame language with the Gothic, it follows of necessary confe- quencc, that the fame language, or dia- lects of the fame language, were spoken over the greatest part of Europe, and a ,reat part of Asia.,As to the Oriental languages, it is certain, that the -lebrew, Pheenician, Syriac, Chal- daic, and Arabic, have all such an affi- nity, that either one of them must be the piarent-language of the reft, or they must be all children of some common parent; and if it could be proved, that they are conneted with the Greek, or Gothic, or its offspring the Teutonic, we should in that way extend the language which I sip- pose to have been spoken in Europe,, and ovcr the north of Asia, into Asia Minor,,Syria,
Syria, Phoenicia, Arabia, and Chaldea. C. Ii.,And this connection betwixt those East- R ern and Western languages the learned in the Hebrew have endeavoured to make out by comparing that language with the Greek, and particularly with the most an- tient dialed of the Greek, viz. the Latin. That the Latin is a dialed of the Greek, is well known to every scholar ; and that it is the most antient dialet now extant, is evident from the following considerations: Im0o, There are preserved in the Latin language many words which we are sure ivere antiently Greek words, though now obsolete in that language d. 2do, The termination in the canine letter r is much used in Latin, and was also very frequent in the antient Greek; but in place of it the Greeks in later times fiib- ftituted the s, as beingg a pleasanter,Thus porcuti was antiently a Greek word for a hg ; and xw,,; r aio0 was the old word 'for lana, vwool; in place of which they afterwards uscd the word ;ipv, vide Salmaf. De Hellenifi. And the antient name of the Greek nation, which was loft in their own language even before the days of Home;, was preserved in the Iatin; I mean.the name of rpsi,, or r;.,i, by which they were called long before Hellen the son of Deuca- ion gave them his name. See PrideJaux in marmor. Il- tund.p. 131.,found
C. Xi. found *. 3tio, Even the infleition.of,nouns and verbs appears to have been the fame in the antient Greek as it is now il the Latin t. 4to, The Latin alphabetical,characters * This appears from a decree of the Spartan senate, preserved to us by Severinui Boitiui in his treatise of music. This decree is against one Timotheus, a musician, who had made some alterations upon their lyre; and in it the musician is called TiLoCoAp, inflead of Tlo9ios ; Mnwwp, instead of MiraIot; and we have rap 'xop, in place of Tia a.xoc; and through the whole decree, in place of the si- nal c, which was used in later times, there is a p. f In the cafes of nouns this is evident: as, for ex- ample, of ;.ftoi, or animus, the Ionic genitive is i.ieq (afterwards contracted into Avslu), which very proba- bly was of old nol, and, leaving out the firlt vowel of the diphthong, &,i,, as in Latin. And accordingly in the dative plural it is ailor, in Latin animDi ; and in the accusative the Latins use the lowing letter in for the termination, and fay anitaum, which it is very probable the antient Greeks did likewise; but they afterwards softened the m into n, and said &I.o,. And with refpet to' the verbs, whoever compares the prese'nt of the indica- tive of the Latin verb lego, with the fame tense of the Greek verb x>y: in the Doric dialeft, will find hardly any difference, except that the Latins, in place'of the diph- thong , use the simple vowel i, throwing aside, as in the former inltance, the first vowel of the diphthong: Then the Greeks terminate the third person singular with a vowel, whereas the Latins terminate it with the con- sonant t. And, hltlly, the Greeks in like manner termi- nate their third person plural with a vowel, for they fay Alyovri, afterwards softened into ,iyst, whereas the,Latins
characters we know are the fame with C. II. the antient Greek. " ;orlnm literis "Latinis, qua veterrimis Gracorum," savs Tacitus in his ililza/s, lib. 2. Andt Pliny fays the fame thing, appealing to a monument that was extant in his time: -" Veteres litcias Grmcas suisse eafdem " pene qux nunc funt Latin:e, indicio erit " Delphica tabula antiqui xris, qua eft "hodie in palatio, dono principum Mi- " nervx dicata." ?Nat. Itfor. lib. 7. c. 58. Now these old Greek letters were no o- ther than the Pelafgic letters, of which Diodorus Siculus speaks, lib. 3. p. 236. edit. l'efelilg; and in which he fays Li- nus and Orpheus wrote their poems. These appear to have been used by the Pc- lafgi, before Cadmus brought into Greece the Phenician letters, from which the modern Greek alphabet is undoubtedly derived. As therefore the Latin alphabet is the fame with the antient Greek alpha- bet, it may be presumed, that their lan- guage also is the fame, or nearly the fame, with the antient Greek language. For I believe it has very seldom happened, that two nations speaking languages entirely Latins fay lcIr.:t; which we can hardly doubt was like- vile the antient'Greek termination.,VOL. I. 3 H different,
C, I . different, have used the fame alphabe-,tical character. But, lastly, there is the greatest reason to believe, that both Greeks and Romans got their language, as well as their characters, from the Pelafgi. With refpe.t to the Greeks, one part of that nation, viz. the Dorians, were, as Herodotus informs us, Pelafgi, and there- fore no doubt spoke the Pelafgic language; and as to the Ionians, who made the'o- ther half, we have already seen, that all the Greeks were first taught the arts of life by this wandering people: and, among other arts which they introduced among them, it: is highly probable their language was one; for allowing that the Greek savages had then iome use of language, yet as the Pelafgi were the governing people a- mong them, and gave them both laws and religion *, it is natural to think, that they would adopt the language of their governors, and of a people so much fupe- rior to them in every thing; especially if,* Herodotus tells us, that the Pelafgi were the first people in Greece who sacrificed and prayed to the gods; and, it was from them, fays he, that the Greeks or Hel- lens learned the names of the several gods. They also inftitulted the SaTotlracian nl syeries, the molt antient in Greece, lib. 2. c. 51. e 52. In short, it is evident, that the Greeks got from the Pelafgi, religion, government, and, in general, all the arts of life.,we
we confider that it must have been a lan- C. Ii. guage much better than the jargon they s)oke. Nor is this mere conjecture.; for we are told by Herodotus, that while the Pelafgi were the governing people in At- tica, the inhabitants there spoke the Pe- laigic language % ' And we cannot doubt,that * Lib. i. c. 57. It is true Herodotus in this pafflige rays, that the Athenians, after they had driven out the Pelafgi, unlearned their language, and learned in the place of it the Greek or Hellenic. But how a whole na- tion could change its language, without other conque- rors coming among them in the place of the Pelafgi, and teaching them their language, (which was not the cafe), he has not explained; nor do I think it is possible to explain it. But Herodotus here proceeds upon the supposition that the Hellenic and Pelafgic languages were different, and that the Pelafgic was a barbarous language; of which the only proof he gives is, that two Pelafgic cities which he names, one in Italy, and the o- ther near the HIellefpont, spoke a barbarous language, that is, a language different from the Greek of his time. But this does not prove, that their language may not have been the original language of Greece, if we confi- der how much ihe Greeks had at that improved and po- lilhed their language ; whilit those two cities, living in the nmidit of barbarous nations, though they preserved their language, cannot be supposed to have made any improve'ment upon it. I am persuaded, if Herodotus had he.ard the Latin of those days spoken, he would like- wiie have pronounced it a barbarous language, though it certainly be a dialeif of the Greek, but a very antient one. But what evidently fliews that Herodotus ismif-,3 H 2 taken
C. I i. that this was the cafe in the other parts,of Greece, where they were the maiters. Thus it appears, that the Ionian Greeks, as well as the reft, got their language from the Pelafgi. And with refpea to the Ro- mans, it is certain that this fame people, the Pelafgi, were among the most antient taken in this hypothesis of his concerning the difference of the two languages, is what he tells us himself, that one half of the Greek nation, viz. the Dorians, were a Pelafgic nation. Now though the Athenians may have changed their langiage after the Pelafgi left them, it is impolible to fippoie that the Pelafgi would also change theirs; and yet it is a thing that cannot be doubted, that the Doric is the fame hlngi;age with the Ionic or SI- lic, only a different dialect. And if any further proof were neccfliry, Herodotus himself has allb furnished it; for he tells us, that the Pelafgi not only taught the Greeks the names of their particular deities, but firfi gave them the general name of oe,., lib. 2. c. 52.; and he informs us for whalt reason they gave them that name. Now eic: is certainly as much a Greek word as any, tho' it be likely that the old Pelafgic word was deus, as it is in Latin; but the later Greeks thought that the change of the s, that is, the middle letter betwixt the r and the e, into the allirate, made the'found fuller and better. In Ihort, .it appears, that though Herodotus was in o- ther refpelts much above the vulgar prejudices, of his countrymen, he could not part with that favourite no- tion of theirs, That the LnOias, of which race lie was himself, and whom he confiders as the genuine Hellens ;or Greeks, were aborii:ers in Greece, and that their language, as well as themfelvcs, was of the growth of the country.,inhabitants
inhabitants of Latium and the adjoining C. I . country, of whom there is any memory preserved; and we cannot doubt that they carried their arts with them into Italy, as they did into Greece, and among others their language: and as we cannot sup- pose the savages that inhabited Latium in those days to have been less barbarous or ignorant than the savages of Greece, I think it can be as little doubted that they likewise learned every thing from the Pe- lafgi. It therefore appears to me to be as evident as any thing of so remote anti- quity can be, that the Latin language is a dialet of the antient Pelafgic, and con- *fequently of the antient Greek, which, as -I have ihewn, was the fame with the Pe- 'lafgic. It is therefore in this most antient dialecd of Greek that we are chiefly to seek for the affinity betwixt the Greek and Hebrew. And this I find is the opinion of a man very learned in language, Thomas- fin in his preface to his Giolary; for whose opinion in this matter I have the greater regard, that he confesses he was once of another opinion, and believed that there was a greater conformity betwixt the Greek and Hebrew, than betwixt the La-,tin
C. I I. tin and' Hebrew; but had changed; that k-YK/ opinion upon a more diligent and: accurate,tfudy of the three languages. .,As I do not underPtand the Hebrew, I cannot pretend to judge for myself of the affinity betwixt the two languages. But, besides the multitude of words agreeing both in found and sense, which are com- mon to the two languages, and of which there is a large catalogue to be seen in a work published not long ago, intitled, Greca et Latina lingua Hcbraizantes *; in all which, I cannot suppose, that so many learned men are mistaken; there are three things that I observe: ifl, That the names of the gods in Latin, such as Minerva, Neptune, Venus, Ceres, and which un- doubtedly were their names in the antient Pelafgic, though disused by the later Greeks, are allowed by all the learned in those matters to be of Phenician or He- brew origin --. And the general name which both the Greeks and Latins gave to,It is pu'liihed at Venice in the year 1764; the au- thor's:name Ogeriuj. t Vid. Bcchart. Gecgrapl. Sacr.--Seldn. de diis Sjriii, -Vofjjiu de Idoolaitr. - -Iltii Demon. Evangelic.,the
the gods, viz. ecc, or Deus, is of Hebrew C. I I. extraction: for, as Herodotus informs us, lib. 2. cap. 52. it is derived from the Greek word er,, of which they afterwards made T,.B, denoting, that the gods arranged and put every thing in order. Now, 6t,. in this sense, is plainly a Hebrew I root, as,* The common derivation of the word far, and it is given, if I am not miRfaken, even by Plato in the Cratr- Ius, is from 6E,, curro, importing, that the firR gods a- mong the Greeks were the celetial bodies, from whose motion the general name ofgedi was derived. But I am persuaded lcrodotus's etymology is the true one. For there is no evidence that the religion which the Pclafgi taught the Grecks was of that kind : but, on the con- trary, if we can believe Herodotus, it was the religion of Egypt that the Pclafgi imported into Greece, which was very different, at leaR at that time, from the religion of the antient Germans and Persians, who worllipped only the celestial bodies and the elements. For Jupiter, whole worflip the Pelafgi introduced into Greece, from whence he is called by Homer, zrw; n:lSyz5:S, was certainly nei- ther fun nor moon, nor any of the flars or clements, but a human personage, whose birth the Greeks, with their usual vanity, ascribed to their own country, and parti- cularly to Crete, from whence, it is likely, that the Pc- lafgi brought the worihip of him to Greece; though it cannot be doubted, but that he was originally of Egypt, the parent-country of the religion of the Greeks. And what I have said of the human extracion of Jupiter, ap- plies equally to. all the gods of Greece: for, as Hero- dotus tells us, they were all apsr , ;vir.,I
C. I . I am informed, with a Greek termination,,signifying, dipofJtit, deJignavit, determinavit, 6'c. which perfetly agrees with Herodo- tus's etymology '.,2dly, The names of the several countries and islands of Greece are undoubtedly of Phenician or Hebrew extration; and the name of the most antient race among them, according to Herodotus, I mean the name iow,, or Javans, by which name we are told the barbarians did antiently call all the Greeks, and by which the 0- rientais at this day call them, is undoubt- edly a Hebrew word: for Javan is the name of the son of Japhet, who was one of the sons of Noah t.,Lqfily, The similarity of termination be- twixt the Hebrew and the Latin, or old Pelafgic, is to me a convincing proof of,* Herodotus's words are, o0,: p, s,0~==. cl r T. 1T iiwry OTI s fETi; r g T iT tsty.To ra, r'; roCnT Ir"fp ;ros ; that is, they dilolfed, aifigned, and distributed every thing. As to the meaning of the Hebrew word, I refer the reader to a very learned and ingeninus work publilh- ed ;t Cambridge by one Samuel Squire, in the year 1741, intitled, An /Inquiy into the Origin of the Greek Lan- guage, p. 148.,' See the above-mentioned Inquiry into the Origin of the Greek Language, p. 144. & 151,,the
the affinity of the languages. For under- C. 1. derfranding of which, it is to be confider- ed, that there are three marks of affinity betwixt languages. The si;/ is, The fimi- larity of the found of words signifying the fame thing in both languages; 2dly, The similarity of termination in particular; and, lafiy, Similarity of flection, in forming cafes, genders, numbers, and tenses. If the words have only the first kind of re- semblance, the connection betwixt the two languages is remote; and all we can fay in iuch a cafe is, that either the one lan- guage is derived from the other, but has undergone much alteration since it came off from the flock; or that they are both derived from the fame parent-language, but, like tdreams from the fame fountain, have divided; and, wandering far from the source, have atfumed very different appearances. But if, besides this first mark, the two languages have likewise the second, the connection becomes much greater: for the termination of words is a characderitical mark, either of likeness or ofdifien'e;cc betwixt languages. Thus the Englifih and Italian having such different terminations, the one ending its words,VCL. I. 3 I mostly
C. 1 I. mostly in consonants, the other in vowels,,J e readily conclude them to be languages of different lineage and extraction; where- as the Dutch, German, Swedish, and o- ther dialeds of the Teutonic, terminating their words mostly in consonants, we con- clude them to have been originally from the fame stock with the Englifll . But if the third mark of resemblance likewise concurs, and if the fleAion is the fame, or nearly the fame, then we pronounce, with- out hesitation, that they are either the iame language, or dialeCs of the fame language, very near akin to one another. But if the resemblance of the flecion is not so obvious, it is only the learned in the grammatical art, who have observed attentively the changes which languages undergo in passing from one people to an- other, that will discover the two languages to have been originally the fame. In this way the Latin is discovered to be a dialec of the Greek. Whereas the later dialets , One of the molt difinguifhing marks of difference betwixt the dialets of the Teutonic, and the Greek or Latin, is, that those dialets terminate a great many of their words with afperated consonants; whereas the Greek and Latin terminate none in that way.,of
of that language, such as the Ionic, At- C. II. tic, Doric, and Eolic, are known, at first l fight, to be dialects of the fame language, as readily as the dialects spoken in the dif- ferent provinces of the ieveral kingdoms of Europe are known to belong all to the fame language.,To apply these general observations to the Hebrew and Latin: They have the first mark of resemblance in a great many words ; and it is likely it would have been found in many more, if there were as ma- ny books extant in Hebrew as there are in Latin. But in Hebrew there is only one book, which cannot be supposed to contain all the words of the language, if it were a much larger book than it is. And indeed it is evident from the way that the roots of this language are composld, that it contains but a finall part even of them ". As to the fleftion, it is, to be fire, very different in the two languages. But we are to confider, that flecfion is the,*The radical words to be found in the Bible do not exceed fifteen hundred; lwhereas the combination of the several consonants in triads will produce above ten thon- sand. See the book above quoted, De Grrce et Latina litgu. Cut'i llcbraica affinitate, p). 53.,' 3 2 I z chief
C. II. chief part of the grammatical art; and,therefore, when we fee two languages dif- fering in flection, we are not from thence to conclude, that they are languages ori- ginally different, but that after they were divided from one another, and came to be spoken by different nations, those nations followed different rules of art, in cultiva- ting and improving their several lan- guages; so that, from the fame mate- rials, languages were formed in appearance very different, though originally the fame. For fleeion, or analogy, as it is commonly called, gives what may be calledl theform to languages; and makes them appear so different, that it is only the critical eye that can fee the resemblance. But by the means of the termination, the relation betwixt the Hebrew and Latin appears e- vident: for, according to the hypothesis of some of the learned in the Hebrew, all the words in that language terminate in consonants; and it is not diifi)uted but that by far the greatcft part of them ter- minate in that way. Now a great part of the Latin words end,in consonants: nor is there any of the simple confbnants,(I
(I mean such as are not aspirated) that C. i. does not terminate some one Latin word. For as to f, it is an aspirated conionant, approaching in found to the Greek v; and as to the g, though no word terminate in it, it is very near of kin to the c, which terminates several words, and indeed may be accounted the fame found; and accor- dingly, in the antient Latin monuments c is commonly used for g, as in the Duli- lian inscription, leciolns is written for le- giones, and cxjfciont for effigiulnt; and in- deed, from its order in the alphabet, we may know, that it answers to the Greek Y. As to p, though it is not used in the end of any word as the Latin is written at present, yet we know, that, according to the old orthography, it was frequently u- Ied for b, to which it is so near akin, even in the end of words. Thus they said ap for the prelofition ab, which is just the Greek l ,a without the final vowel. And as to the q, it is used for the Greek x, with some variation, it is likely, in the found, which it is not easy to explain. And in the old Latin, there are flill more words,to
C. Ii. to be found terminating in consonants.,In the present Latin there are but few words which end in d; but there were more in the old Latin; for in the Dui- lian monument, instead of populo we find populod; instead of sententia, Jententiad. On the other hand, in the Greek language, as we have it at present, there is no noun terminating in a mute consonant, as A- riftotle has observed *; nor indeed any word, so far as I can recollec, unless the preposition x. But even this prepofl- tion, before a vowel, is written ;'; and as it was so pronounced by the Latins, I should incline to think, that I, was like- wife the Greek word, and the r was on- ly elided, for the fake of better found, when a consonant followed it. Nor does any of the liquids terminate words in Greek, except , and ,. as Aristotle likewise has observed; and but very few end in f, as I had occasion to observe before.,But I am persuaded it was not always so among the Greeks; and that while their dialed was nearer to the old Pelaf-,* P lic. c. zc 1.,glc,
gic, before they began to soften the found C. 1. of it, and to vary the terminations of it by inflection, they had as many words ending in mute consonants as the Latins. Thus, as I observed before, I cannot doubt, but in place of ,YOTI, they taid of old l)-yr, as the Latins fay; in place of rA,, F; and instead of a«o they used the La- tin preposition &t or &p. And yet, notwith- Itanding the difference of termination be- twixt the Greek and Hebrew, some learn- ed men * are of opinion, that the Greek resembles the Hebrew more than the La- tin. But betides the resemblance of ter- mination, which, as I have observed, is a strong mark of affinity betwixt two lan- guages, it is natural to think, that the old Pelafgic would undergo less change in I- taly, and be less cultivated and improved, than it was in Greece, and consequently have the greater resemblance to the He- brew.,I have insisted the more upon this like- ness of termination betwixt the Hebrew and Latin, that I think it has not been,* See Ogeriur De lingua Grecex et Latine cuml Hebra. ica affiliate.,sufficiently
C. I i. sufficiently attended to by learned men;,but it appears to me so strong a mark of resemblance, that it is very near as clear a proof of the Latin being derived from the Hebrew, as of our Englifl being de- rived fiom the Gothic: for the fledion in thefi two laft-mentioned languages is very different; and it is as much by the likeness of the termination, as by the si- milarity of the found of the words in o- ther refpeCs, that we know them to be so near akin.,If any more arguments were wanting to prove the affinity betwixt the Latin, or old Pclafgic, and the Hebrew, this alone, I think, might suffice, that as the Pelafgi came from Asia, they must have spoken some Asiatic language. Now we know, that the dialects that were spoken in that part of Asia, such as the Syriac, Pheni- cian, and Chaldaic, are all connected with the Hebrew.,If the reader is satisfied of the connec- tion betwixt the Hebrew and the Latin, it will follow of consequence, that the Hctrufcan language is also conneced with tile -Hebrew. For it is evident, from the monuments of that once great and power- ful nation flill extant, particularly the,T7bul'
Tabule Etugzibine *, that their language C. i. was the fame, or a dialed of the fame language with the Pelafgic or Latin; and the connedion betwixt it and the He- brew may be accounted for in the fame way as the connlleion betwixt the He- brew and the Pelafgic, namely, from the origin of the people, who came from Asia, as well as the Pelafgi, being original- ly Lydians, as Herodotus has informed us.,And thus it appears, that not only the northern parts of Asia, but the southern parts adjoining to the Mediterranean sea, and Greece, and Italy, and we may fay all Europe, once spoke the fame language, or dialcds of the fame language.,But what fliall we fay of the parent- country of all arts and sciences, at least to this weltrn part.of the world, I mean Egypt ? What was the language spoken there ? Was it peculiar to them ? or was it borrowed from any of their neighbours ?,* Sc wvith refpea to tlhcfe tables the fiNrfam Heiruif- CuMn o; ó'cri,'i, andl the Colleion of Hietrulcan Antiqui- ties. l.itc!y i;::'iitllfd in lo splendid a form by Mtr Iha- miltn1, to, . p. 4.,VoL.I. 13 K or
or did their neighbours borrow from them ? This is a matter of curious in- quiry, and well deserves a chapter by it- self.,C H A P. XII. Of the Antiquity of the Egjyptians.-That the,PelaJgi got their Language from Egypt, and brought it into Greece.- That the A- thenians were a Colony of the Egyptians. --hat Egypt was a country very proper for propagating or for inventing lan- guage. -No Univefal Language now ex- C. 12. I T cannot, I think, be doubted, that the,Egyptian nation was of very great an- tiquity, compared at least with any nation in Europe: for nothing is more certain in antient history, than that Egypt was a great kingdom, flourishing in arts and sciences, religion, and policy, while Eu- rope was inhabited, if at all inhabited, only by savages. The only nation in Eu- xope in antient times that had any preten- sions to antiquity was the Greek: but,the
the wiser even among them confidered C. I2. themselves as children, and of yesterday, compared with the Egyptians. Plato fays, that they had no memory of any thing beyond a thousand, or at most two thou- sand years before his time; whereas, if we can believe that most diligent and ac- curate historian Herodotus, the Egyptians had not only traditions, but records, viz. their sacred books, that went back above eleven thousand years before that time. And besides those books, they had a chro- nological record, such as I believe was never found in any other nation, I mean the fta- tues of the high-priefts of Jupiter in Thebes, of which Herodotus saw himself to the number of 345, who succeeded one another from father to son, (for the priesthood in Egypt was hereditary), from the reign of their first king down to Herodotus *. And Plato speaks of pieces,of * Lib. 2. c. . 43 cl fcq. They were coloflal lratues of wood; every high-prielR having set up one for himfjf du- ring his life. They had been shewn before to Hecataiis the historian, when he was bragging of the antiquity of his fa- mily, and reckoning up fifteen ancestors, and the sixteenth a god: so: the Greeks were vain of the antiquity of their families, as well as of their nation. The computation',3 K 2 heli
C. 12. of music among the Egyptians, afcri- wv^ bed to Isis, which he fays were above,ten thousand years old *. What num- ber of years the learned and religious reader will think proper to abate of this account, I cannot take upon me to deter- mine; but thus much I may fay, that unless we believe Egypt to be a nation of very high antiquity, we must reject the authority of all antient history, sacred as well as profane.,Further, we are sure, from the best au- thority, that Egypt was a country of learning in very early times, as early as here of the x1,0oo years by generations, three of which Herodotus reckons make loo years: but fiom what he fays a little below it appears, that they had the years of the reigns of their several kings exaaly set down in their sacred books; for he fays, they reckoned from Bacchus, who was one of the youngellt of their gods, fifteen thou- sand years, down to Amnafis, the last of their kings be- fore the Persian conquest; and this they said they were sure of, ,iH *. xyoyom,, xe; aIf amorpalo,,roi Ta ,; C; the mean- ing of which words, I think, clearly is, that they always computed and set down in their books the years of every king's reign at the time of his death. There arc other curious things to be gathered from this paflnge, which is one of the most remarkable in the book, but they are not to our present purpose. * Lib, 2. De Legilus, p. 657.,the
the days of Moses, who, we are told, was C. I2. infiruded i all the wisdom of the Egyp- ~ tians '.,Lastly, It is a fact, which I think like- wife cannot be denied, that all religion and policy, arts and sciences, came ori- ginally from Egypt into the different parts of Europe: and they appear to me to have been conveyed and propagated in two fe- veral ways, and by two several nations; by the Phenicians by sea, and the Pclafgi by land. Of these lalI, and of their in- tercourfe with Egypt, I have said some- thing already, and fliall presently fay more. And as to the Phenicians, they once dwelt upon the Red sea, as Hero- dotus informs us, nearer to the Egyp- tians; and, if they were not a colony of theirs, had certainly a close intercourse with them, in consequence of vwhich they learned to circumcise themselves, as the fame author tells us -P. And it appears they were so much connected with them,* Ads of the ApoJhlea, chap. 7. v. 22. The word in the original is .op,; which I do not understand to mean prua'ence in the common affairs of life, for which the pro- per Greek word is fp¢owr; but knowledge in the most hidden secrets of nature, and the highelt philofopliy.,- Lib. 2. C. 104.,as
C. 12. as to be admitted to a participation of their,Y religion and worihip: for we are told like-,wife by Herodotus *, that they carried upon the prows of their gallies an image of the god Vulcan, such as that which the Egyptians worihipped in the adyta of their temples.,These things being premised, we are now to inquire, Whether the art of lan- guage, as well as other arts, may not have come to the Western world from Egypt ? and whether that language, which I have shewn was universal over Europe, and a great part of Asia, was not originally the language of Egypt,If such was the cafe, the nations who spoke this language mufft have had some way or other a communication with E- gypt; and all or most of them had that communication, if we can believe the hi- flory of the Egyptians, of which Hero- dotus has given us so exact an account. For, not to mention the conquests of their god' Osiris, their king Sefoftris traversed, with a great army, almost all the world that was then known, and left monuments,* Lit. 3. c. 37.,of
of himself in several countries, some of C. I2. which were frill remaining in the days of Herodotus. Among other monuments lhe may have left his language in several places, as he certainly did in Colchis, where he left a colony, who, at the time Herodotus wrote, lived according to the manners of the Egyptians ', and spoke their language. And if it be further true, that they planted a co- lony, not only there, but in many other parts of the world, as Diodorus informs us they pretended, in that way we can account for all the languages I have ien- tioned being dialeds of the Egyptian: for that the Egyptians learned their language from any of those other nations, there is not, I think, the least proof or probabi- lity.,But if we flould disbelieve every thing that the Egyptians have said of themselves, it is impossible that we can reject what the Greeks have told us of their intercourse with that nation, unless we have a mind to reject at the fame time all antient hi-,* Lib. 2. c. 104. et se'q.,story.
C. 12. ilory. Now, according to the Greek ac-,counts, they had a communication with Egypt, not only by the means of Greek travellers into that country, in which way I do not think their language was brought into Greece; but chiefly by the means of firangers from that country, who came and fettled in Greece, and became govern- ing persons, and founders of flates there. Of this kind I hold Deucalion to have been, and Inachus the first king in Greece, as Danaus and Cecrops certainly were; and likewise Cadmus, who, though he came into Greece immediately from Phenicia, was originally from Egypt. But besides those patriarchs of the Greeks, as I may call them, it appears to me, that the Pe- lafgi, the firt civilizers of Greece, and whose language I think I have proved was the origin of the Greek language, were ei- ther tome colony of the Egyptians, or, by intercourse with them,. had learned, not only their religion and arts, but their lan- guage.,It is certain that the Pelafgi were the first civilizcrs of Greece; and I think I have fllewn, that, among other arts which they brought into Greece, they introduced,their
their language. Further, it is evident, C. I2. tiat they came fro m Asia; and as to their Cl ihtei-courfe with Eg-pr, we are told by Herodotus, that they Ibrought into Greece frbm ;Egypt the names of the gods. And if Herodotus had not told us so, from'what other country than Eg.ypt could they have brought the gods of Egypt ? And it further appears, that they not only 1knew the popular religion of the country, but Wecre initiated into their mysteries: for it was from Egypt that they brouglht the Samothracian mysteries, the most an- tient and most refipeclable of all the Greek mysteries. These mysteries were in ho- nlour of the Cabirin, nmot venerable de- ities of Egypt, into whose temple none was permitted to enter but the priest s . 'The conclusion that 1 draw from there sacs is, that the Pelafgi were either one of the many colonies that came out of Egypt, or were so intimately conneded with the E- gyptians as to have learned their language, as well as their religion and arts.,This conclusion, I think, mulft appear * lierodr . lib. 2. c. 51. t- bid. lib. 3. c. 37. VOL. I. 3 L extremely
C. 12. extremely probable, especially as it is not,contradiced by any antient author; for none of them has said any thing conce:n- ing ihe origin of the Pelafgi. But. the e- videuce becomes much fironger, and in- deed amounts to a proof as clear as. can be expeAed in matters of such remote anti- quity, if we attend to what Herodotus has .said, That the Dorians were Pelafgi; and that the leaders of the Dorians were from Egypt '. Now what language can we sup- pose those Egyptian leaders to have spoken other than the Egyptian? And is it to be believed, that the Dorians spoke a differ- ent language from their leaders? For fiup- .pose they had spoken a different language when those leaders came among them, it is natural to think, that the fame thing would have happened to the Dorians, as icrodotus tells us happened to the Athe- nians when the Pelafgi governed Athens, namely, that they would adopt the language of their governors. And as to the later E- gyptian fitrangers, such as Danaus or Cad- *mus, that came into Greece after the Pelafgi were eflabliihed there, they must have un- derIlood, and been able to speak, the lan-,* Hcrcdot. lib. 6. cap, 53.,guage
guage of the country; otherwise, I think, C. I2. it is impossible that they could have got such an ascendency over the people as to become kings and rulers among them, not by force, which it is certain they did not iufe, but by persuasion L. Thus, I think, I have proved, that one race of the Greeks, viz. the Dorians, spoke a dialed of the Egyptian language. But what flall we fay of the other race, the Ionians, whom only Herodotus will al- low to be the true Hellens or Greeks ? I fay, in the fifl place, that the Doric, and Attic, or Ionic, are clearly dialects of the fame language; so that if we admit the Doric to be Egyptian, it is impossible we can deny the Attic to be so likewise. And as to the notion of the Pelafgi or Dorians having changed their language after they came into Greece, and adopted the lan- guage of the people whom they governed, I have endeavoured to {hew, that it is without foundation, and contrary to all probability. But, 2dly, Suppose we should,* See this argument very well handled by Squire, in his Inquiry, which I quoted before, into the originof the Greek language, fel/. 3. P. 173.,3 L 2 admit
C. I2. admit this to have happened, however im-,. probable, and that the Attic or Ionic is the true original Greek language which the Pelafgi learned after they came into Greece; I fay, that the language of. A- thens, the principal city of the Ionians, was originally Egyptian; because the A- thenians were an Egyptian colony. This is a curious fad of antient history, not commonly known; and as it belongs to our fuljet, I will slate the evidence of it at some length: in doing which I am as- fifled by a French dissertation on the sub- iled, lately publilhed by the society of an- tiquarians in London.,Apd, in the firfl place, if we can believe the Egyptians themselves, there is no doubt of the matter. For, as Diodorus Si- culus info'rms us a, among many other colonies which they pretended to have fettled in difficrent parts of the world, they said the city of Athens was one; and they were so particular as to name the znome or diftriA in Egypt from whence this co- lony came, viz. the difirid of SaiD. And accordingly Plato tells us t, that the,* Lb. . cap. 23. edit. Ilfelgling. t' Tom. 3p. p . 2. edit' rrani.,SaYtes
Saites confidered the Athenians as related C. 12. to them; and on that account treated So- Ion with great kindness when he came a- mong them, and inftruated him in antient history; telling him, ainong other things, the story of the Atlantic island, which Plato has related in the- Timtsus. The Egyptians further, according to Diodorus -, said, that Erechthcus, who is commonly reckon- ed the sixth King of Athens, was an Egyp- tian; and did, on account of that relation of the Athenians to the Egyptians, im- port into Attica, from Egypt, a quantity of corn in a time of great drought, which had produced a famine in Attica, and for this service was made king of the country. This account of Erechtheus must be al- lowed to be at least more credible, than the story which the Greeks told of him, that he sprung out of the earth -f; and was so far confirmed by the Athenians themselves, as the fame Diodorus tells us, that they admitted there was a great scar- city of corn in Attica in the reign of E- rechtheus, and that then Ceres came a-,* Ubi filpra. t Ilerodot. lib. 8. cap. 5;. 'Ernv i T Brfo;roA, Tavuri EpeX (g;s Tr ynYivO; A)otivus ftrav o;,,mong
C. r2. mong them, and gave them corn; the,meaning of which fable, the Egyptians said, was, that Erechtheus, along with the corn, brought with him from Egypt the mysteries of that goddess, and established them in Eleusis in Attica, from whence they were called the Eleufliian mnyjeries. Now, if it be admitted, that there was at that time an importation of corn into At- tica, I think it could hardly be from any other country than Egypt, which, by its nature, could not susser famine from the want of rain, the cause, as it is said, of the famine at that time in Attica, and, as Diodorus tells us, in almost every part of the known world, except Egypt. It must therefore, I think, be allowed, that the Egyptian fiory is at least a probable one, and agreeable to what the Athenians themselves relate.,Further, that the Athenians were a colony of the Saites, was the opinion of Theopom- pus, a very learned Greek historian, whose diligence, and the expence, as well as the pains he was at to inform himlelf of fads, and particularly concerning the origin of nations and cities, Dionysius the Ha-,licarnaffian
licarnaffian very much commends *. The C. 12. work of Theopompus is loft; but the faa ' is related by Eusebius in his Pieparatio E- vaingelica, lib. Io. cap. Io. p. 491.; and also by Proclus the philosopher, in his commen- tary upon the Timllius of Plato, p. 30.; who informs us at the. fame time, that Callif- thenes and Phanodemus averred the con- trary of this, viz. That the Saites were a colony of the Athenians; and he men- tions Atticus, a Platonic philosopher of later times, who fays, that Theopompus, through envy, inverted the flory. And he adds, that in Atticus's time there came certain persons from Sais to Athens to re- new their relation and connecion with the Athenians t.,From all these accounts, one thing ap- pears to be evident, that there was a con- neclion betwixt the Saites and Athenians,,* Dionf. I 'alscarn. Epi/7ol. ad Pomp. d l!iJ/orsic.i, p. 131. t As this work of Proclus is not in the hands of every body, I have excerpted the passage, which runs thus:- Tuc S AB9 v3i'nc KaXX ivBC B;v xa; (t'evQJryc Yar~aT rw' triT'rS ;ropiar ylv;rc9 -. OIDTTOUOf Ji nrayaxivt Yomuf [leg. xloiryb] duruv 5t1 Fl;v. ATTi u I0 rtTc.vlxcl; Sdi Bxarxan v T0lW, ,ttsratoteaI Tr ;roflav 7; GtcTOJCV'Tc ;YUT jy dp IK'rrCCi T7V5A iX 7I t u; 5I ' RC i V/ 7-o TIOn c,and
C. 12. and that either the Saites were a colony of,the Athenians, or the Athenians of the SaYtes. Now, I think the learned 'reader cahnot hesitate a moment in chufing whicli of these alternatives he ihould believe fdir though it be certain, that the Egyp- tians sent out many colonies, and piarti- culaily that many Egyptians cale" 'iiito Greece, there is not the least proof or probability, that any colony ever came from Greece into Egypt, nor indeed froin any other country in the world,, to far as we know, except from Ethiopia, which I hold to have been the parent-country of tle Egyptians,' who, coming from thence, first inhabited the Thebais, or Upper E- gypt, and then spread thcmfclves over'the Delta, after that country was formed by the river.,Further still, not only does it thus ap- pear in general, that the Athenians were a colony of the SaYtes, but I think we' know particularly, at what time, and by whom this colony was fettled in Athens. Fori'it appears to me, that the colony was, led by Cecroips, the firt king of A- thens, some time ,after ' the Ogygian de- luge, which had desolated Attica. Whe-,ther
ther this deluge was the fame with that C. 12. of which Solon was informed by the old Egyptian priest of SaYs, and which, at the fame time that it deflroyed Attica, over- whelmed the Atlantic island *, or whether it was another, posterior to this, I pretend not to determine. -,That this first Athenian king was an E- gyptian, is a fact that I think incontefta- ble t; though the Athenian mythologists made him likewise the offspring of the earth +. And it appears also certain, that,* See Plato in 7imxo, tomr 3. 2. S. errani. t See Johannes Tzetzes, Iliad. S. cap. 18.-Suidas in voce CECROPS.-Sckoliajf. in Plitum Arijflphanis. -I- faacus Tzetzes ad Lcopjron.-And Crdrenus Comi end. Hi- floriarum.,t ,pollodor. Bibliothec. lib. 3. This was a common fable among the Greeks, invented either to conceal their ignorance, or to disguise the true origin of their nation, and'to make the world believe that they were the pro- duce 9f the country which they inhabited. This, we know,' was in particular the vanity of the Athenians, who copfidered all the other inhabitants of Greece as so- reignerS in the country where they lived, and themselves only as indigenns, and truly natives. Upon this topic their orators never failed to expatiate in the funeral orations which they pronounced upon those of the Athenians who fell in war. See what Plato has said upon this subjet in his Ao7ro ;?,pio;, in the Menexenus.,VOL. . 3 M he
C. I2. he came from Sais in Egypt ". And that,he came after the Ogygian deluge, and found Attica inhabited by men, who lived in a state of the greateCf barbari- ty, copulating promiscuously like beats, appears also to be certain t: for it is a- greed, that he first instituted marriage a- mong the Athenians; and for this reason he is diftinguiflied by the epithet lur, as Tzetzes has very well explained the word in his various history T. The cafe appears to have been, that the country. of Attica having been quite defblated by the Ogy- gian deluge at the time that Cecrops arri- ved with his colony from Sais, which it is computed was a hundred and eighty- nine years after that deluge, according to Africanus's chronology, as quoted by Eusebius, was then inhabited by savages,,* Job. Tzclz. lceo supra citalo. t Eu/eb. Chron. et prip. Evqngel.. t Johannes Tczet. Iliad. 5. cap. 8i.; where he tells us,, that before Cecrops, the mothers of children were only known ; so that tlle chldlren were p.vr"n;:, where- as, after the institution of marriage, both parents being k;nown, they became S.:,cr. And in this account of the name, Athencus, lib. 13. and Juftin the hiforian, lib. 2, cap. 6, agree with Tzetzes,,who
who lived without government, arts, or C. 12m civility; and who therefore must be sup- posed to have learned every art of life from Cecrops and his followers; and, a- mong other arts, that of language.,Diodorus, though his vanity as a Greek made him unwilling to believe that the principal city of Greece was an Egyptian colony; yet, as a faithful. historian, he has fairly given us the arguments which the Egyptians used to convince the Greeks of the truth of the sac. They said, that there was a great conformity betwixt the religious and civil institutions of the people of Sais, and those of the Athenians.' And, among other particulars, he mentions the division of the people of both cities into three classes of the fame kind ',But, among other argumenfs, they u- fed one which appears to me most con- vincing in matters of such remote anti- quity, because it is drawn fiom the most antient of all the monuments of men, I mean the names of places. For the E- gyptians said, that the colony came from a town. in the diftri& of Sa'is,,* Di;dor. lib. I. cap. 28. edit. Iresing.,3 1M 2 called
C. 12. called Ajly *; and this name they gave to,the new city that they founded in Greece. In support of this argument, they said, whatno doubt was true, that the Athenians were the only people in Greece that gave that name to their city t: for the word auv is not the general name for a city in Greek, ex- cept among the poets, but a name peculiar to the city of Athens, and no doubt a foreign word, which the Athenians preserved with- out altering it, or giving it the usual Greek,* The words of Diodorus are, Ka T,;( 'Aei>,i;, mil (Ai. yu.TioiJ) aTpixvf d0el 5uilY . e ; ATC yt uT S' ta; AOIPWTC 7T-i oirYX.077- roc TUTW; ftphV 4aIHSEu; ltafd so p i; yap Tl g 'Ehunvv i) v T o0i, 'A5TT xAH.a$l, IsiTtvityvUy ; iT trfonyoatpa ao rZ* TxaA curof rs;#;, lib. I. cap. 28. Of these last words, it may be thought the meaning is, that -a'u was another name for the city of Sais. But though that interpretation would equally serve my purpose, I hold the proper meaning of the words to be, that the name of cnu given to Athens was tranf ferred from the ,aru among themu, as it may be literally rendered: an expreflion which so clear a writer as Dio. dorus would not have uscd, if he- had meant to fay, either that aoru was a general name for a city in the E- gyptian language, or that this city of Sais, besides that name, was likewise called atu; The meaning therefore of the passage clearly is, that as there was a diliria of the name of Sais, as well as a city, (fee Plato in Tineo), ev was the name of some other city or village in that diftri&, from which this Athenian colony came. t Not only the Athenians themselves called their city by that names but also the Latin writers. See Corn. Ncpor, 7'eriJocl cap. 4c . & T6eren Eunuch. dc.,termination.
termination. For Arittotle has told us -", C. 1z. that there are only five 'nouns in Greek v which terminate in this vowel v, of which r, is one; and I am persuaded they are all foreign words, that had not been na- turalized by getting a Greek termination.,But besides all these arguments, there is one that arises from the manners and institutions of the Egyptians, and the state of their country, which to many may ap- pear more conclusive than any that I have hitherto mentioned. It is a fadt that can- not be disputed, that Egypt, in antient times, I mean before the Perlian conquest, was the most populous country then known in the world t. Nor indeed can any man, from what is to be seen in Eu- rope, have any idea of the populoufilefs of this country, such as it is described to us by antient authors. For, not to men- tion the number of cities and great villages, which are said to have amounted to eigh- teen thousand, Herodotus tells us $, that in one of their many procefions, that to,* Arifo7t. PoeWic. cap. 21. in sit:e. .\ Diodor. Sicul. lib. I. cap. 3I 1 . eit. ling. t Lib. 2. cap. 60.,the
C. 12. the city of Bubaftis in honour. of Diana,,there would be sometimes seven hundred thousand men and women, besides chil- dren, as he was informed by the natives. And the account he gives of the race of the fighting men thews us, that the numbers of the whole people muff have been pro- digious for a trac of country which, is not near so large as what now goes by the name of Egypt; for it comprehended, no more than what was overflowed by, the river; so that a great deal of the country now called Egypt was then known, either under the name of Arabia towards the east, or of Libya towards the weft. The fight- ing men, he fays, all together, were four hundred and ten thousand in number when Egypt was in its most flourifling state. So that, according to the ordinary computation, of one fourth of the whole number of people being able to bear arms, the number of this class of men in Egypt must have amounted to one million fix hundred and forty thousand. Now, the race of fighting men was, as Herodo- tus tells us, but one of seven classes into which the people were divided; and if their number was so great, what must the,number
number have been of husbandmen, shep- C. 12. herds,- sailors, and artificers of every kind, not to mention the prieffs, who were in E- gypt a very numerous race ? What enabled Egypt to maintain such numbers was the nature of the country, where the land was not onlr more fruitful than the land of any other, but the river abounded exceedingly with fish, and also with herbs, which served for the sustenance of man. Their policy too and manners very much encouraged propagation: for every man in Egypt had as many wives as he chose, except the prieffts, who married only one. Nor was exposition of children allowed a- mong them, as in Greece; but they were obliged to bring them all up, even such as they had by female slaves, and without diftinfcion, whether they were lawful children, or what we call bqafards. And left we should think it impoflible that they could rear so many children, the fame author informs us t, that it was done at no coit, the children for the greater part,Hcrodot. lib. 2. cap. 165. fcqq. Dio.tr. lib. 1. cap. 73. 7 74. P. 84. i- Dicdor. Sicul. lib, I, c. 80. p, 91.,going
C. I2. going about naked, and feeding. upon,s reeds and other aquatic plants which grew,in their river and marshes.,In such circumflances, it was of abfo- lute necessity, that they should ease them- selves of their superfluous numbers by fend- ing out colonies; a fadt of which 1 could have had no doubt, though it.had. not been vouched by any hiflory or record. And I imagine, that the warlike expedi- tions of Osiris and Sefoftris were underta- ken, rather with a political view of easing themselves of their fuperiluous numbers, than of making conquefis: for it does not appear that they retained, or attempted to retain, any of the countries that they o- ver-ran, but only fettled colonies in them. I therefore confider Egypt as a hive that cast off swarms from time to time, which spread themselves all round on every fide, carrying with them their religion and their arts, and, among other arts, that of language. And it appears to me, that those swarms did not only fettle in the Weft, but also in the East. For the Egyp- tians themselves said, that the Babylo- nians and Chaldeans were a colony from,them
them *. And indeed I think it is highly C. I2. probable, that the Chaldeans, who were the priests and philosophers of the Baby- lonians, brought with them their religion and sciences from Egypt. For, betides the resemblance which Diodorus has obfer- ved betwixt them and the Egyptian priests, there is, with refpet to religion, a circumstance of surprising conformity mentioned by Herodotus, which, I think, could not have been accidental I-; and as there is not the least reason to believe that the Egyptians borrowed any thing from any other country, unless it be Ethio- pia, the country from whence, as I have laid, they probably came, we must sup- pose, that the Chaldeans took it from them.,i Diodor. Sicul. lib. I. cap. 28. p. 32. t Iie fays, that in the temple of Jupiter Belus at Babylon, whole priests the Chaldeans were, none was permitted to pass the night, except a woman, who was chosen for that purpose, and had no intercourse with nman. The lhrnc, he fays; was praailed in the temple'. of jupiter in the Egyptian Thebes; and in both temples, there was a couch for the god, upon which they said he reposed during the night: ;,G, P ri f;im4;, fiys our au- thor, lib. i. cap,. 12.,VOL. I. 3 N Further,
C. 12. Further, it is a fat which. cannot be ^^J doubted, that when the Greeks under A-,lexander the Great came into India, they found every where there monuments both 'of: Bacchus, or Dionysius, and Hercules; and efsccially of the firif, who, the In- dians said, came from the weft with a great army, conquered the country, taught tthem agriculture and the use of wine, sand other arts of civil and social life ". : Now, there. is no man who knows any thing of antient history, that can believe that this conqueror of India was Bacchus the son of Semele, or Hercules the son of Am- phitryon. And I think there can be little :doibt who they were, when we find the history of two countries so remote as Egypt and India agreeing in the fame flory: for the Egyptians related, that their Bacchus, whom they called Osiris, (with whom their Hercules was contemporary),. over-ran all the world known at that time with a great army, civilizing men, and teaching them the arts of life where-cver he came; and particularly, that he was in India, where he built several cities, and, among others, i, *' See. Strabo, lib. . 5 . 1co8. o38.- rian. Indica, c, .. 5.-and Expedit. Alexandri, lib. 5. c. i. * *I-";-;' .' a
a famous one, called Nlfa, and left betides C. I2. many other monuments of himself ". And there.are at this day remarkable vestiges in India to be found of Egyptian manners and customs; particularly the veneration -of the cow 1.. And I am disposed to be- lieve, that the arts and sciences, of which it is certain the Indians have been in pof- feflion for many ages, have risen from feeds sown there by the Egyptians 1:.,Now, if we can believe that the Egyp- tians sent out their colonies as far as In- dia, or if we only believe that they went the length of the Euxine sea, where the Colchians dwelt, whom Herodotus pofi- tively affirms to have been an Egyptian colony, we can hardly doubt of their fending colonies to Greece; a country so much nearer to them, and to which they had so easy access, both by iea and land.,Thus I have endeavoured to shew, that even upon Herodotus's supposition, of the Pelafgic being a barbarous language, alto-,* Diodor. Sicul. lib. I. cap, In . p. p23. '' t See, upon this subjea, La. Croze, lib.. . Hiior. ChriJf. Indor. p. 430.. . $ See Du Pons's account of the language, philosophy, and sciences of the Bramins of India, in 26th vol. of the Letlres edifianltes r curieufs.' '',3 N gether
C. I2. gether different from Greek, and that the,Attic language was the only true Hellenic, there is the greatest reason to believe, that the Attic itself was originally an Egyptian dialed, which came with an Egyptian co- lony into Attica. And upon this hypo- thesis, I think, we may account for the possibility of that change of language which Herodotus fays happened in Attica after the expulsion of the Pelafgi. These Pelafgi pofleffed Attica before the arrival of Cecrops. This Herodotus very plainly intimates, when he tells us, that while the Pelafgi were malters of what is now call- ed Greece, the Athenians were Pelafgi, and were called Cranai; then, under Cecrops their king, they were called Cecropide; then, under Erechtheus, a succeeding king, their name was changed into Athenians, ,6c. * Now, if it be true, as I have en- deavoured to shew, that the Pelafgi spoke the Egyptian language, as they were at that time long from Egypt, it must have been a dialet of it different from that which was newly imported by Cecrops, and perhaps from a different part of the country. The Athenians therefore, in,JI-rc'kt,. lib. 8. cap. 44.,place
place of the old Egyptian of the Pelafgi, C. 12. may have learned a more modern dialed of it from this king and his followers. For though it be almost impoflibie, that a whole people having once learned a regular- formed language, and been in use to speak it for ibme time; fiould unlearn it, and acquire another quite different; they may change.one dialed of the fame language for another, as we fee men among us get free of their provincial dialed, and learn one more courtly and polite.,If the arguments that I have uscd to prove, that both races of the Greek na- tion were originally from Egypt, do not appear so convincing to the reader as they do to me, there are not wanting other proofs, and there more direc, of the E- gyptian and Greek languages being origi- nally the fame. And, first, if it be true, as I have endeavoured to Ihew, that there is a resemblance betwixt the Greek and the Hebrew, and if it be also true, that there is such a similarity betwixt the HIe- brew and Egyptian as could not be acci- dental, it will follow of neccflary cotele- quence, that there mus;t have been a con tcc- tion betwixt the Egyptialn ai Grcek. Now,,that
C. 12. that there is such a similarity betwixt the,Hebrew and Egyptian, is evident from the scattered remains of the Egyptian in the writings of the antients, which have been carefully collected by learned;mien, parti- culariy Bochart and Thomaffin, and' cni- pared with the Greek. Some of tliefe words are preserved in the sacred 'Wri- tings, and particularly the name M:-or, which it is said Pharaoh's daughter impo- fed upon the child that flhe drew out of the river *, is, as I am certainly informed,' a Hebrew word, signifying what it is said in the text to denote, viz. the being ex- trnAied, or drawn out. And the name also which Pharaoh gave to Joseph t, is like- wife thought, by learned men, to be a Hebrew word, signifying an interpreter of secret things :.,Another proof more diret still is, the conformity which is at this day to be found betwixt the Greek and the Coptic, that is, the remains of the old Egyptian, which still,* Exodus, ch. ii. v. o0. t Genes. ¢c. xli. v. 4S. : See Squire'l Inquiry, p, 171..,continue
continue to be spoken in Egypt. This C. 12. conformity appears so great to the learned Kircher, that he thinks the one must be derived from the other; but he fays it is difficult to determine whether the Greek be derived from the Egyptian, or the E- gyptian from the Greek ". But this ap- pears to me to be a question very easily determined: for even the vanity of the Greeks never pretended, that the E- gyptians had borrowed any arts from them of any kind, much less this most neceflary art of life. Nor do I know that any other nation ever boasted of the E- gyptians being obliged to them for any invention, except the Ethiopians, who, as I have said, were originally the fame peo- ple.,Other arguments might be uscd to fllew the conformity betwixt the Egyptian and the antient language of Greece; tome of which Mr Squire, in the Inquiry above quoted, has very well enforced; fich as the autho- rity and ascendant which single Egyptian firangers gained over the people of Greece, and which it is hardly poflible to con-,Squire's Inquipy, p. 175.,ceive
C. 12. ceive how they should have gained, if,they. had been entirely ignorant of the language of the country: and how should those many Greek firangers that travel- led into Egypt in antient times, such as Orpheus, Mufeus, Linus, Homer, &c. have been so successful in learning and importing into Greece the religion and arts of Egypt, if they had been obliged to undergo the drudgery of acquiring a lan- guage quite different from their own, as well as of learning those arts ? But I think enough has been said already to maike.it highly probable, and indeed as certain as any matter of such remote antiquity can be, that Egypt was the parent-country, at least with refped to Europe and the weft- ern parts of Asia, of language, as well as of other arts.,But was this language, so far spread, invented in Egypt, as well as derived from thence to the fevcral countries where it was spoken ? This is a question that cannot, like the one we have been speaking of concerning the propagation of languages, be decided by history and facts, but is a matter of argument and probable conjecture. One thing, I think, cannot,be
be denied, that Egypt, of all the countries C. I2* in this part of the globe, is that where it is the most likely a language of art llould have been invented. In any country where any common business was carried on by men, a barbarous jargon, such as we have dcIcribed, may have been invented; and, I am persuaded, many such were invented in different parts of the world: but with- out the closest intercourse of social life, it appears to me impofible, that an art of such refinement as the art of language could have been discovered. Now, such intercourse there is not among savages that subsist by hunting, fiffing, or the natural fruits of the earth. It is to be found only among men that fubfit' by a- griculture, and live in cities, under regular forms of governmlent. Now, the Egyp- tians were certainly the first people in the neibgbourhood of Europe who lived in that way, 'bing obliged to do fb by the nature of tic.r country. For, as their land vwas un'.er water a considerable part of the year, they could not fubfifi by hunting or paftCragc, nor without agri- culturc, at leaf, in any great number; and it was necefiary for them to have ci-,VOL.I. 30 ties
C. 12. ties or villages, such as we know those of,Egypt were, raised upon mounds of earth, in which they might live in the time of the inundation. This nature of their country, it is admitted, gave birth to geometry a- mong them, and, I am persuaded, to ma- ny other arts. They were likewise the first people, so far as we know, that were civilized, and lived under a regular go- vernment. For these reasons, I think it is probable, that they first invented the art of language, as well as the art of no- ting it by alphabetical characters, and c- fiery other art and science of which we are in polTeffion. And accordingly it is recorded in the Egyptian annals, that Teuth, or Hermles, as he was called by the Greeks, invented the grammatical, as well as the writing art; giving a form to lan- guage, and imposing names upon things that had none before *,But * Diodor. Stu!. lib. r. cap. 15. p. i9. His words arc, *T, yjp TUTU ('EpAu) P2Toy .Iw T (7 s xoivmv 'IsArxTOv spScpSvarxl xl; 7ortsx TY a UvvA4 V T7vU rp;,yoptl. From which it ap- pears, that there was a language uscd in Egypt before Teuth; but he firfl dillinguillied it properly by articu- lation, and gave names to thinls. For before him, it vould fcem, that the Egyptians uled only v:rbi quibra,voces
But was this language, which I suppose C. 12. may have been invented in Egypt, and carried to so many different countries, propagated all over the earth? Are we to believe that the Huron, the Algonkin, the Caribbee, and all the many different Ian- guages spoken in- North and South Ame- merica; the language of Otahitee, and the other islands or continents that may be in the great Pacific ocean; the hissing lan- guage of the Troglodytes in Abyssinia; or the muttering jargon of those savages mentioned by Condamin upon the banks of the river Amazons, spoken, as he fays, in drawing in the breath; or the language, if they have any, of the men with tails in the island of Nicobar, are all dialects of the fame parent-language, which I suppose to have been invented in Egypt? This might be credible, if there were any hi- itory or tradition of all the world being peopled by colonies from that country, or if there were any such conformity voces ftenffque notarent, but had not invented nomina, or names; at least not names for every thing. See also, concerning this Teuth, Plato in P ilebo, p. 18,; et in Phxcdro, p. 274.; Plutarch, tom. 2. p. 738.,3 02 of
C. 12. of those languages last mentioned, ci- -' t ther wjih one another, or with the lan-,guage of Egypt, as is to be found in the other languages above mentioned; if, for example, they agreed in religious terms, in words expressing numbers, or relations of persons, or any other capital words of necessary and firequent use. But the fad is, that so far as we know of those languages, they differ totally from one another, par- ticularly in the names of numbers. Of these I have given specimens from the Huron, the Algonkin, and the Otahitee language, all differing extremely from one another; and it is impossible, I flould think, to connec them with the fame names in any of the languages that I sup- pose to be derived from Egypt. I have given also the name of the number three used by those favagcs upon the banks of the river Amazons, which he must be an able etymologist indeed who can derive from any Hebrew root; and I think I may fay the fame of the Elsquimaux words ex- prefling imuch and little.,I cannot therefore carry the propagation of language further than I have done. I think it probable, that all the languages,spoken
spoken in Europe, all Asia, if you will, C. I2. and Tome part of Africa, are dialects of one parent-language, which probably was invented in Egypt. But I am not warranted to go farther, either by the reason of the thing, by historical fats, or by any thing I -can discover in the lan- guages. themselves. Some, I know, are very fond of the system of an universal language; but when they come to prove it by fads, and by the languages them- selves, I think they fail very much; as may be seen from that dictionary of uni- verlal language which Mons. Bullet has Subjoined to his Celtic dictionary. What- ever therefore we may believe of there ha- ving been once but one language upon the face of the earth, we muff, I think, allow, that it is now either totally loft in a great part of the earth, or so depraved and cor- rupted as no longer to be known,,C I A P.
C H A P. XIII. Changes to which Language is liable;-c- specially in its pafage from one people to another.- Examples of that kind.- Gene- ral Observations upon Etymology, and the derivation of one Language from another. -Ctonclrfion and Recapitulation. C. I3. ALthough language be of a nature so,"<> ' durable, that I doubt whether there be an example of a language of art being totally loft; yet it is extremely mutable as to its form and fashion; as mutable, I believe, as any thing belonging to man. Words, fays Horace, are as liable to change and decay as the leaves of trees:,Utfylvefoliis pronos mutantur in annos; Prima cadunt: ita verborlum vetus interit,etas, 2Et juvenum ritu florent modo nata, vigent.,que. :ebemur morti nos nofJraque.,HOR. Ars Poet.,Thug
Thus the languages spoken in the several C. 13. nations of Europe only three hundred years ago, are so different from the prefentj that if we can understand them at all, it is only by the help of learned critics who have composed glossaries and dictionaries of them. Nor is- there any way of fixing and giving a standard to a language, o- therwife than by written records, that is, by books, one or more, which are allowed to be perfect in their style ard compofi- tion. Thus, though there can be no doubt that the Greek language underwent many variations before the days of HI-omer, his poems fixed the standard of it; so that there was no considerable variation of it from his time down to the taking of Con- ftantinople by the Twu'ks; that is, for the space of about three thousand years: for we have at that time books written in' Greek with as much purity of style, and almost as much elegance, as any written in any preceding period. The Engliih language, in like manner, was in a con- Rant Rfate of flucuation down to the reign of James VI. when it was fixed by the translation of the Bible, which is the standard of our language as well,as
C. 13 as of our faith; and every variatioi that,has been made from it is, in my opi- nion, for the worse. And to give one ex- ample more, the standard of the Arabic was in the fame manner fixed by their re- ligious record, the Koran, which is held to be so perfed in its style and composition, that it is used by the Mahometan docors, as a proof of the divine mission and infpi- ration of their prophet, who being an il- literate man, they fay, could not otherwise have compoled such a book. And by this method of record, as I observed before, the life of a language is perpetuated, and it flill exiiEs after it ceases to be a living lan- guage; and perhaps in greater purity, and with less hazard of corruption, than while it continued to be spoken.,But if a language is thus liable to change while it is in the mouths of the fame people, how much more altered muff it be when it is derived to different tribes and nations, living perhaps in parts very remote fromn the mother-country of the lanbuag'', under the influence of cdiierent clirmates, cufcnms, and manners, and mix- ing with olther nations fpcaling different languages ? In such a caic, to di!tinguifi,the
the mother fiom the child, or even to C. 13. perceive any conneEtion betwixt the two, is a matter of great learning and nice dif- cernmcnt. It is in this that the art of that part of grammar we call etymology consists; and if, in tracing the progress of a language from one nation to another, the derivations appear sometimes to be forced and far- fetched, we must not therefore reject them. The French, Spanifil, and Italian, are un- doubtedly derived fromn the Latin; and yet how different are the words in those languages from the Latin words ? The au- thor of the Mcchanifim of language, whom I quoted in the beginning of this work, has given us sundry examples of the surprising change that words have uindcrgone in their passage from the Lat;n into those langua- ges: I will add fbime few more. Who would think that the French words Ven- dredi, no;l, and carefine, or careme, as they write it now, came from the Latin words Venus, natalis, and quadragefimns *; yet nothing is more certain: for Vendredi,* The'e c-ampics are firnmined me by Oqerius, the I- talian author a'onve mentioned, who writes upon the as- finity of the Greek and Latin with the Hebrew, p. 84. VOL. I. 3 P is
C. 13. is from Veneris dies, by cutting off the ter- . mination -is of Veneris, transposing the r,and e, and inserting a d betwixt the n and r; and then by cutting off the termination -es irom the word dies. No;l is formed from nlatalis, by striking out the t, changing the two a's into o and e, and taking away the termination is; which last is commonly done in the words which the Freinch have taken from the Latin. Thus, in place of velntus, they fay vent. And from quadra- gefimus, carbine is derived, by cutting oft in like manner the termination us, chan- ging the qu in the beginning of the word into the consonant c of like found, and a- bridging the reft of the word, by throw- ing out the consonants d and g, and the vowels a and i.,I will give one example more, from our Engliih language. Who would think that the word flranlger was derived from the Latin preposition ex? and yet there is no genealogy of a word more certain: for, from ex comes extra; from extra, extra- leus; from extraneus, the French word e- Jfranger, (for so they spelled it of old); and from eflralger comes our English word Jfranger, by throwing out the initial e, as,happens
happens in several words, particularly the C. 13. word escuage, from which comes the Eng- lifll wordfcutage, signifying the afcltmient which a knight who was armed with a scutum, or ihield, paid for the dispensation of personal service.,It would be betide the purpose of this work to dwell longer upon the particulars of etymology and derivation, and the changes which a language undergoes in its pafiage from one nation to another. What I have further to fay upon this subject will be more proper when I come to speak of the corruption of language, which will be the subjet of the last part of my work. I will therefore conclude this part with two or three general observations.,And, in the fifl place, We are to dif- tinguilh betwixt a dialedt of a language and the corruption of a language. The Attic, Ionic, Doric, and Eolic, are all dia- leds of the original Pelafgic or Hellenic, but none of them corruptions of it. Nei- ther is the Latin a corruption of the Greek, but a diale ; only it is a dialed that came off very early, and was not so much cultivated and improved as the o- ther dialedts above mentioned. It there-,3P 2 fore
C. I3. fore has not all the numbers, voices, and,tenses of those dialects, nor that variety of infledion and copioufilefs of found in which the Greek language so much excels all others that I know. It appears to me, from comparing the remains of old Latin yet extant with the later Latin, that the Romans, when they came to be a great people, and to apply to arts and sciences, polished and improved their language up- on the model of the Greek, by clearing it of the rust of the antient Pelafgic, or of what mixture of a more barbarous lan- guage there may have been in it. And this I take to be what Plutarch means when he fiys, that the later Latin was much liker the Greek than the antient.,On the other hand, the French, Spanish, and Italian, are clearly corruptions of the Latin, by which the analogy, that makes so great a part of the art of language, is loft, and the words almoit all made inde- clineable.,It is not easy, merely by a comparison of the languages, to fay, whether the worflt of the two be the corruption of the other, or the original language out of which it is formed and improved by the addition,of
of proper terminations and flections. Thus C. 13. it would be difficult to determine, whether the Pelafgic, Hebrew, or Egyptian, was a corruption of the Greek, or whether they were the parent-languages out of which the Greek was formed, if we did not know from hiflory, that those lan- guages were much more antient than the Greek. In the fame manner, it would not be easy to decide, whether the Englilh, or any other dialect of the Teutonic pre- fently spoken in Europe, was a corruption of the Gothic and Saxon, or whether the Gothic and Saxon were an improvement of the Englith, if we did not know from history, that the molt antient of them is the most perfect: for the Gothic is a more perfect language than the Saxon, having, as I have ihewn, almost as much variety of termination and fleAion as the Greek, and the Saxon is more perfect than the English. The cafe, therefore, with re- fpet to those dialcts of the Teutonic, is just the reverse of what has happened with refpet to the Greek and Latin, which are improvements of their parent-languages: whereas the English, and other dialects of,the
C. 13. the Teutonic, are so many corruptions of,theirs.,Another observation is, That in judging of the affinity of languages, we are to have little regard to the vowels, but chief- ly to confider the consonants. For, as I observed when I was explaining the na- ture of articulate founds, it is the confo- nants which break and diftinguiih the voice most, and make the principal part of articulation. The consonants therefore may be said to be the bones and sinews of a language, while the vowels are little more than the vehicles of breath by which they are enunciated. Accordingly, in the Hebrew, many learned men are of opi- nion, that no points or marks of vowels were originally used. And the faa un- doubtedly is, that at this day the Ara- bians, in common writing, use no such marks, but only in tranfiribing the Alco- ran, or any of their antient poems, for which they have a particular esteem, in order to prevent all poflibility of mistakes. In the different dialects of the Greek, we fee how the vowels are changed; and in the fame dialec the cafes and tenses, and, in general, the declension of their words,is
is in a great measure by change of the C. 13. vowels. Nor does the change of the vowel appear to me to be so material a thing in the Greek language, as the change of the time, or quantity of it: for we often fee one flort vowel changed for another, or one long vowel for another, in the dif- ferent dialects; but seldom a short for a long, or a long for a ihort.,But the change even of consonants does not often make so great a change of the word as might be expected: for consonants of the fame organ are easily interchanged. Thus b, p, v, f, being all labial consonants, are frequently interchanged in many langua- ges -. And in Greek, r, x, b, x. which are,all * f and r are consonants of different kinds, the one being a mute, the other a liquid; yet as they are both of the fame organ, being both labial, though the F be pronounced by the opening and explosion of the lips, the other, by closing them with a beat or chop, they too are interchanged. Thus Y.fv is a Geeek word, which fig- nifies fitum, from whence the Latin moir and morier, and the Greek word opr.c, signifying /omo, or mortalir, as in that pafrage of Callimacrus, tz(, ar(ix POFrol. Now, the . being changed into p, (which was the cu- storm of the Eolians ; for, in place of'uvp^;, they said tpc, from whence the Latin firm:ica), and the . and p transposed, which is also very common, it becomes psor;, .which is the common Greek word for homo, or mnortalis.,This
C..13. all palatine consonants, are commonly,changed into one another; particularly in the fleclion of nouns and verbs; and the soft, middle, and aspirated mute confo- nants of the fame order, are very often changed into one another in the different dialects. Thus d is the middle consonant betwixt the T and the e; and therefore the Latins, in place of the Greek eoo, fay Deus.,The last observation I ihall make is, That they appear to me to be much mifta- ken, who think we ought to judge of the affinity of languages chiefly by the flec- tion or analogy, and not by the word it- self, or by its termination: for there are the three things, as I observed, by which we determine the relation of languages to one another. But, on the contrary, I This observation, I fee, is made in one of the philologi- cal letters of Dr Baxter, publifled by the society of an- tiquarians in London. It flews how much words in the fame language, fpokcn by the ftame people, will change. But how much greater mull the change be in the paflEge of a language from one people to another ? We ought not therefore ralliy to rejea those derivations which learned men have discovered of Greek and Latin words from Hebrew, Celtic, or Teutonic roots, though the words do not agree in their coufonants any more than in their vowels.,maintain,
maintain, that it is the mark of likeness C. I3. which least of all is to be regarded: for, u- if we were to judge by that rule, we could not fay that the French, Spanilh, or Itn- lian, are derived from the Latin; because the fleEtion, as well as the termination, and in general the grammar, of those lan- guages, is very different from that of the Latin. But the cafe truly is, that if the one language be a corruption of the other, as the languages just now mentioned are of the Latin, the fletion, and very often the termination, will be different: or, if the one language be at a dillance from the source, and be much more cultivated and improved than the parent-language, its fleftions or analogy will be very dif- ferent; and if it be at a great diflance, its terminations will also be different. Thus the Greek being further removed from the Oricntal languages than the La- tin, has both its flerRions and its termina- tions quite different: whereas the Latin, not being so far removed, though it have different flecions, has, as we have lmcwn, a great similarity to those languages in its terminations.,VOL. I. 3 Q With
C. i3. With these observations' conclude this,book, and this first part of the work; in which I have endeavoured to shew, That no part of language, neither natter nor form, is natural to man, but the effect of acquired habit: - That this habit could not have been acquired, except by men living in political society; but that neither is the political life natural to man: - That the political life arose from the ne- ceffities of men, and thatl it may exist without the use of language: - That the first languages were without art, such as might be expected among people alto- gether ,barbarous:-and, lastly, That if language was at .all invented, there is no reason to believe that it was invented only in one nation, and that all the languages of the earth are but dialects of that one original language; although there be good reason to believe, that language has not be.a the invention of many nations, and that all the languages' presently spoken in Europe, Asia, and a part of Africa, are derived from one original language.,The End of PART I.,BRITAN ! NICVaM