TEMORA – BOOK I.
AN EPIC POEM.
ARGUMENT.
Cairbar, the son of Borbar-duthul, lord of Atha, in Connaught, the most Potent chief
of the race of the Fir-bolg, having murdered, at Temora, the royal palace, Cormac, the
son of Artho, the young king of Ireland, usurped the throne. Cormac was lineally
descended from Conar, the son of Trenmor, the great-grandfather of Fingal, king of
those Caledonians who inhabited the western coast of Scotland. Fingal resented the
behavior of Cairbar, and resolved to pass over into Ireland with an army, to reestablish the royal family on the Irish throne. Early intelligence of his designs coming
to Cairbar, he assembled some of his tribes in Ulster, and at the same time ordered his
brother Cathmor to follow him speedily with an army from Temora. Such was the
situation of affairs when the Caledonian invaders appeared on the coast of Ulster.
The poem opens in the morning. Cairbar is represented as retired from the rest of the
army, when one of his scouts brought him news of the landing of Fingal. He
assembles a council of his chiefs. Foldath, the chief of Moma, haughtily despises the
enemy; and is reprimanded warmly by Malthos. Cairbar, after hearing their debate,
orders a feast to be prepared, to which, by his bard Olla, he invites Oscar, the son of
Ossian; resolving to pick a quarrel with that hero, and so have some pretext for killing
him. Oscar came to the feast; the quarrel happened; the followers of both fought, and
Cairbar and Oscar fell by mutual wounds. The noise of the battle reached Fingal's
army. The king came on to the relief of Oscar, and the Irish fell back to the army of
Cathmor, who was advanced to the banks of the river Lubar, on the heath of Moi-lena.
Fingal, after mourning over his grandson, ordered Ullin, the chief of his bards, to
carry his body to Morven, to be there interred. Night coming on, Althan, the son of
Conachar, relates to the king the particulars of the murder of Cormac. Fillan, the son
of Fingal, is sent to observe the motions of Cathmor, by night, which concludes the
action of the first day. The scene of this book is a plain, near the hill of Mora, which
rose on the borders of the heath of Moi-lena in Ulster.
THE blue waves of Erin roll in light. The mountains are covered with day.
Trees shake their dusky heads in the breeze. Gray torrents pour their noisy streams.
Two green hills, with aged oaks, surround a narrow plain. The blue course of a stream
is there. On its banks stood Cairbar of Atha. His spear supports the king: the red eye
of his fear is sad. Cormac rises in his soul, with all his ghastly wounds. The gray form
of the youth appears in darkness. Blood pours from his airy side. Cairbar thrice threw
his spear on earth. Thrice he stroked his beard. His steps are short. He often stops. He
tosses his sinewy arms. He is like a cloud in the desert, varying its form to every blast.
JAMES MACPHERSON
-228-
The valleys are sad around, and fear, by turns, the shower! The king at length resumed
his soul. He took his pointed spear. He turned his eye to Moi-lena. The scouts of blue
ocean came. They came with steps of fear, and often looked behind. Cairbar knew that
the mighty were near. He called his gloomy chiefs.
The sounding steps of his warriors came. They drew at once their swords.
There Morlath stood with darkened face. Hidalla's long hair sighs in the wind. Redhaired Cormar bends on his spear, and rolls his sidelong-looking eyes. Wild is the
look of Malthos, from beneath two shaggy brows. Foldath stands, like an oozy rock,
that covers its dark sides with foam. His spear is like Slimora's fir, that meets the wind
of heaven. His shield is marked with the strokes of battle. His red eye despises danger.
These, and a thousand other chiefs, surrounded the king of Erin, when the scout of
ocean came, Mor-annal, from streamy Moi-lena, His eyes hang forward from his face.
His lips are trembling pale!
"Do the chiefs of Erin stand," he said, "silent as the grove of evening? Stand
they, like a silent wood, and Fingal on the coast? Fingal, who is terrible in battle, the
king of streamy Morven!" "Hast thou seen the warrior?" said Cairbar with a sigh.
"Are his heroes many on the coast? Lifts he the spear of battle? or comes the king in
peace?" "In peace be comes not, king of Erin; I have seen his forward spear. <1> It is
a meteor of death. The blood of thousands is on its steel. He came first to the shore,
strong in the gray hair of age. Full rose his sinewy limbs, as he strode in his might.
That sword is by his side, which gives no second wound. His shield is terrible, like the
bloody moon, ascending through a storm. Then came Ossian, king of songs. Then
Morni's son, the first of men. Connal leaps forward on his spear. Dermid spreads his
dark-brown locks. Fillan bends his bow, the young hunter of streamy Moruth. But
who is that before them, like the terrible course of a stream? It is the son of Ossian,
bright between his locks! His long hair falls on his back. His dark brows are half
enclosed in steel. His sword hangs loose on his side. His spear glitters as he moves. I
fled from his terrible eyes, king of high Temora!"
"Then fly, thou feeble man," said Foldath's gloomy wrath. "Fly to the gray
streams of thy land, son of the little soul! Have not I seen that Oscar? I beheld the
chief in war. He is of the mighty in danger: but there are others who lift the spear.
Erin has many sons as brave, king of Temora of groves. Let Foldath meet him in his
strength. Let me stop this mighty stream. My spear is covered with blood. My shield
is like the wall of Tura!"
"Shall Foldath alone meet the foe?" replied the dark-browed Malthos? "Are
they not on our coast, like the waters of many streams? Are not these the chiefs who
vanquished Swaran, when the sons of green Erin fled? Shall Foldath meet their
bravest hero? Foldath of the heart of pride! Take the strength of the people! and let
Malthos come. My sword is red with slaughter, but who has heard my words?"
"Sons of green Erin," said Hidalla, "let not Fingal hear your words. The foe
might rejoice, and his arm be strong in the land. Ye are brave, O warriors! Ye are
tempests in war. Ye are like storms, which meet the rocks without fear, and overturn
the woods! But let us move in our strength, slow as a gathered cloud! Then shall the
mighty tremble; the spear shall fall from the hand of the valiant. We see the cloud of
death, they will say, while shadows fly over their face. Fingal will mourn in his age.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 229 -
He shall behold his flying fame. The steps of his chiefs will cease in Morven. The
moss of years shall grow in Selma!"
Cairbar heard their words in silence, like the cloud of a shower: it stands dark
on Cromla, till the lightning bursts its side. The valley gleams with heaven's flame;
the spirits of the storm rejoice. So stood the silent king of Temora; at length his words
broke forth. "Spread the feast on Moi-lena. Let my hundred bards attend. Thou redhaired Olla, take the harp of the king. Go to Oscar, chief of swords. Bid Oscar to our
joy. To-day we feast and hear the song; to-morrow break the spears! Tell him that I
have raised the tomb of Cathol; that bards gave his friend to the winds. Tell him that
Cairbar has heard of his fame, at the stream of resounding Carun. Cathmor, my
brother, is not here. He is not here with his thousands, and our arms are weak.
Cathmor is a foe to strife at the feast! His soul is bright as that sun! But Cairbar must
fight with Oscar, chiefs of woody Temora, His words for Cathol were many! the
wrath of Cairbar burns! He shall fall on Moi-lena. My fame shall rise in blood!"
Their faces brightened round with joy. They spread over Moi-lena. The feast
of shells is prepared. The songs of bards arise. The chiefs of Selma heard their joy.
We thought that mighty Cathmor came. Cathmor, the friend of strangers! the brother
of red-haired Cairbar. Their souls were not the same. The light of heaven was in the
bosom of Cathmor. His towers rose on the banks of Atha: seven paths led to his halls.
Seven chiefs stood on the paths, and called the stranger to the feast! But Cathmor
dwelt in the wood, to shun the voice of praise!
Olla came with his songs. Oscar went to Cairbar's feast. Three hundred
warriors strode along Moi-lena of the streams. The gray dogs bounded on the heath:
their howling reached afar. Fingal saw the departing hero. The soul of the king was
sad. He dreaded Cairbar's gloomy thoughts, amidst the feast of shells. My son raised
high the spear of Cormac. A hundred bards met him with songs. Cairbar concealed,
with smiles, the death that was dark in his soul. The feast is spread. The shells
resound. Joy brightens the face of the host. But it was like the parting beam of the sun,
when he is to hide his red head in a storm!
Cairbar rises in his arms. Darkness gathers on his brow. The hundred harps
cease at once. The clang of shields <2> is heard. Far distant on the heath Olla raised a
song of wo. My son knew the sign of death; and rising seized his spear. "Oscar," said
the dark-red Cairbar, "I behold the spear of Erin. The spear of Temora glitters in thy
hand, son of woody Morven! It was the pride of a hundred kings. The death of heroes
of old. Yield it, son of Ossian, yield it to car-borne Cairbar!"
"Shall I yield," Oscar replied, "the gift of Erin's injured king; the gift of fairhaired Cormac, when Oscar scattered his foes? I came to Cormac's halls of joy, when
Swaran fled from Fingal. Gladness rose in the face of youth. He gave the spear of
Temora. Nor did he give it to the feeble: neither to the weak in soul. The darkness of
thy face is no storm to me: nor are thine eyes the flame of death. Do I fear thy
clanging shield? Tremble I at Olla's song? No Cairbar, frighten the feeble; Oscar is a
rock!"
"Wilt thou not yield the spear?" replied the rising pride of Cairbar." Are thy
words so mighty, because Fingal is near? Fingal with aged locks, from Morven's
JAMES MACPHERSON
-230-
hundred groves! He has fought with little men. But he must vanish before Cairbar,
like a thin pillar of mist before the winds of Atha!" — "Were he who fought with little
men, near Atha's haughty chief, Atha's chief would yield green Erin to avoid his rage!
Speak not of the mighty, O Cairbar! Turn thy sword on me. Our strength is equal: but
Fingal is renowned! the first of mortal men!"
Their people saw the darkening chiefs. Their crowding steps are heard. Their
eyes roll in fire. A thousand swords are half unsheathed. Red-haired Olla raised the
song of battle. The trembling joy of Oscar's soul arose: the wonted joy of his soul
when Fingal's horn was heard. Dark as the swelling wave of ocean before the rising
winds, when it bends its head near the coast, came on the host of Cairbar!
Daughter of Toscar! why that tear? He is not fallen yet. Many were the deaths
of his arm before my hero fell!
Behold they fall before my son, like groves in the desert; when an angry ghost
rushes through night, and takes their green heads in his hand! Morlath falls. Maronnan
dies. Conachar trembles in his blood. Cairbar shrinks before Oscar's sword! He creeps
in darkness behind a stone. He lifts the spear in secret, he pierces my Oscar's side! He
falls forward on his shield, his knee sustains the chief. But still his spear is in his
hand! See, gloomy Cairbar falls! The steel pierced his forehead, and divided his red
hair behind. He lay like a shattered rock, which Cromla shakes from its shaggy side,
when the green-valleyed Erin shakes its mountains from sea to sea!
But never more shall Oscar rise! He leans on his bossy shield. His spear is in
his terrible hand. Erin's sons stand distant and dark. Their shouts arise, like crowded
streams. Moi-lena echoes wide. Fingal heard the sound. He took the spear of Selma.
His steps are before us on the heath. He spoke the words of wo. "I hear the noise of
war. Young Oscar is alone. Rise, sons of Morven: join the hero's sword!"
Ossian rushed along the heath. Fillan bounded over Moi-lena. Fingal strode in
his strength. The light of his shield is terrible. The sons of Erin saw it far distant. They
trembled in their souls. They knew that the wrath of the king arose: and they foresaw
their death. We first arrived. We fought. Erin's chiefs withstood our rage. But when
the king came, in the sound of his course, what heart of steel could stand? Erin fled
over Moi-lena. Death pursued their flight. We saw Oscar on his shield. We saw his
blood around. Silence darkened on every face. Each turned his back and wept. The
king strove to hide his tears. His gray beard whistled in the wind. He bends his head
above the chief. His words are mixed with sighs.
"Art thou fallen, O Oscar! in the midst of thy course? the heart of the aged
beats over thee! He sees thy coming wars! The wars which ought to come he sees!
They are cut off from thy fame! When shall joy dwell at Selma? When shall grief
depart from Morven? My sons fall by degrees: Fingal is the last of his race. My fame
begins to pass away. Mine age will be without friends. I shall sit a gray cloud in my
hall. I shall not hear the return of a son, in his sounding arms. Weep, ye heroes of
Morven! never more shall Oscar rise!"
And they did weep, O Fingal! Dear was the hero to their souls. He went out to
battle, and the foes vanished. He returned in peace, amidst their joy. No father
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 231 -
mourned his son slain in youth: no brother his brother of love. They fell without tears,
for the chief of the people is low! Bran is howling at his feet: gloomy Luath is sad; for
he had often led them to the chase; to the bounding roe of the desert!
When Oscar saw his friends around, his heaving breast arose. "The groans," he
said, "of aged chiefs; the howling of my dogs; the sudden bursts of the song of grief,
have melted Oscar's soul. My soul, that never melted before. It was like the steel of
my sword. Ossian, carry me to my hills! Raise the stones of my renown. Place the
horn of a deer: place my sword by my side; The torrent hereafter may raise the earth:
the hunter may find the steel, and say, 'This has been Oscar's sword, the pride of other
years!'" "Fallest thou, son of my fame? shall I never see thee, Oscar? When others
hear of their sons, shall I not hear of thee? The moss is on thy four gray stones. The
mournful wind is there. The battle shall be fought without thee. Thou shalt not pursue
the dark-brown hinds. When the warrior returns from battles, and tells of other lands;
'I have seen a tomb,' he will say, 'by the roaring stream, the dark dwelling of a chief.
He fell by car-borne Oscar, the first of mortal men.' I, perhaps, shall hear his voice. A
beam of joy will rise in my soul."
Night would have descended in sorrow, and morning returned in the shadow
of grief. Our chiefs would have stood, like cold-dropping rocks on Moi-lena, and have
forgot the war; did not the king disperse his grief, and raise his mighty voice. The
chiefs, as new-wakened from dreams, lift up their heads around.
"How long on Moi-lena shall we weep? How long pour in Erin our tears? The
mighty will not return. Oscar shall not rise in his strength. The valiant must fall in
their day, and be no more known on their hills. Where are our fathers, O warriors! the
chiefs of the times of old? They have set, like stars that have shone. We only hear the
sound of their praise. But they were renowned in their years: the terror of other times.
Thus shall we pass away, in the day of our fall. Then let us be renowned when we
may; and leave our fame behind us, like the last beams of the sun, when he hides his
red head in the west. The traveller mourns his absence, thinking of the flame of his
beams. Ullin, my aged bard! take thou the ship of the king. Carry Oscar to Selma of
harps. Let the daughters of Morven weep. We must fight in Erin, for the race of fallen
Cormac. The days of my years begin to fail. I feel the weakness of my arm. My
fathers bend from their clouds, to receive their gray-haired son. But before I go hence,
one beam of fame shall rise. My days shall end, as my years began, in fame. My life
shall be one stream of light to bards of other times!"
Ullin raised his white sails. The wind of the south came forth. He bounded on
the waves towards Selma. I remained in my grief, but my words were not heard. The
feast is spread on Moi-lena. A hundred heroes reared the tomb of Cairbar. No song is
raised over the chief. His soul has been dark and bloody. The bards remembered the
fall of Cormac! what could they say in Cairbar's praise?
Night came rolling down. The light of a hundred oaks arose. Fingal sat
beneath a tree. Old Althan stood in the midst. He told the tale of fallen Cormac.
Althan the son of Conachar, the friend of car-borne Cuthullin. He dwelt with Cormac
in windy Temora, when Semo's son fell at Lego's stream. The tale of Althan was
mournful. The tear was in his eye when he spoke.
JAMES MACPHERSON
-232-
"The setting sun was yellow on Dora. Gray evening began to descend.
Temora's woods shook with the blast of the inconstant wind. A cloud gathered in the
west. A red star looked from behind its edge. I stood in the wood alone. I saw a ghost
on the darkening air! His stride extended from hill to hill. His shield was dim on his
side. It was the son of Semo! I knew the warrior's face. But he passed away in his
blast; and all was dark around! My soul was sad. I went to the hall of shells. A
thousand lights arose. The hundred bards had strung the harp. Cormac stood in the
midst, like the morning star, when it rejoices on the eastern hill, and its young beams
are bathed in showers. Bright and silent is its progress aloft, but the cloud that shall
hide it is near! The sword of Artho was in the hand of the king. He looked with joy on
its polished studs; thrice he attempted to draw it, and thrice he failed; his yellow locks
are spread on his shoulders! his cheeks of youth are red. I mourned over the beam of
youth, for he was soon to set!
"'Althan!' He said with a smile, ' didst thou behold my father? Heavy is the
sword of the king; surely his arm was strong. O that I were like him in battle, when
the rage of his wrath arose! then would I have met, with Cuthullin, the car-borne son
of Cantéla! But years may come on, O Althan! and my arm be strong. Hast thou heard
of Semo's son, the ruler of high Temora? he might have returned with his fame. He
promised to return to-night. My bards wait him with songs. My feast is spread in the
hall of kings.'
"I heard Cormac in silence. My tears began to flow. I hid them with my aged
locks. The king perceived my grief. 'Son of Conachar!' he said, 'is the son of Semo
low? Why bursts the sigh in secret? Why descends the tear? Comes the car-borne
Torlath? Comes the sounds of red-haired Cairbar? They come! for I behold thy grief.
Mossy Tura's chief is low! Shall I not rush to battle? But I cannot lift the spear! O had
mine arm the strength of Cuthullin, soon would Cairbar fly; the fame of my fathers
would be renewed; and the deeds of other times!'
"He took his bow. The tears flow down from both his sparkling eyes. Grief
saddens round. The bards bend forward, from their hundred harps. The lone blast
touched their trembling strings. <3> The sound is sad and low! a voice is heard at a
distance, as of one in grief. It was Carril of other times, who came from dark Slimora.
He told of the fall of Cuthullin. He told of his mighty deeds. The people were
scattered round his tomb. Their arms lay on the ground. They had forgot the war, for
he their sire, was seen no more!
"'But who,' said the soft-voiced Carril, 'who come like bounding roes? Their
stature is like young trees in the valley, growing in a shower! Soft and ruddy are their
cheeks! Fearless souls look forth from their eyes? Who but the sons of Usnoth, chief
of streamy Etha? The people rise on every side, like the strength of an halfextinguished fire, when the winds come, sudden, from the desert, on their rustling
wings. Sudden glows the dark brow of the hill; the passing mariner lags, on his winds.
The sound of Caithbat's shield was heard. The warriors saw Cuthullin in Nathos. So
rolled his sparkling eyes! his steps were such on the heath. Battles are fought at Lego.
The sword of Nathos prevails. Soon shalt thou behold him in thy halls, king of
Temora of groves!'
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 233 -
"'Soon may I behold the chief!' replied the blue-eyed king. But my soul is sad
for Cuthullin His voice was pleasant in mine ear. Often have we moved, on Dora, to
the chase of the dark-brown hinds. His bow was unerring on the hills. He spoke of
mighty men. He told of the deeds of my fathers. I felt my rising joy. But sit thou at thy
feast, O Carril! I have often heard thy voice. Sing in praise of Cuthullin. Sing of
Nathos of Etha!'
"Day rose on Temora, with all the beams of the east. Crathin came to the hall,
the son of old Gelláma. 'I behold,' he said, 'a cloud in the desert, king of Erin! a cloud
it seemed at first, but now a crowd of men! One strides before them in his strength.
His red hair flies in the wind. His shield glitters to the beam of the east. His spear is in
his hand.' — 'Call him to the feast of Temora,' replied the brightening king. 'My hall is
in the house of strangers, son of generous Gelláma! It is perhaps the chief of Etha,
coming in all his renown. Hail, mighty stranger! art thou of the friends of Cormac?
But, Carril, he is dark and unlovely. He draws his sword. Is that the son of Usnoth,
bard of the times of old?'
"' It is not the son of Usnoth!' said Carril. 'It is Cairbar, thy foe.' 'Why comest
thou in thy arms to Temora? chief of the gloomy brow. Let not thy sword rise against
Cormac! 'Whither dost thou turn thy speed?' he passed on in darkness.. He seized the
hand of the king. Cormac foresaw his death; the rage of his eyes arose. 'Retire, thou
chief of Atha! Nathos comes with war. Thou art bold in Cormac's hall, for his arm is
weak.' The sword entered the side of the king. He fell in the halls of his father. His
fair hair is in the dust. His blood is smoking round.
"'Art thou fallen in thy halls?' said Carril, 'O son of noble Artho! The shield of
Cuthullin was not near. Nor the spear of thy father. Mournful are the mountains of
Erin, for the chief of the people is low! Blest be thy soul, O Cormac! Thou art
darkened in thy youth!'"
"His words came to the ears of Cairbar. He closed us in the midst of darkness.
He feared to stretch his sword to the bards, though his soul was dark. Long we pined
alone! At length the noble Cathmor came. He heard our voice from the cave. He
turned the eye of his wrath on Cairbar.
"'Brother of Cathmor,' he said, 'how long wilt thou pain my soul? Thy heart is
a rock. Thy thoughts are dark and bloody! But thou art the brother of Cathmor; and
Cathmor shall shine in thy war. But my soul is not like thine; thou feeble hand in
fight! The light of my bosom is stained with thy deeds. Bards will not sing of my
renown; they may say, "Cathmor was brave, but he fought for gloomy Cairbar. "They
will pass over my tomb in silence. My fame shall not be heard. Cairbar! loose the
bards. They are the sons of future times. Their voice shall be heard in other years;
after the kings of Temora have failed. We came forth at the words of the chief. We
saw him in his strength. He was like thy youth, O Fingal! when thou first didst lift the
spear. His face was like the plain of the sun, when it is bright. No darkness travelled
over his brow. But he came with his thousands to aid the red-haired Cairbar. Now he
comes to revenge his death, O king of woody Morven!'
"Let Cathmor come," replied the king," I love a foe so great. His soul is bright.
His arm is strong. His battles are full of fame. But the little soul is a vapor that hovers
JAMES MACPHERSON
-234-
round the marshy lake. It never rises on the green hill, lest the winds should meet it
there. Its dwelling is in the cave: it sends forth the dart of death! Our young heroes, O
warriors! are like the renown of our fathers. They fight in youth. They fall. Their
names are in song. Fingal is amid his darkening years. He must not fall, as an aged
oak, across a secret stream. Near it are the steps of the hunter, as it lies beneath the
wind. 'How has that tree fallen?' he says, and, whistling, strides along. Raise the song
of' joy, ye bards of Morven! Let our souls forget the past. The red stars look on us
from the clouds, and silently descend. Soon shall the gray beam of the morning rise,
and show us the foes of Cormac. Fillan! my son, take thou the spear of the king. Go to
Mora's dark-brown side. Let thine eyes travel over the heath. Observe the foes of
Fingal; observe the course of generous Cathmor. I hear a distant sound, like falling
rocks in the desert. But strike thou thy shield, at times, that they may not come
through night, and the fame of Morven cease. I begin to be alone, my son. I dread the
fall of my renown!"
The voice of bards arose. The king leaned on the shield of Trenmor. Sleep
descended on his eyes. His future battles arose in his dreams. The host are sleeping
around. Dark-haired Fillan observes the foe. His steps are on the distant hill. We hear,
at time; his clanging shield.
<1> Mor-annal here alludes to the particular appearance of Fingal's spear. If a man
upon his first landing in a strange country, kept the point of his spear forward, it
denoted, in those days, that he came in a hostile manner, and accordingly he was
treated as an enemy; if he kept the point behind him, it was a token of friendship, and
ht was immediately invited to the feast, according to the hospitality of the times.
<2> The clang of shields: when a chief was determined to kill a person already in his
power, it was usual to signify that his death was intended, by the pound of a shield
struck with the blunt end of a spear: at the same time that a bard at a distance raised
the death-song.
<3> The lone blast touched their trembling strings: that prophetic sound mentioned in
other poems, which the harps of the bards emitted before the death of a person worthy
and renowned.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 235 -
TEMORA — BOOK II
ARGUMENT.
This book opens, we may suppose, about midnight, with a soliloquy of Ossian, who
had retired from the rest of the army, to mourn for his son Oscar. Upon hearing the
noise of Cathmor's army approaching, he went to find out his brother Fillan, who kept
the watch on the hill of Mora, in the front of Fingal's army. In the conversation of the
brothers, the episode of Conar, the son of Trenmor, who was the first king of Ireland,
is introduced, which lays open the origin of the contests between the Gael and the Firbolg, the two nations who first possessed themselves of that island. Ossian kindles a
fire on Mora: upon which Cathmor desisted from the design he had formed of
surprising the army of the Caledonians. He calls a council of his chiefs: reprimands
Foldath for advising a night attack, as the Irish were so much superior in number to
the enemy. The bard Fonar introduces the story of Crothar, the ancestor of the king,
which throws further light on the history of Ireland, and the original pretensions of the
family of Atha to the throne of that kingdom. The Irish chiefs lie down to rest, and
Cathmor himself undertakes the watch. In his circuit round the army he is met by
Ossian. The interview of the two heroes is described. Cathmor obtains a promise from
Ossian to order a funeral elegy to be sung over the grave of Cairbar: it being the
opinion of the times, that the souls of the dead could not be happy till their elegies
were sung by a bard. Morning comes. Cathmor and Ossian part; and the latter,
casually meeting with Carril the son of Kinfena, sends that bard, with a funeral song,
to the tomb of Cairbar.
FATHER of heroes! O Trenmor! High dweller of eddying winds! where the
dark-red thunder marks the troubled clouds! Open thou thy stormy halls. Let the bards
of old be near. Let them draw near with songs and their half viewless harps. No
dweller of misty valley comes! No hunter unknown at his streams! It is the car-borne
Oscar, from the field of war. Sudden is thy change, my son, from what thou wert on
dark Moi-lena! The blast folds thee in its skirt, and rustles through the sky! Dost thou
not behold thy father, at the stream of night? The chiefs of Morven sleep far distant.
They have lost no son! But ye have lost a hero, chiefs of resounding Morven! Who
could equal his strength, when battle rolled against his side, like the darkness of
crowded waters? Why this cloud on Ossian's soul? It ought to burn in danger. Erin is
near with her host. The king of Selma is alone. Alone thou shalt not be, my father,
while I can lift the spear!
I rose in all my arms. I rose and listened to the wind. The shield of Fillan is not
heard. I tremble for the son of Fingal. "Why should the foe come by night? Why
should the dark-haired warrior fall?" Distant, sullen murmurs rise; like the noise of the
lake of Lego, when its waters shrink, in the days of frost, and all its bursting ice
JAMES MACPHERSON
-236-
resounds. The people of Lara look to heaven, and foresee the storm! My steps are
forward on the heath. The spear of Oscar is in my hand? Red stars looked from high. I
gleamed along the night.
I saw Fillan silent before me, bending forward from Mora's rock. He heard the
shout of the foe. The joy of his soul arose. He heard my sounding tread, and turned his
lifted spear. "Comest thou, son of night, in peace? Or dost thou meet my wrath? The
foes of Fingal are mine. Speak, or fear my steel. I stand not, in vain, the shield of
Morven's race." "Never mayest thou stand in vain, son of blue-eyed Clatho! Fingal
begins to be alone. Darkness gathers on the last of his days. Yet he has two sons who
ought to shine in war. Who ought to be two beams of light, near the steps of his
departure."
"Son of Fingal," replied the youth, "it is not long since I raised the spear. Few
are the marks of my sword in war. But Fillan's soul is fire! The chiefs of Bolga <1>
crowd around the shield of generous Cathmor. Their gathering is on the heath. Shall
my steps approach their host? I yielded to Oscar alone in the strife of the race of
Cona!"
"Fillan, thou shalt not approach their host; nor fall before thy fame is known.
My name is heard in song; when needful, I advance. From the skirts of night I shall
view them over all their gleaming tribes. Why, Fillan, didst thou speak of Oscar? Why
awake my sigh! I must forget the warrior, till the storm is rolled away. Sadness ought
not to dwell in danger, nor the tear in the eye of war. Our fathers forgot their fallen
sons, till the noise of arms was past. Then sorrow returned to the tomb, and the song
of bards arose. The memory of those who fell quickly followed the departure of war:
when the tumult of battle is past, the soul in silence melts away for the dead.
"Conar was the brother of Trathal, first of mortal men. His battles were on
every coast. A thousand streams rolled down the blood of. his foes. His fame filled
green Erin, like a pleasant gale. The nations gathered in Ullin, and they blessed the
king; the king of the race of their fathers, from the land of Selma.
"The chiefs of the south were gathered, in the darkness of their pride. In the
horrid cave of Moma they mixed their secret words. Thither often, they said, the
spirits of their fathers came; showing their pale forms from the chinky rocks;
reminding them of the honor of Bolga. 'Why should Conar reign,' they said, 'the son
of resounding Morven?'
"They came forth, like the streams of the desert, with the roar of their hundred
tribes. Cona was a rock before them: broken, they rolled on every side. But often they
returned, and the sons of Selma fell. The king stood, among the tombs of his warriors.
He darkly bent his mournful face. His soul was rolled into itself: and he had marked
the place where he was to fall: when Trathal came, in his strength, his brother from
cloudy Morven. Nor did he come alone. Colgar was at his side: Colgar the son of the
king and of white-bosomed Solin-corma.
"As Trenmor, clothed with meteors, descends from the halls of thunder,
pouring the dark storm before him over the troubled sea: so Colgar descended to
battle, and wasted the echoing field. His father rejoiced over the hero: but an arrow
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 237 -
came! His tomb was raised without a tear. The king was to revenge his son. He
lightened forward in battle, till Bolga yielded at her streams!
"When peace returned to the land: when his blue waves bore the king to
Morven: then he remembered his son, and poured the silent tear. Thrice did the bards,
at the cave of Furmono, call the soul of Colgar. They called him to the hills of his
land. He heard them in his mist. Trathal placed his sword in the cave, that the spirit of
his son might rejoice."
"Colgar, son of Trathal," said Fillan, "thou wert renowned in youth! but the
king hath not marked my sword, bright streaming on the field. I go forth with the
crowd. I return without my fame. But the foe approaches, Ossian! I hear their murmur
on the heath. The sound of their steps is like thunder, in the bosom of the ground,
when the rocking hills shake their groves, and not a blast pours from the darkened
sky!"
Ossian turned sudden on his spear. He raised the flame of an oak on high. I
spread it large on Mora's wind. Cathmor stopt in his course. Gleaming he stood, like a
rock, on whose sides are the wandering blasts; which seize its echoing streams, and
clothe them with ice. So stood the friend of strangers! The winds lift his heavy locks.
Thou art the tallest of the race of Erin, king of streamy Atha!
"First of bards" said Cathmor, "Fonar, call the chiefs of Erin. Call red-haired
Cormar: dark-browed Malthos: the sidelong-looking gloom of Maronnan. Let the
pride of Foldath appear. The red-rolling eye of Turlotho. Nor let Hidalla be forgot; his
voice, in danger, is the sound of a shower, when it falls in the blasted vale, near Atha's
falling stream. Pleasant is its sound on the plain, whilst broken thunder travels over
the sky!"
They came in their clanging arms. They bent forward to his voice, as if a spirit
of their fathers spoke from a cloud of night. Dreadful shone they to the light, like the
fall of the stream of Bruno, <2> when the meteor lights it, before the nightly stranger.
Shuddering he stops in his journey, and looks up for the beam of the morn!
"Why delights Foldath," said the king, "to pour the blood of foes by night?
Fails his arm in battle, in the beams of day? Few are the foes before us; why should
we clothe us in shades? The valiant delight to shine in the battles of their land! Thy
counsel was in vain, chief of Moma! The eyes of Morven do not sleep. They are
watchful as eagles on their mossy rocks. Let each collect beneath his cloud the
strength of his roaring tribe. To-morrow I move, in light, to meet the foes of Bolga!
Mighty was he that is low, the race of Borbar-duthul!"
"Not unmarked," said Foldath, "were my steps be. fare thy race. In light, I met
the foes of Cairbar. The warrior praised my deeds. But his stone was raised without a
tear! No bard sung over Erin's king. Shall his foes rejoice along their mossy hills? No
they must not rejoice! He was the friend of Foldath. Our words were mixed, in secret,
in Moma's silent cave; whilst thou, a boy in the field, pursued'st the thistle's beard.
With Moma's sons I shall rush abroad, and find the foe on his dusky hills. Fingal shall
die without his song, the gray-haired king of Selma."
JAMES MACPHERSON
-238-
" Dost thou think, thou feeble man," replied Cathmor, half enraged: "Dost thou
think Fingal can fail, without his fame, in Erin? Could the bards be silent at the tomb
of Selma's king; the song would burst in secret! the spirit of the king would rejoice! It
is when thou shalt fall, that the bard shall forget the song. Thou art dark, chief of
Moma, though thine arm is a tempest in war. Do I forget the king of Erin, in his
narrow house? My soul is not lost to Cairbar, the brother of my love! I marked the
bright beams of joy which travelled over his cloudy mind, when I returned, with fame,
to Atha of the streams."
Tall they removed, beneath the words of the king. Each to his own dark tribe;
where, humming, they rolled on the heath, faint-glittering to the stars: like waves in a
rocky bay, before the nightly wind. Beneath an oak lay the chief of Atha. His shield, a
dusky round, hung high. Near him, against a rock, leaned the fair stranger <3> of Inishuna: that beam of light, with wandering locks, from Lumon of the roes. At a distance
rose the voice of Fonar, with the deeds of the days of old. The song fails, at times, in
Lubar's growing roar.
"Crothar," began the bard, first dwelt at Atha's mossy stream! A thousand
oaks, from the mountains, formed his echoing hail. The gathering of the people
was there, around the feast of the blue-eyed king. But who, among his chiefs, was like
the stately Crothar? Warriors kindled in his presence. The young sigh of the virgins
rose. In Alnecma <4> was the warrior honored: the first of the race of Bolga.
"He pursued the chase in Ullin: on the moss-covered top of Drumardo. From
the wood looked the daughter of Cathmin, the blue-rolling eye of Con-láma. Her sigh
rose in secret. She bent her head, amidst her wandering locks. The moon looked in, at
night, and saw the white tossing of her arms; for she thought of the mighty Crothar in
the season of dreams.
"Three days feasted Crothar with Cathmin. On the fourth they awaked the
hinds. Con-láma moved to the chase, with all her lovely steps. She met Crothar in the
narrow path. The bow fell at once from her hand. She turned her face away, and half
hid it with her locks. The love of Crothar rose. He brought the white-bosomed maid to
Atha. Bards raised the song in her presence. Joy dwelt round the daughter of Cathmin.
"The pride of Turloch rose, a youth who loved the white-handed Con-láma. He
came, with battle, to Alnecma; to Atha of the roes. Cormul went forth to the strife, the
brother of car-borne Crothar. He went forth, but he fell. The sigh of his people rose.
Silent and tall across the stream, came the darkening strength of Crothar: he rolled the
foe from Alnecma. He returned midst the joy of Con-láma.
"Battle on battle comes. Blood is poured on blood. The tombs of the valiant
rise. Erin's clouds arc hung round with ghosts. The chiefs of the South gathered round
the echoing shield of Crothar. He came, with death to the paths of the foe. The virgins
wept, by the streams of Ullin. They looked the mist of the hill: no hunter descended
from its folds. Silence darkened in the land. Blasts sighed lonely on grassy tombs.
"Descending like the eagle of heaven, with all his rustling winds, when he
forsakes the blast with joy, the son of Trenmor came; Conar, arm of death, from
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 239 -
Morven of the groves, lie poured his might along green Erin. Death dimly strode
behind his sword. The sons of Bolga fled from his course, as from a stream, that,
bursting from the stormy desert, rolls the fields together, with all their echoing woods
Crothar met him in battle: but Alnecma's warriors fled. The king of Atha slowly
retired, in the grief of his soul. He afterward shone in the south; but dim as the sun of
autumn, when he visits, in his robes of mist, Lara of dark streams. 'The withered grass
is covered with dew; the field, though bright, is sad."
"Why wakes the bard before me," said Cathmor, "the memory of those who
fled? Has some ghost, from his dusky cloud, bent forward to thine ear; to frighten
Cathmor from the field, with the tales of old? Dwellers of the skirts of night, your
voice is but a blast to me; which takes the gray thistle's head, and strews its beard on
streams. Within my bosom is a voice. Others hear it not. His soul forbids the king of
Erin to shrink back from war."
Abashed, the bard sinks back on night; retired, lie bends above a stream. His
thoughts are on the days of Atha, when Cathmor heard his song with joy. His tears
came rolling down. The winds are in his beard. Erin sleeps around. No sleep comes
down on Cathmor's eyes. Dark, in his soul, he saw the spirit of low-laid Cairbar. He
saw him, without his song, rolled in a blast of night. He rose. His steps were round the
host. He struck, at times, his echoing shield. The sound reached Ossian's ear on
Mora's mossy brow.
"Fillan," I said, "the foes advance. I hear the shield of war. Stand thou in the
narrow path. Ossian shall mark their course. if over my fall the host should pour; then
be thy buckler heard. Awake the king on his heath, lest his fame should fly away." I
strode in all my rattling arms; wide bounding over a stream that darkly winded in the
field, before the king of Atha. Green Atha's king with lifted spear, came forward on
my course. Now would we have mixed in horrid, fray, like two contending ghosts,
that bending forward from two clouds, send forth the roaring winds; did not Ossian
behold, on high, the helmet of Erin's kings. The eagle's wing spread above it, rustling
in the breeze. A red star looked through the plumes. I stopt the lifted spear.
"The helmet of kings is before me! Who art thou, son of night? Shall Ossian's
spear be renowned, when thou art lowly laid?" At once he dropt the gleaming lance.
Growing before me seemed the form. He stretched his hand in night. He spoke the
words of kings.
"Friend of the spirits of heroes, do I meet thee thus in shades? I have wished
for thy stately steps in Atha, in the days of joy. Why should my spear now arise?' The
sun must behold us, Ossian, when we bend, gleaming in the strife. Future warriors
shall mark the place, and shuddering think of other years. They shall mark it, like the
haunt of ghosts, pleasant and dreadful to the soul ."
"Shall it then be forgot," I said, "where we meet in peace? Is the remembrance
of battles always pleasant to the soul? Do not we behold, with joy, the place where
our fathers feasted? But our eyes are full of tears, on the fields of their war. This stone
shall rise with all its moss and speak to other years. 'Here Cathmor and Ossian met;
the warriors met in peace!' When thou, O stone, shalt fail: when Lubar's stream shall
roll away; then shall the traveller come and bend here, perhaps, in rest. When the
JAMES MACPHERSON
-240-
darkened moon is rolled over his head, our shadowy forms may come, and, mixing
with his dreams, remind him of his place. But why turnest thou so dark away; son of
Borbar-duthul?"
"Not forgot, son of Fingal, shall we ascend these winds. Our deeds are streams
of light, before the eyes of bards. But darkness is rolled on Atha: the king is low
without his song; still there was a beam towards Cathmor, from his stormy soul; like
the moon in a cloud, amidst the dark-red course of thunder."
"Son of Erin," I replied, "my wrath dwells not in his earth. My hatred flies on
eagle wings, from the foe that is low. He shall hear the song of bards. Cairbar shall
rejoice on his winds."
Cathmor's swelling soul arose. He took the dagger from his side, and placed it
gleaming in my hand. He placed it in my hand, with sighs, and silent strode away.
Mine eyes followed his departure. He dimly gleamed, like the form of a ghost, which
meets a traveller by night, on the dark-skirted heath. His words are dark, like songs of
old: with morning strides the unfinished shade away!
Who comes from Luba's vale? from the skirts of the morning mist? The drops
of heaven are on his head. His steps are in the paths of the sad. It is Carril of other
times. He comes from Tura's silent cave. I behold it dark in the rock, through the thin
folds of mist. There, perhaps, Cuthullin sits, on the blast which bends its trees.
Pleasant is the song of the morning from the bard of Erin.
"The waves crowd away," said Carril." They crowd away for fear. They hear
the sound of thy coming forth, O sun! Terrible is thy beauty, son of heaven, when
death is descending on thy locks: when thou rollest thy vapors before thee, over the
blasted host. But pleasant is thy beam to the hunter, sitting by the rock in a storm,
when thou showest thyself from the parted cloud, and brightenest his dewy locks he
looks down on the streamy vale, and beholds the de. scent of roes! How long shalt
thou rise on war, and roll, a bloody shield, through heaven? I see the death of heroes,
dark wandering over thy face!"
"Why wander the words of Carril?" I said. "Does the son of heaven mourn? lie
is unstained in his course, ever rejoicing in his fire. Roll on, thou careless light. Thou
too, perhaps, must fall. Thy darkening hour may seize thee, struggling as thou rollest
through thy sky. But pleasant is the voice of the bard: pleasant to Ossian's soul! It is
like the shower of the morning, when it comes through the rustling vale, on which the
sun looks through mist, just rising from his rocks. But this is no time, O bard! to sit
down, at the strife of song. Fingal is in arms on the vale. Thou seest the flaming shield
of the king. His face darkens between his locks. He beholds the wide rolling of Erin.
Does not Carril behold that tomb, beside the roaring stream? Three stones lift their
gray heads, beneath a bending oak. A king is lowly laid! Give thou his soul to the
wind. He is the brother of Cathmor! Open his airy hall! Let thy song be a stream of
joy to Cairbar's darkened ghost!"
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 241 -
TEMORA — BOOK III.
ARGUMENT.
Morning coming on, Fingal, after a speech to his people, devolved the command on
Gaul, the son of Morni; it being the custom of the times, that the king should not
engage, till the necessity of affairs required his superior valor and conduct. The king
and Ossian retire to the hill of Cormul, which overlooked the field of battle. The bards
sing the war-song. The general conflict is described. Gaul, the son of Morni,
distinguishes himself; kills Tur-lathon, chief of Moruth, and other chiefs of lesser
name. On the other hand, Foldath, who commanded the Irish army (for Cathmor, after
the example of Fingal, kept himself from battle,) fights gallantly; kills Connal, chief
of Dun-lora, and advances to engage Gaul himself. Gaul, in the mean time, being
wounded in the hand, by a random arrow, is covered by Fillan the son of Fingal, who
performs prodigies of valor. Night comes on. The horn of Fingal recalls his army. The
bards meet them with a congratulatory song, in which the praises of Gaul and Fillan
are particularly celebrated. The chiefs sit down at a feast; Fingal misses Connal. The
episode of Connal and Duth-caron is introduced; which throws further light on the
ancient history of Ireland. Carril is despatched to raise the tomb of Connal. The action
of this book takes up the second day from the opening of the poem.
"Who is that at blue-streaming Lubar? Who, by the bending hill of roes? Tall
he leans on an oak torn from high, by nightly winds. Who but Comhal's son,
brightening in the last of his fields? His gray hair is on the breeze. He half unsheathes
the sword of Luno. His eyes are turned to Moi-lena, to the dark moving of foes. Dost
thou hear the voice of the king? it is like the bursting of a stream in the desert, when it
comes, between its echoing rocks, to the blasted field of the sun!
Wide-skirted comes down the foe! Sons of woody Selma, arise! Be ye like the
rocks of our land, in whose brown sides are the rolling of streams. A beam of joy
comes on my soul. I see the foe mighty before me. It is when he is feeble, that the
sighs of Fingal are heard: lest death should come without renown, and darkness dwell
on his tomb. Who shall lead the war, against the host of Alnecma? It is only when
danger grows, that my sword shalt shine. Such was the custom, heretofore, of
Trenmor the ruler of winds! and thus descended to battle the blue-shielded Trathal!"
The chiefs bend towards the king. Each darkly seems to claim the war. They
tell, by halves, their mighty deeds. They turn their eyes on Erin. But far before the rest
the son of Morni stands. Silent he stands, for who had not heard of the battles of Gaul
They rose within his soul. His hand, in secret, seized the sword. The sword which he
brought from Strumon, when the strength of Morni failed. On his spear leans Fillan of
Selma, in the wandering of his locks. Thrice he raises his eyes to Fingal: his voice
JAMES MACPHERSON
-242-
thrice fails him as he speaks. My brother could not boast of battles: at once he strides
away. Bent over a distant stream he stands: the tear hangs in his eye. He strikes, at
times, the thistle's head, with his inverted spear. Nor is he unseen of Fingal. Sidelong
he beholds his son. He beholds him with bursting joy; and turns, amid his crowded
soul. In silence turns the king towards Mora of woods. He hides the big tear with his
locks. At length his voice is heard.
"First of the sons of Morni! Thou rock that defiest the storm! Lead thou my
battle for the race of low-laid Cormac. No boy's staff is thy spear: no harmless beam
of light thy sword. Son of Morni of steeds, behold the foe! Destroy! Fillan, observe
the chief! He is not calm in strife: nor burns he, heedless in battle. My son, observe
the chief! He is strong as Lubar's stream, but never foams and roars. High on cloudy
Mora, Fingal shall behold the war. Stand, Ossian, near thy father, by the falling
stream. Raise the voice, O bards! Selma, move beneath the sound. It is my latter field.
Clothe it over with light."
As the sudden rising of winds; or distant rolling of troubled seas, when some
dark ghost in wrath heaves the billows over an isle: an isle the seat of mist on the
deep, for many dark-brown years! So terrible is the sound of the host, wide moving
over the field. Gaul is tall before them. The streams glitter within his strides. The
bards raise the song by his side. He strikes his shield between. On the skirts of the
blast the tuneful voices rise.
"On Crona," said the bards, "there bursts a stream by night. It swells in its own
dark course, till morning's early beam. Then comes it white from the hill, with the
rocks and their hundred groves. Far be my steps from Crona. Death is tumbling there.
Be ye a stream from Mora, sons of cloudy Morven!
"Who rises, from his car, on Clutha? The hills are troubled before the king!
The dark woods echo round, and lighten at his steel. See him amidst the foe, like
Colgach's sportful ghost: when he scatters the clouds and rides the eddying winds! It
is Morni of bounding steeds! Be like thy father, O Gaul!
"Selma is opened wide. Bards take the trembling harps. Ten youths bear the
oak of the feast. A distant sunbeam marks the hill. The dusky waves of the blast fly
over the fields of grass. Why art thou silent, O Selma? The king returns with all his
fame. Did not the battle roar? yet peaceful is his brow! It roared, and Fingal
overcame. Be like thy father, O Fillan!"
They move beneath the song. High wave their arms, as rushy fields beneath
autumnal winds. On Mora stands the king in arms. Mist flies round his buckler
abroad; as aloft it hung on a bough, on Cormul's mossy rock. In silence I stood by
Fingal, and turned my eyes on Cromla's wood: lest I should behold the host, and rush
amid my swelling soul. My foot is forward on the heath. I glittered, tall in steel: like
the falling stream of Tromo, which nightly winds bind over with ice. The boy sees it
on high gleaming to the early beam: towards it he turns his ear, wonders why it is so
silent.
Nor bent over a stream is Cathmor, like a youth in a peaceful field. Wide he
drew forward the war, a dark and troubled wave. But when he beheld Fingal on Mora,
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 243 -
his generous pride arose. "Shall the chief of Atha fight, and no king in the field?
Foldath, lead my people forth, thou art a beam of fire."
Forth issues Foldath of Moma, like a cloud, the robe of ghosts. He drew his
sword, a flame from his side. He bade the battle move. The tribes, like ridgy waves,
dark pour their strength around. Haughty is his stride before them. His red eye rolls in
wrath. He calls Cormul, chief of Dun-ratho; and his words were heard.
"Cormul, thou beholdest that path. It winds green behind the foe. Place thy
people there; lest Selma should escape from my sword. Bards of green-valleyed Erin,
let no voice of yours arise. The sons of Morven must fall without song. They are the
foes of Cairbar. Hereafter shall the traveller meet their dark, thick mist, on Lena,
where it wanders with their ghosts, beside the reedy lake. Never shall they rise,
without song, to the dwelling of winds."
Cormul darkened as he went. Behind him rushed his tribe. They sunk beyond
the rock. Gaul spoke to Fillan of Selma; as his eye pursued the course of the darkeyed chief of Dun-ratho. "Thou beholdest the steps of Cormul! Let thine arm be
strong! When he is low, son of Fingal, remember Gaul in war. Here I fall forward into
baffle, amid the ridge of shields!"
The sign of death ascends: the dreadful sound of Morni's shield. Gaul pours
his voice between. Fingal rises on Mora. He saw them from wing to wing, bending at
once in strife. Gleaming on his own dark hill, stood Cathmor, of streamy Atha. The
kings were like two spirits of heaven, standing each on his gloomy cloud: when they
pour abroad the winds, and lift the roaring seas. The blue tumbling of waves is before
them, marked with the paths of whales. They themselves are calm and bright. The
gale lifts slowly their locks of mist.
What beam of light hangs high in air? What beam but Morni's dreadful sword?
Death is strewed on thy paths, O Gaul! Thou foldest them together in thy rage. Like a
young oak falls Tur-lathon, with his branches round him. His high-bosomed spouse
stretches her white arms, in dreams, to the returning chief, as she sleeps by gurgling
Moruth, in her disordered locks. It is his ghost, Oichoma. The chief is lowly laid.
Hearken not to the winds for Tur-lathon's echoing shield. It is pierced, by his streams.
Its sound is passed away.
Not peaceful is the hand of Foldath. He winds his course in blood. Connal met
him in fight. They mixed their clanging steel. Why should mine eyes behold them?
Connal, thy locks are gray! Thou wert the friend of strangers, at the moss-covered
rock of Dun-Ion. When the skies were rolled together: then thy feast was spread. The
stranger heard the winds without; and rejoiced at thy burning oak. Why, son of Duthcaron, art thou laid in blood? the blasted tree bends above thee. Thy shield lies broken
near. Thy blood mixes with the stream, thou breaker of the shields!
Ossian took the spear, in his wrath. But Gaul rushed forward on Foldath. The
feeble pass by his side: his rage is turned on Moma's chief. Now they had raised their
deathful spears: unseen an arrow came. it pierced the hand of Gaul. His steel fell
sounding to earth. Young Fillan came, with Cormul's shield! lie stretched it large
JAMES MACPHERSON
-244-
before the chief. Foldath sent his shouts abroad, and kindled all the field: as a blast
that lifts the wide-winged flame over Lumon's echoing groves.
"Son of blue-eyed Clatho," said Gaul, "O Fillan! thou art a beam from heaven;
that, coming on the troubled deep, binds up the tempest's wing. Cormul is fallen
before thee. Early art thou in the fame of thy fathers. Rush not too far, my hero. I
cannot lift the spear to aid. I stand harmless in battle: but my voice shall be poured
abroad. The sons of Selma shall hear, and remember my former deeds."
His terrible voice rose on the wind. The host bends forward in fight. Often had
they heard him at Strumon, when he called them to the chase of the hinds. He stands
tall amid the war, as an oak in the skins of a storm, which now is clothed on high, in
mist: then shows its broad waving head. The musing hunter lifts his eye, from his own
rushy field!
My soul pursues thee, O Fillan! through the path of thy fame. Thou rollest the
foe before thee. Now Foldath, perhaps, may fly: but night comes down with its
clouds. Cathmor's horn is heard on high. The sons of Selma hear the voice of Fingal,
from Mora's gathered mist. The bards pour their song, like den, on the returning war.
"Who comes from Strumon," they said, "amid her wandering locks? She is
mournful in her steps, and lifts her blue eyes towards Erin. Why art thou sad, Evirchoma? Who is like thy chief in renown? He descended dreadful to battle; he returns,
like a light from a cloud. He raised the sword in wrath: they shrunk before blueshielded Gaul!
"Joy, like the rustling gale, comes on the soul of the king. He remembers the
battles of old; the days wherein his fathers fought. The days of old return on Fingal's
mind, as he beholds the renown of his sons. As the sun rejoices, from his cloud, over
the tree his beams have raised, as it shades its lonely head on the heath; so joyful is
the king over Fillan!
"As the rolling of thunder on hills when Lara's fields are still and dark, such
are the steps of Selma, pleasant and dreadful to the ear. They return with their sound,
like eagles to their dark-browed rock, after the prey is torn on the field, the dun sons
of the bounding hind. Your fathers rejoice from their clouds, sons of streamy Selma!"
Such was the nightly voice of bards, on Mora of the hinds. A flame rose, from
a hundred oaks, which winds had torn from Cormul's steep. The feast is spread in the
midst; around sat the gleaming chiefs. Fingal is there in his strength. The eagle wing
of his helmet sounds. The rustling blasts of the west unequal rush through night. Long
looks the king in silence round; at length his words are heard.
"My soul feels a want in our joy. I behold a breach among my friends. The
head of one tree is low. The squally wind pours in on Selma. Where is the chief of
Dun-lora? Ought Connal to be forgot at the feast? When did he forget the stranger, in
the midst of his echoing hall? Ye are silent in my presence! Connal is then no more!
Joy meet thee, O warrior! like a stream of light. Swift be thy course to thy fathers,
along the roaring winds. Ossian, thy soul is fire; kindle the memory of the king.
Awake the, battles of Connal, when first he shone in war. The locks of Connal were
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 245 -
gray. His days of youth were mixed with mine.. In one day Duth-caron first strung
bows against the roes of Dun-lora."
"Many," I said, "are our paths to battle in green valleyed Erin. Often did our
sails arise, over tho blue tumbling waves; when we came in other days, to aid the race
of Cona. The strife roared once in Alnecma, at the foam-covered streams of Duth-ula.
With Cormac descended to battle Duth-caron, from cloudy Selma. Nor descended
Duth-caron alone; his son was by his side, the long-haired youth of Connal, lifting the
first of his spears. Thou didst command them, O Fingal! to aid the king of Erin.
"Like the bursting strength of ocean, the sons of Bolga rushed to war. Colculla was before them, the chief of blue stream Atha. The battle was mixed on the
plain. Cormac shone in his own strife, bright as the forms of his fathers. But, far
before the rest, Duth-caron hewed down the foe. Nor slept the arm of Connal by his
father's side. Colc-ulla prevailed on the plain: like scattered mist fled the people of
Cormac.
"Then rose the sword of Duth-caron, and the steel of broad-shielded Connal.
They shaded their flying friends, like two rocks with their heads of pine. Night came
down on Duth-ula; silent strode the chiefs over the field. A mountain-stream roared
across the path, nor could Duth-caron bound over its course. 'Why stands my father?'
said Connal, 'I hear the rushing foe.'
"'Fly, Connal,' he said. 'Thy father's strength begins to fail. I come wounded
from battle. Here let me rest in night.' 'But thou shalt not remain alone,' said Connal's
bursting sigh. 'My shield is an eagle's wing to cover the king of Dun-lora.' He bends
dark above his father. The mighty Duth-caron dies!
"Day rose, and night returned. No lonely ban appeared, deep musing on the
heath: and could Connal leave the tomb of his father, till lie should receive his fame?
He bent the bow against the roes of Duth-ula. He spread the lonely feast. Seven nights
he laid his head on the tomb, and saw his father in his dreams. lie saw him rolled, dark
in a blast, like the vapor of reedy Lego. At length the steps of Colgan came, the bard
of high Temora. Duth-caron received his fame and brightened, as he rose on the
wind."
"Pleasant to the ear," said Fingal, "is the praise of the kings of men; when their
bows are strong in battle; when they soften at the sight of the sad. Thus let my name
be renowned, when the bards shall lighten my rising soul. Carril, son of Kinfena! take
the bards, and raise a tomb. To-night let Connal dwell within his narrow house. Let
not the soul of the valiant wander on the winds. Faint glimmers the moon at Moi-lena,
through the broad-headed groves of the hill! Raise stones, beneath its beam, to all the
fallen in war. Though no chiefs were they, yet their hands were strong in fight. They
were my rock in danger: the mountain from which I spread my eagle wings. Thence
am I renowned. Carril, forget not the low!"
Loud, at once, from the hundred bards, rose the song of the tomb. Carril strode
before them; they are the murmur of streams behind his steps. Silence dwells in the
vales of Moi-lena, where each, with its owl: dark rib, is winding between the hills. I
heard the voice of the bards, lessening, as they moved along. I leaned forward from
JAMES MACPHERSON
-246-
my shield, and felt the kindling of my soul. Half formed, the words of my song burst
forth upon the wind. So hears a tree, on the vale, the voice of spring around. It pours
its green leaves to the sun. it shakes its lonely head. The hum of the mountain bee is
near it; the hunter sees it with joy, from the blasted heath.
Young Fillan at a distance stood. His helmet lay glittering on the ground. His
dark hair is loose to the blast. A beam of light is Clatho's son! He heard the words of
the king with joy. He leaned forward on his spear.
"My son," said car-borne Fingal, "I saw thy deeds, and my soul was glad."
"The fame of our fathers," I said, "bursts from its gathering cloud. Thou art brave, son
of Clatho! but headlong in the strife. So did not Fingal advance, though he never
feared a foe. Let thy people be a ridge behind. They are thy strength in the field. Then
shalt thou be long renowned, and behold the tombs of the old. The memory of the past
returns, my deeds in other years: when first I descended from ocean on the greenvalleyed isle."
We bend towards the voice of the king. The moon looks abroad from her
cloud. The gray-skirted mist is near: the dwelling of the ghosts!
<1> The southern parts of Ireland went, for some time, under the name of Bolga, from
the Fir-bolg or Belgae of Britain, who settled a colony there. "Bolg" signifies a
"quiver," from which proceeds "Fir-bolg," i. e., "bowmen:" so called from their using
bows more than any of the neighboring nations.
<2> Bruno was a place of worship, (Fing. b. 6.) in Craca, which is supposed to be one
of the isles of Shetland
<3> By "the stranger of Inis-huna," is meant Sul-malla. — B iv.
<4> Alnecma, or Alnecmacht, was the ancient name of Connaught. Ullin is still the
Irish name of the province of Ulster
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 247 -
TEMORA — BOOK IV
On the rushy bank of a stream slept the daughter of Inis-huna.
ARGUMENT
The second night continues. Fingal relates, at the feast, his own first expedition into
Ireland, and his marriage with Ros-cranna, the daughter of Cormac, king of that
island. The Irish chiefs convene in the presence of Cathmor. The situation of the king
described. The story of Sul-malla, the daughter of Conmor, king of Inis-huna, who, in
the disguise of a young warrior, hath followed Cathmor to the war. The sullen
behavior of Foldath, who had commanded in the battle of the preceding day, renews
the difference between him and Malthos: but Cathmor, interposing, ends it. The chiefs
feast, and hear the song of Fonar the bard. Cathmor returns to rest, at a distance from
the army. The ghost of his brother Cairbar appears to him in a dream; and obscurely
JAMES MACPHERSON
-248-
foretells the issue of the war. The soliloquy of the king. He discovers Sul-malla.
Morning comes. Her soliloquy closes the book.
"BENEATH an oak," said the king, "I sat on Selma's streamy rock, when
Connal rose, from the sea, with the broken spear of Duth-caron. Far distant stood the
youth. He turned away his eyes. He remembered the steps of his father, on his own
green hill. I darkened in my place. Dusky thoughts flew over my soul. The kings of
Erin rose before me. I half unsheathed the sword. Slowly approached the chiefs. They
lifted up their silent eyes. Like a ridge of clouds, they wait for the bursting forth of my
voice. My voice was, to them, a wind from heaven, to roll the mist away.
"I bade my white sails to rise, before the roar of Cona's wind. Three hundred
youths looked, from their waves, on Fingal's bossy shield. High on the mast it hung,
and marked the dark-blue sea. But when night came down, I struck, at times, the
warning boss: I struck, and looked on high, for fiery-haired Ul-erin. <1> Nor absent
was the star of heaven. It travelled red between the clouds. I pursued the lovely beam,
on the faint-gleaming deep. With morning, Erin rose in mist. We came into the bay of
Moi-lena, where its blue waters tumbled, in the bosom of echoing woods. Here
Cormac, in his secret halls, avoids the strength of Colc-ulla. Nor he alone, avoids the
foe. The blue eye of Ros-cranna is there: Ros-cranna, white-handed maid, the
daughter of the king!
"Gray, on his pointless spear, came forth the aged steps of Cormac. He smiled
from his waving locks; but grief was in his soul. He saw us few before him, and his
sigh arose. 'I see the arms of Trenmor,' he said; 'and these are the steps of the king!
Fingal! thou art a beam of light to Cormac's darkened soul! Early is thy fame, my son:
but strong are the foes of Erin. They are like the roar of streams in the land, son of
car-borne Comhal!' 'Yet they may be rolled away,' I said, in my rising soul. 'We are
not of the race of the feeble, king of blue-shielded hosts! Why should fear come
amongst us, like a ghost of night? The soul of the valiant grows when foes increase in
the field. Roll no darkness, king of Erin, on the young in war!'
"The bursting tears of the king came down. He seized my hand in silence.
'Race of the daring Trenmor!' at length he said, 'I roll no cloud before thee. Thou
burnest in the fire of thy fathers. I behold thy fame. It marks thy course in battle, like a
stream of light. But wait the coming of Cairbar; my so must join thy sword. He calls
the sons of Erin from all their distant streams.'
"We came to the hall of the king, where it rose in the midst of rocks, on whose
dark sides were the marks of streams of old. Broad oaks bend around with their moss.
The thick birch is waving near. Half hid, in her shadowy grove, Ros-cranna raises the
song. Her white hands move on the harp. I beheld her blues rolling eyes. She was like
a spirit of heaven half folded in the skirt of a cloud!
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 249 -
Three days we feasted at Moi-lena. She rises bright in my troubled soul.
Cormac beheld me dark. He gave the white-bosomed maid. She comes with bending
eye, amid the wandering of her heavy locks. She came! Straight the battle roared.
Colc-ulla appeared: I took my spear. My sword rose, with my people against the ridgy
foe. Alnecma fled. Colc-ulla fell. Fingal returned with fame.
"Renowned is he, O Fillan, who fights in the strength of his host. The bard
pursues his steps through the land of the foe. But he who fights alone, few are his
deeds to other times! He shines to-day, a mighty light. To-morrow he is low. One
song contains his fame. His name is one dark field. He is forgot; but where his tomb
sends forth the tufted grass."
Such are the words of Fingal, on Mora of the roes. Three bards, from the rock
of Cormul, pour down the pleasing song. Sleep descends in the sound, on the broadskirted host. Carril returned with the bards, from the tomb of Dunlora's chief. The
voice of morning shall not come to the dusky bed of Duth-caron. No more shalt thou
hear the tread of roes around thy narrow house!
As roll the troubled clouds, around a meteor of night, when they brighten their
sides with its light along the heaving sea; so gathers Erin around the gleaming form of
Cathmor. He, tall in the midst, careless lifts, at times, his spear: as swells, or falls the
sound of Fonar's distant harp. Near him leaned, against a rock, Sul-malla of blue eyes,
the white-bosomed daughter of Conmor, king of Inis-huna. To his aid came blueshielded Cathmor, and rolled his foes away. Sul-malla beheld him stately in the hail of
feasts. Nor careless rolled the eyes of Cathmor on the long-haired maid!
''The third day arose, when Fithil came, from Erin of the streams. He told of
the lifting up of the shield in Selma: he told of the danger of Cairbar. Cathmor raised
the sail at Cluba; but the winds were in other lands. Three days he remained on the
coast, and turned his eyes on Conmor's halls. He remembered the daughter of
strangers, and his sigh arose. Now when the winds awaked the wave: from the hill
came a youth in arms; to lift the sword with Cathmor, in his echoing fields. It was the
white-armed Sul-malla. Secret she dwelt beneath her helmet. Her steps were in the
path of the king: on him her blue eyes rolled with joy, when he lay by his rolling
streams: But Cathmor thought that on Lumon she still pursued the roes. He thought,
that fair on a rock, she stretched her white hand to the wind; to feel its course from
Erin, the green dwelling of her love. He had promised to return, with his whitebosomed sails. The maid is near thee, O Cathmor: leaning on her rock.
The tall forms of the chiefs stand around; all but dark-browed Foldath. He
leaned against a distant tree, rolled into his haughty soul. His bushy hair whistles in
the wind. At times, bursts the hum of a song. He struck the tree at length, in wrath;
and rushed before the king! Calm and stately, to the beam of the oak, arose the form
of young Hidalla. His hair falls round his blushing cheek, in the wreaths of waving
light. Soft was his voice in Clonra, in the valley of his fathers. Soft was his voice
when he touched the harp, in the hall near his roaring stream!
"King of Erin," said Hidalla, "now is the time to feast. Bid the voice of bards
arise. Bid them roll the night away. The soul returns, from song, more terrible to war.
Darkness settles on Erin. From hill to hill bend the skirted clouds. Far and gray, on the
JAMES MACPHERSON
-250-
heath, the dreadful strides of ghosts are seen: the ghosts of those who fell bend
forward to their song. Bid, O Cathmor! the harps to rise, to brighten the dead, on their
wandering blasts."
"Be all the dead forgot," said Foldath's bursting wrath. "Did not I fail in the
field? Shall I then hear the song? Yet was not my course harmless in war. Blood was a
stream around my steps. But the feeble were behind me. 'The foe has escaped from
my sword. In Conra's vale touch thou the harp. Let Dura answer to the voice of
Hidalla. Let some maid look, from the wood, on thy long yellow locks. Fly from
Lubar's echoing plain. This is the field of heroes!"
"King of Erin," Malthos said, "it is thine to lead in war. Thou art a fire to our
eyes, on the dark-brown field. Like a blast thou hast passed over hosts. Thou hast laid
them low in blood. But who has heard thy words returning from the field? The
wrathful delight in death; their remembrance rests on the wounds of their spear. Strife
is folded in their thoughts: their words are ever heard. Thy course, chief of Moma,
was like a troubled stream. The dead were rolled on thy path: but others also lift the
spear. We were not feeble behind thee: but the foe was strong."
Cathmor beheld the rising rage and bending forward of either chief: for, half
unsheathed, they held their swords, and rolled their silent eyes. Now would they have
mixed in horrid fray, had not the wrath of Cathmor burned. He drew his sword: it
gleamed through night, to the high-flaming oak! "Sons of pride," said the king," allay
your swelling souls. Retire in night. Why should my rage arise? Should I contend with
both in arms! It is no time for strife! Retire, ye clouds, at my feast. Awake my soul no
more."
They sunk from the king on either side; like two columns of morning mist,
when the sun rises, between them, on his glittering rocks. Dark is their rolling on
either side: each towards its reedy pool!
Silent sat the chiefs at the feast. They look, at times, on Atha's king, where he
strode, on his rock, amid his settling soul. The host lie along the field. Sleep descends
on Moi-lena. The voice of Fonar ascends alone, beneath his distant tree. It ascends in
the praise of Cathmor, son of Larthon of Lumon. But Cathmor did not hear his praise.
He lay at the roar of a stream. The rustling breeze of night flew over his whistling
locks.
His brother came to his dreams, half seen from his low-hung cloud. Joy rose
darkly in his face. He had heard the song of Carril . <2> A blast sustained his darkskirted cloud: which he seized in the bosom of night, as he rose, with his fame,
towards his airy hail. Half mixed with the noise of the stream, he poured his feeble
words.
"Joy meet the soul of Cathmor. His voice was heard on Moi-lena. The bard
gave his song to Cairbar. He travels on the wind. My form is in my father's hall, like
the gliding of a terrible light, which darts across the desert, in a stormy night. No bard
shall be wanting at thy tomb when thou art lowly laid. The sons of song love the
valiant. Cathmor, thy name is a pleasant gale. The mournful sounds arise! On Lubar's
field there is a voice! Louder still, ye shadowy ghosts! The dead were full of fame!
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 251 -
Shrilly swells the feeble sound. The rougher blast alone is heard! Aid soon is Cathmor
low!" Rolled into himself he flew, wide on the bosom of winds. The old oak felt his
departure, and shook its whistling head. Cathmor starts from rest. He takes his
deathful spear. He lifts his eyes around. He sees but dark-skirted night.
"It was the voice of the king," he said. "But now his form is gone. Unmarked
is your path in the air, ye children of the night. Often, like a reflected beam, are ye
seen in the desert wild: but ye retire in your blasts, before our steps approach. Go,
then, ye feeble race! Knowledge with you there is none! Your joys are weak, and like
the dreams of our rest, or the light winged thought, that flies across the soul. Shall
Cathmor soon be low? Darkly laid in his narrow house! Where no morning comes,
with her half-opened eyes? Away, thou shade! to fight is mine! All further thought
away! I rush forth on eagles' wings, to seize my beam of flame. In the lonely vale of
streams, abides the narrow soul. Years roll on, seasons return, but he is still unknown.
In a blast comes cloudy death, and lays his gray head low. His ghost is folded in the
vapor of the fenny field. Its course is never on hills, nor mossy vales of wind. So shall
not Cathmor depart. No boy in the field was he, who only marks the bed of roes, upon
the echoing hills. My issuing forth was with kings. My joy in dreadful plains: where
broken hosts are rolled away, like seas before the wind."
So spoke the king of Alnecma, brightening in his rising soul. Valor, like a
pleasant flame, is gleaming within his breast. Stately is his stride on the heath! The
beam of east is poured around. He saw his gray host on the field, wide spreading their
ridges in light. He rejoiced, like a spirit of heaven, whose steps came forth on the seas,
when he beholds them peaceful round, and all the winds are laid. But soon he awakes
the waves, and rolls them large to some echoing shore.
On the rushy bank of a stream slept the daughter of Inis-huna. The helmet had
fallen from her head. Her dreams were in the lands of her fathers. There morning is on
the field. Gray streams leap down from the rocks. The breezes, in shadowy waves, fly
over the rushy fields. There is the sound that prepares for the chase. There the moving
of warriors from the hall. But tall above the rest is seen the hero of streamy Atha. He
bends his eye of love on Sul-malla, from his stately steps. She turns, with pride, her
face away, and careless bends the bow.
Such were the dreams of the maid when Cathmor of Atha came. He saw her
fair face before him, in the midst of her wandering locks. He knew the maid of
Lumon. What should Cathmor do? His sighs arise. His tears come down. But straight
he turns away. "This is no time, king of Atha, to awake thy secret soul. The battle is
rolled before thee like a troubled stream."
He struck that warning boss, <3> wherein dwelt the voice of war. Erin rose
around him, like the sound of eagle wing. Sul-malla started from sleep, in her
disordered locks. She seized the helmet from earth. She trembled in her place. "Why
should they know in Erin of the daughter of Inis-huna?" She remembered the race of
kings. The pride of her soul arose! Her steps are behind a rock, by the blue-winding
stream of a vale; where dwelt the dark-brown hind ere yet the war arose, thither came
the voice of Cathmor, at times, to Sul-malla's ear. Her soul is darkly sad. She pours
her words on wind.
JAMES MACPHERSON
-252-
"The dreams of Inis-huna departed. They are dispersed from my soul. I hear
not the chase in my land. I am concealed in the skirt of war. I look forth from my
cloud. No beam appears to light my path. I behold my warriors low; for the broadshielded king is near. He that overcomes in danger, Fingal, from Selma of spears!
Spirit of departed Conmor! are thy steps on the bosom of winds? Comest thou, at
times, to other lands, father of sad Sul-malla? Thou dost come! I have heard thy voice
at night; while yet I rose on the wave to Erin of the streams. The ghosts of fathers,
they say, call away the souls of their race, while they behold them lonely in the midst
of wo. Call me, my father, away! When Cathmor is low on earth, then shall Sul-malla
be lonely in the midst of wo!
<1> Ul-erin, "the guide to Ireland," was a star known by that name in the days of
Fingal
<2> The song of Carril: the funeral elegy at the tomb of Cairbar.
<3> He struck that warning boss: in order to understand this passage, it is necessary to
look to the description of Cathmor's shield in the seventh book. This shield had seven
principal bosses, the sound of each of which, when struck with a spear, conveyed a
particular order from the king to his tribes. The sound of one of them, as here, was the
signal for the army to assemble.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 253 -
TEMORA — BOOK V
ARGUMENT.
The poet, after a short address to the harp of Cona, describes the arrangement of both
armies on either side of the river Lubar. Fingal gives the command to Fillan; but at the
same time orders Gaul, the son of Morni, who had been wounded in the hand in the
preceding battle, to assist him with his counsel. The army of the Fir-bolg is
commanded by Foldath. The general onset is described. the great actions of Fillan. He
kills Rothmar and Culmin. But when Fillan conquers in one wing, Foldath presses
hard on the other. He wounds Dermid, the son of Duthno, and puts the whole wing to
flight. Dermid deliberates with himself. and, at last, resolves to put a stop to the
progress of Foldath, by engaging him in single combat. When the two chiefs were
approaching towards one another, Fillan came suddenly to the relief of Dermid;
engaged Foldath, and killed him. The behavior of Malthos towards the fallen Foldath.
Fillan puts the whole army, of the Fir-bolg to flight. The book closes with an address
to Clatho, the mother of that hero.
THOU dweller between the shields that hang, on high, in Ossian's hall!
Descend from thy place, O harp, and let me hear thy voice! Son of Alpin, strike the
string. Thou must awake the soul of the bard. The murmur of Lora's stream has rolled
the tale away. I stand in the cloud of years. Few are its openings towards the' past; and
when the vision comes, it is but dim and dark. I hear thee, harp of Selma! my soul
returns like a breeze, which the sun brings back to the vale, where dwelt the lazy mist.
Lubar is bright before me in the windings of its vale. On either side, on their
hills, arise the tall forms of the kings. Their people are poured around them, bending
forward to their words: as if their fathers spoke, descending from the winds. But they
themselves are like two rocks in the midst; each with its dark head of pines, when they
are seen in the desert, above low-sailing mist. High on their face are streams which
spread their foam on blasts of wind!
Beneath the voice of Cathmor pours Erin, like the sound of flame. Wide they
come down to Lubar. Before them is the stride of Foldath. But Cathmor retires to his
hill, beneath his bending oak. The tumbling of a stream is near the king. He lifts, at
times, his gleaming spear. It is a flame to his people, in the midst of war. Near him
stands the daughter of Conmor, leaning on a rock. She did not rejoice at the strife. Her
soul delighted not in blood. A valley spreads green behind the hill, with its three, blue
streams. The sun is there in silence. The dun mountain roes come down. On these are
turned the eyes of Sul-malla in her thoughtful mood.
JAMES MACPHERSON
-254-
Fingal beholds Cathmor, on high, the son of Borbar-duthul! he beholds the
deep rolling of Erin, on the darkened plain. He strikes that warning boss, which bids
the people to obey, when he sends his chief before them, to the field of renown. Wide
rise their spears to the sun. Their echoing shields reply around. Fear, like a vapor,
winds not among the host: for he, the king, is near, the strength of streamy Selma.
Gladness brightens the hero. We hear his words with joy.
"Like the coming forth of winds, is the sound of Selma's sons! They are
mountain waters, determined in their course. Hence is Fingal renowned. Hence is his
name in other lands. He was not a lonely beam in danger: for your steps were always
near! But never was Fingal a dreadful form, in your presence, darkened into wrath.
My voice was no thunder to your ears. Mine eyes sent forth no death. When the
haughty appeared, I beheld them not. They were forgot at my feasts. Like mist they
melted away. A young beam is before you! Few are his paths to war! They are few,
but he is valiant. Defend my dark-haired son. Bring Fillan back with joy. Hereafter he
may stand alone. His form is like his fathers. His soul is a flame of their fire. Son of
car-borne Morni, move behind the youth. Let thy voice reach his ear, from the skirts
of war. Not unobserved rolls battle before thee, breaker of the shields."
The king strode, at once, away to Cormul's lofty rock. Intermitting darts the
light from his shield, as slow the king of heroes moves. Sidelong rolls his eye o'er the
heath, as forming advance the lines. Graceful fly his half-gray locks round his kingly
features, now lightened with dreadful joy. Wholly mighty is the chief! Behind him
dark and slow I moved. Straight came forward the strength of Gaul. His shield hung
loose on its thong. He spoke, in haste, to Ossian. "Bind, son of Fingal, this shield!
Bind it high to the side of Gaul. The foe may behold it, and think I lift the spear. If I
should fall, let my tomb be hid in the field; for fall I must without fame. Mine arm
cannot lift the steel. Let not Evir-choma hear it, to blush between her locks. Fillan, the
mighty behold us! Let us not forget the strife. Why should they come from their hills,
to aid our flying field!"
He strode onward, with the sound of his shield. My voice pursued him as he
went. "Can the son of Morni fall, without his fame in Erin? But the deeds of the
mighty are forgot by themselves. They rush carless over the fields of renown. Their
words are never heard!" I rejoiced over the steps of the chief. I strode to the rock of
the king, where he sat, in his wandering locks, amid the mountain wind!
In two dark ridges bend the host towards each other, at Lubar Here Foldath
rises a pillar of darkness: there brightens the youth of Fillan. Each, with his spear in
the stream, sent forth the voice of war. Gaul struck, the shield of Selma. At once they
plunge in battle! Steel pours its gleam on steel: like the fall of streams shone the field,
when they mix their foam together, from two dark-browed rocks! Behold he comes,
the son of fame! He lays the people low! Deaths sit on blasts around him! Warriors
strew thy paths, O Fillan!
Rothmar, the shield of warriors, stood between two chinky rocks. Two oaks,
which winds had bent from high, spread their branches on either side. He rolls his
darkening eyes on Fillan, and, silent, shades his friends. Fingal saw the approaching
fight. The hero's soul arose. But as the stone of Loda <1> falls, shook, at once, from
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 255 -
rocking Drumanard, when spirits heave the earth in their wrath; so fell blue-shielded
Rothmar.
Near are the steps of Culmin; the youth came, bursting into tears. Wrathful he
cut the wind, ere yet he mixed his strokes with Fillan. He had first bent the bow with
Rothmar, at the rock of his own blue streams. There they had marked the place of the
roe, as the sunbeam flew over the fern. Why, son of Cul-allin! why, Culmin, dost thou
rush on that beam of light? <2> It is a fire that consumes. Son of Cul-allin, retire.
Your fathers were not equal in the glittering strife of the field. The mother of Culmin
remains in the hall. She looks forth on blue-rolling Strutha. A whirlwind rises, on the
stream, dark-eddying round the ghost of her son. His dogs <3> are howling in their
place. His shield is bloody in the hall. "Art thou fallen, my fair-haired son, in Erin's
dismal war?"
As a roe, pierced in secret, lies panting, by her wonted streams; the hunter
surveys her feet of wind! He remembers her stately bounding before. So lay the son of
Cul-allin beneath the eye of Fillan. His hair is rolled in a little stream. His blood
wanders on his shield. Still his hand holds the sword, that failed him in the midst of
danger. "Thou art fallen," said Fillan, "ere yet thy fame was heard. Thy father sent
thee to war. He expects to hear of thy deeds. He is gray, perhaps, at his streams. His
eyes are towards Moi-lena. But thou shalt not return with the spoil of the fallen foe!"
Fillan pours the flight of Erin before him, over the resounding heath. But, man
on man, fell Morven before the dark-red rage of Foldath: for, far on the field, he
poured the roar of half his tribes. Dermid stands before him in wrath. The sons of
Selma gathered around. But his shield is cleft by Foldath. His people fly over the
heath.
Then said the foe in his pride, "They have fled. My fame begins! Go, Malthos,
go bid Cathmor guard the dark rolling of ocean; that Fingal may not escape from my
sword. He must lie on earth. Beside some fen shall his tomb be seen. It shall rise
without a song. His ghost shall hover, in mist, over the reedy pool."
Malthos heard, with darkening doubt. He rolled his silent eyes. He knew the
pride of Foldath. He looked up to Fingal on his hills; then darkly turning, in doubtful
mood, he plunged his sword in war.
In Clono's narrow vale, where bend two trees above the stream, dark, in his
grief, stood Duthno's silent son. The blood pours from the side of Dermid. His shield
is broken near. His spear leans against a stone. Why, Dermid, why so sad? "I hear the
roar of battle. My people are alone. My steps are slow on the heath and no shield is
mine. Shall he then prevail? It is then after Dermid is low! I will call thee forth, O
Foldath, and meet thee yet in fight."
He took his spear, with dreadful joy. The son of Morni came. "Stay, son of
Duthno, stay thy speed. Thy steps are marked with blood. No bossy shield is thine.
Why shouldst thou fall unarmed?" — "Son of Morni, give thou thy shield. It has often
rolled back the war! I shall stop the chief in his course. Son of Morni, behold that
stone! It lifts its gray head through grass. There dwells a chief of the race of Dermid.
Place me there in night."
JAMES MACPHERSON
-256-
He slowly rose against the hill. He saw the troubled field: the gleaming ridges
of battle, disjointed and broken around. As distant fires, on heath by night, now seem
as lost in smoke: now rearing their red streams on the hill, as blow or cease the winds;
so met the intermitting war the eye of broad-shielded Dermid. Through the host are
the strides of Foldath, like some dark ship on wintry waves, when she issues from
between two isles to sport on resounding ocean!
Dermid with rage beholds his course. He strives to rush along. But he fails
amid his steps; and the big tear comes down. He sounds his father's horn. He thrice
strikes his bossy shield. He calls thrice the name of Foldath, from his roaring tribes.
Foldath, with joy, beholds the chief. He lifts aloft his bloody spear. As a rock is
marked with streams, that fell troubled down its side in a storm; so streaked with
wandering blood, is the dark chief of Moma! The host on either side withdraw from
the contending kings. They raise, at once, their gleaming points. Rushing comes Fillan
of Selma. Three paces back Foldath withdraws, dazzled with that beam of light, which
came, as issuing from a cloud, to save the wounded chief. Growing in his pride he
stands. He calls forth all his steel.
As meet two broad-winged eagles, in their sounding strife, in winds: so rush
the two chiefs, on Moi-lena, into gloomy fight. By turns are the steps of the kings
[Fingal and Cathmor] forward on their rocks above; for now the dusky war seems to
descend on their swords. Cathmor feels the joy of warriors!, on his mossy hill: their
joy in secret, when dangers rise to match their souls. His eye is not turned on Lubar,
but on Selma's dreadful king. He beholds him, on Mora, rising in his arms.
Foldath falls on his shield. The spear of Fillan pierced the king. Nor looks the
youth on the fallen, but onward rolls the war. The hundred voices of death arise.
"Stay, son of Fingal, stay thy speed. Beholdest thou not that gleaming form, a dreadful
sign of death? Awaken not the king of Erin. Return, son of blue-eyed Clatho."
Malthos beholds Foldath low. He darkly stands above the chief. Hatred is
rolled from his soul. He seems a rock in a desert, on whose dark side are the trickling
of waters; when the slow-sailing mist has left it, and all its trees are blasted with
winds. He spoke to the dying hero about the narrow house. "Whether shall thy gray
stones rise in Ullin, or in Moma's woody land; where the sun looks, in secret, on the
blue streams of Dalrutho? Them are the steps of thy daughter, blue-eyed Dardu-lena!"
"Rememberest thou her," said Foldath, "because no son is mine; no youth to
roll the battle before him, in revenge of me? Malthos, I am revenged. I was not
peaceful in the field. Raise the tombs of those I have slain, around my narrow house.
Often shall I forsake the blast, to rejoice above their graves; when I behold them
spread around, with their long-whistling grass."
His soul rushed to the vale of Moma, to Dardu-lena's dreams, where she slept,
by Dalrutho's stream, returning from the chase of the hinds. Her bow is near the maid,
unstrung. The breezes fold her long hair on her breasts. Clothed in the beauty of
youth, the love of heroes lay. Dark bending, from the skirts of the wood, her wounded
father seemed to come. He appears, at times, then hid himself in mist. Bursting into
tears she arose. She knew that the chief was low. To her came a beam from his soul,
when folded in its storms. Thou wert the last of his race, O blue-eyed Dardu-lena.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 257 -
Wide spreading over echoing Lubar, the flight of Bolga is rolled along. Fillan
hangs forward on their steps. He strews, with dead, the heath. Fingal rejoices over his
son. Blue-shielded Cathmor rose.
Son of Alpin, bring the harp. Give Fillan's praise to the wind. Raise high his
praise in mine ear, while yet he shines in war.
"Leave, blue-eyed Clatho, leave thy hail! Behold that early beam of thine! The
host is withered in its course. No further look, it is dark. Light trembling from the
harp, strike, virgins, strike the sound. No hunter he descends from the dewy haunt of
the bounding roe. He bends not his bow on the wind; nor sends his gray arrow abroad.
"Deep folded in red war! See battle roll against his side. Striding amid the
ridgy strife, he pours the death of thousands forth. Fillan is like a spirit of heaven, hat
descends from the skirt of winds. The troubled ocean feels his steps, as he strides from
wave to wave. His path kindles behind him. Islands shake their heads on the heaving
seas! Leave, blue-eyed Clatho, leave thy hall!"
<1> By "the stone of Loda" is meant a place of worship among the Scandinavians.
<2> The poet metaphorically calls Fillan a beam of light.
<3> Dogs were thought to be sensible of the death of their master, let it happen at ever
so great a distance. It was also the opinion of the times, that the arms, which warriors
left at home, became bloody when they themselves fell in battle.
JAMES MACPHERSON
-258-
TEMORA — BOOK VI.
ARGUMENT
This book opens with a speech of Fingal, who sees Cathmor descending to the
assistance of his flying army. The king despatches Ossian to the relief of Fillan. He
himself retires behind the rock of Cormul, to avoid the sight of the engagement
between his son and Cathmor. Ossian advances. The descent of Cathmor described.
He rallies the army, renews the battle, and, before Ossian could arrive, engages Fillan
himself. Upon the approach of Ossian, the combat between the two heroes ceases.
Ossian and Cathmor prepare to fight, but night coming on pre vents them. Ossian
returns to the place where Cathmor and Fillan fought. He finds Fillan mortally
wounded, and leaning against a rock. Their discourse. Fillan dies, his body is laid, by
Ossian, in a neighboring cave. The Caledonian army return to Fingal. He questions
them about his son, and understanding that he was killed, retires, in silence, to the
rock of Cormul. Upon the retreat of the army of Fingal, the Fir-bolg advance.
Cathmor finds Bran, one of the dogs of Fingal, lying on the shield of Fillan, before the
entrance of the cave, where the body of that hero lay. His reflection thereupon. He
returns, in a melancholy mood, to his army. Malthos endeavors to comfort him, by the
example of his father, Borbar-duthul. Cathmor retires to rest. The song of Sul-malla
concludes the book, which ends about the middle of the third night from the opening
of the poem.
"Cathmor rises on his hill! Shall Fingal take the sword of Luna? But what shall
become of thy fame, son of white-bosomed Clatho? Turn not thine eyes from Fingal,
fair daughter of Inis-tore. I shall not quench thy early beam. It shines along my soul.
Rise, wood-skirted Mora, rise between the war and me! Why should Fingal behold the
strife, lest his dark -haired warrior should fall? Amidst the song, O Carril, pour the
sound of the trembling harp! Here are the voices of rocks! and there the bright
tumbling of waters. Father of Oscar! lift the spear! defend the young in arms. Conceal
thy steps from Fillan. He must not know that I doubt his steel. No cloud of mine shall
rise, my son, upon thy soul of fire!"
He sunk behind his rock, amid the sound of Carril's song. Brightening in my
growing soul, I took the spear of Temora. I saw, along Moi-lena, the wild tumbling of
battle; the strife of death, in gleaming rows, disjointed and broken round. Fillan is a
beam of fire. From wing to wing is his wasteful course. The ridges of war melt before
him. They are rolled, in smoke, from the fields!
Now is the coming forth of Cathmor, in the armor of kings! Dark waves the
eagle's wing, above his helmet of fire. Unconcerned are his steps, as if they were to
the chase of Erin. He raises, at times, his terrible voice. Erin, abashed, gathers round.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 259 -
Their souls return back, like a stream. They wonder at the steps of their fear. He rose,
like the beam of the morning, on a haunted heath: the traveller looks back, with
bending eye, on the field of dreadful forms! Sudden from the rock of Moi-lena, are
Sul-malla's trembling steps. An oak takes the spear from her hand. Half bent she
looses the lance. But then are her eyes on the king, from amid her wandering locks!
No friendly strife is before thee! No light contending of bows, as when the youth of
Inis-huna come forth beneath the eye of Conmor!
As the rock of Runo, which takes the passing clouds as they fly, seems
growing, in gathered darkness, over the streamy heath; so seems the chief of Atha
taller, as gather his people around. As different blasts fly over the sea, each behind its
dark-blue wave; so Cathmor's words, on every side, pour his warriors forth. Nor silent
on his hill is Fillan. He mixes his words with his echoing shield. An eagle be seemed,
with sounding wings, calling the wind to his rock, when he sees the coming forth of
the roes, on Lutha's rushy field!
Now they bend forward in battle. Death's hundred voices arise. The kings, on
either side, were like fires on the souls of the host. Ossian bounded along. High rocks
and trees rush tall between the war and me. But I hear the noise of steel, between my
clanging arms. Rising, gleaming on the hill, I behold the backward steps of hosts:
their backward steps on either side, and wildly-looking eyes. The chiefs were met in
dreadful fight! The two blue-shielded kings! Tall and dark, through gleams of steel,
are seen the striving heroes! I rush. My fears for Fillan fly, burning, across my soul!
I come. Nor Cathmor flies; nor yet comes on; he sidelong stalks along. An icy
rock, cold, tall, he seems. I call forth all my steel. Silent awhile we stride, on either
side of a rushing stream: then, sudden turning, all at once, we raise our pointed spears.
We raise our spears, but night comes down. It is dark and silent round; but where the
distant steps of hosts are sounding over the heath.
I come to the place where Fillan fought. Nor voice nor sound is there. A
broken helmet lies on earth, a buckler cleft in twain. Where, Fillan, where art thou,
young chief of echoing Morven? He hears me, leaning on a rock, which bends its gray
head over the stream. He hears; but sullen, dark he stands. At length. I saw the hero.
"Why standest thou, robed in darkness, son of woody Selma! Bright is thy
path, my brother in this dark-brown field! Long has been thy strife in battle! Now the
horn of Fingal is heard. Ascend to the cloud of thy father, to his hill of feasts. In the
evening mists he sits, and hears the sound of Carril's harp. Carry joy to the aged,
young breaker of the shields!"
"Can the vanquished carry joy? Ossian, no shield is mine! It lies broken on the
field. The eagle-wing of my helmet is torn. It is when foes fly before them, that
fathers delight in their sons. But their sighs burst forth, in secret, when their young
warriors yield. No: Fillan shall not behold the king! Why should the hero mourn?"
"Son of blue-eyed Clatho! O Fillan, awake not my soul! Wert thou not a
burning fire before him? Shall he not rejoice? Such fame belongs not to Ossian; yet is
the king still a sun to me. He looks on my steps with joy. Shadows never rise on his
face. Ascend, O Fillan, to Mora! His feast is spread in the folds of mist."
JAMES MACPHERSON
-260-
"Ossian! give me that broken shield: those feathers that are rolled in the wind.
Place them near to Fillan, that less of his fame may fall. Ossian, I begin to fail. Lay
me in that hollow rock. Raise no stone above, lest one should ask about my fame. I
am fallen in the first of my fields, fallen without renown. Let thy voice alone send joy
to my flying soul. Why should the bard know where dwells the lost beam of Clatho?"
"Is thy spirit on the eddying winds, O Fillan, young breaker of shields. Joy
pursue my hero, through his folded clouds. The forms of thy fathers, O Fillan, bend to
receive their son! I behold the spreading of their fire on Mora: the blue-rolling of their
wreaths. Joy meet thee, my brother! But we are dark and sad! I behold the foe round
the aged. I behold the wasting away of his fame. Thou art left alone in the field, O
gray-haired king of Selma!"
I laid him in the hollow rock, at the roar of the nightly stream. One red star
looked in on the hero. Winds lift, at times, his locks. I listen. No sound is heard. The
warrior slept! as lightning on a cloud, a thought came rushing along my soul. My eyes
roll in fire: my stride was in the clang of steel. "I will find thee, king of Erin! in the
gathering of thy thousands find thee. Why should that cloud escape, that quenched our
early beam? Kindle your meteors on your hills, my fathers. Light my daring steps. I
will consume in wrath. <1> — But should not I return? The king is without a son,
gray-haired among his foes! His arm is not as in the days of old. His fame grows dim
in Erin. Let me not behold him, laid low in his latter field — But can I return to the
king? Will he not ask about his son?" Thou oughtest to defend young Fillan." —
Ossian will meet the foe! Green Erin, thy sounding tread is pleasant to my ear. I rush
on thy ridgy host, to shun the eyes of Fingal. I hear the voice of the king, on Mora's
misty top! He calls his two sons! I come, my father, in my grief. I come like an eagle,
which the flame of night met in the desert, and spoiled of half his wings!
Distant, round the king, on Mora, the broken ridges of Morven are rolled.
They turned their eyes: each darkly bends, on his own ashen spear. Silent stood the
king in the midst. Thought on thought rolled over his soul: as waves on a secret
mountain lake, each with its back of foam. He looked; no son appeared, with his longbeaming spear. The sighs rose, crowding, from his soul; but he concealed his grief. At
length I stood beneath an oak. No voice of mine was heard.! What could I say to
Fingal in this hour of wo? His words rose, at length, in the midst: the people shrunk
backward as he spoke.
"Where is the son of Selma; he who led in war? I behold not his steps, among
my people, returning from the field. Fell the young bounding roe, who was so stately
on my hills? He fell! for ye are silent. The shield of war is cleft in twain. Let his armor
be near to Fingal; and the sword of dark-brown Luno. I am waked on my hills; with
morning I descend to war!"
High on Cormul's rock, an oak is flaming to the wind. The gray skirts of mist
are rolled around; thither strode the king in his wrath. Distant from the host he always
lay, when battle burnt within his soul. On two spears hung his shield on high; the
gleaming sign of death! that shield, which he was wont to strike, by night, before he
rushed to war. It was then his warriors knew when the king was to lead in strife; for
never was his buckler heard, till the wrath of Fingal arose. Unequal were his steps on
high, as ho shone on the beam of the oak; he was dreadful as the form of the spirit of
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 261 -
night, when he clothes, on his wild gestures with mist, and, issuing forth, on the
troubled ocean, mounts the car of winds.
Nor settled, from the storm, is Erin's sea of war! they glitter, beneath the
moon, and, low humming, still roll on the field. Alone are the steps of Cathmor,
before them on the heath: he hangs forward, with all his arms, on Morven's flying
host. Now had he come to the mossy cave, where Fillan lay in night. One tree was
bent above! the stream, which glittered over the rock. There shone to the moon the
broken shield of Clatho's son; and near it, on grass, lay hairy-footed Bran. He had
missed the chief on Mora, and searched him along the wind. He thought that the blueeyed hunter slept; he lay upon his shield. No blast came over the heath unknown to
bounding Bran.
Cathmor saw the white-breasted dog; he saw the broken shield. Darkness is
blown back on his soul; he remembers the falling away of the people. They came, a
stream; are rolled away; another race succeeds. But some mark the fields, as they
pass, with their own mighty names. The heath, through dark brown years, is theirs;
some blue stream winds to their fame. Of these be the chief of Atha, when he lays him
down on earth. Often may the voice of future times meet Cathmor in the air; when he
strides from wind to wind, or folds himself in the wing of a storm.
Green Erin gathered round the king to hear the voice of his power. Their joyful
faces bend unequal, forward, in the light of the oak. They who were terrible, were
removed; Lubar winds again in their host. Cathmor was that beam from heaven,
which shone when his people were dark. He was honored in the midst. Their souls
arose with ardor around! The king alone no gladness showed; no stranger he to war!
"Why is the king so sad?" said Malthos, eagle-eyed. "Remains there a foe at
Lubar t Lives there among them who can lift the spear? Not so peaceful was thy
father, Borbar-duthul, king of spears. His rage was a fire that always burned: his joy
over fallen foes was great. Three days feasted the gray-haired hero, when he heard
that Calmar fell: Calmar who aided the race of Ullin, from Lara of the streams. Often
did he feel, with his hands, the steel which they said had pierced his foe. He felt it
with his hands, for Borbar-duthul's eyes had failed. Yet was the king a sun to his
friends; a gale to lift their branches round. Joy was around him in his halls: he loved
the sons of Bolga. His name remains in Atha, like the awful memory of ghosts whose
presence was terrible; but they blew the storm away. Now let the voices of Erin <2>
raise the soul of the king; he that shone when war was dark, and laid the mighty low.
Fonar, from that gray-browed rock pour the tale of other times: pour it on wide-skirted
Erin, as it settles round.
"To me," said Cathmor, "no song shall rise; nor Fonar sit on the rock of Lubar.
The mighty there are laid low. Disturb not their rushing ghosts. Far, Malthos, far
remove the sound of Erin's song. I rejoice not over the foe, when he ceases to lift the
spear. With morning we pour our strength abroad. Fingal is wakened on his echoing
hill."
Like waves, blown back by sudden winds, Erin retired, at the voice of the
king. Deep, rolled into the field of night, they spread their humming tribes. Beneath
his own tree, at intervals, each bard sat down with his harp. They raised the song, and
JAMES MACPHERSON
-262-
touched the string: each to the chief he loved. Before a burning oak Sul-malla
touched, at times, the harp. She touched the harp, and heard, between, the breezes in
her hair. In darkness near lay the king of Atha, beneath an aged tree. The beam of the
oak was turned from him; he saw the maid, but was not seen. His soul poured forth, in
secret, when he beheld her fearful eye. "But battle is before thee, son of Borbarduthul."
Amidst the harp, at intervals, she listened whether the warrior slept. Her soul
was up; she longed, in secret, to pour her own sad song. The field is silent. On their
wings the blasts of night retire. The bards had ceased; and meteors came, red-winding
with their ghosts. The sky grew dark: the forms of the dead were blended with the
clouds. But heedless bends the daughter of Conmor over the decaying flame. Thou
wert alone in her soul, car-borne chief of Atha. She raised the voice of the song, and
touched the harp between.
"Clun-galo <3> came; she missed the maid. Where art thou, beam of light?
Hunters from the mossy rock, saw ye the blue-eyed fair? Are her steps on grassy
Lumon; near the bed of roes? Ah, me! I behold her bow in the hail. Where art thou,
beam of light?
"Cease, love of Conmor, cease! I hear thee not on the ridgy heath. My eye is
turned to the king, whose path is terrible in war. He for whom my soul is up, in the
season of my rest. Deep-bosomed in war he stands; he beholds me not from his cloud.
Why, sun of Sul-malla, dost thou not look forth? I dwell in darkness here: wide over
me flies the shadowy mist. Filled with dew are my locks: look thou from thy cloud, O
sun of Sul-malla's soul!"
<1> "I will consume in wrath —" Here the sentence is designedly left unfinished. The
sense is, that he was resolved, like a destroying fire, to consume Cathmor, who had
killed his brother. In the midst of this resolution, the situation of Fingal suggests itself
to him in a very strong light. He resolves to return to assist the king in prosecuting the
war. But then his shame for not defending his brother recurs to him. He is determined
again to go and find out Cathmor. We may consider him as in the act of advancing
towards the enemy, when the horn of Fingal sounded on Mora, and called back his
people to his presence.
<2> The voices of Erin: A poetical expression for the bards of Ireland.
<3> Clun-galo: the wife of Conmor, king of Inis-huna, and the mother of Sul-malla.
She is here represented as missing her daughter, after she had fled with Cathmor.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 263 -
TEMORA — BOOK VII.
The king took his deathful spear, and struck the deeply sounding shield.
ARGUMENT.
This book begins about the middle of the third night from the opening of the poem.
The poet describes a kind of mist, which rose by night from the Lake of Lego, and
was the usual residence of the souls of the dead, during the interval between their
decease and the funeral song. The appearance of the ghost of Fillan above the cave
where his body lay. His voice comes to Fingal on the rock of Cormul. The king strikes
the shield of Trenmor, which was an infallible sign of his appearing in arms himself.
The extraordinary effect of the sound of the shield. Sul-malla, starting from sleep,
awakes Cathmor. Their affecting discourse. She insists with him to sue for peace; he
resolves to continue the war. He directs her to retire to the neighboring valley of Lona,
which was the residence of an old Druid, until the battle of the next day should be
JAMES MACPHERSON
-264-
over. He awakes his army with the sound of his shield. The shield described. Fonar,
the bard, at the desire of Cathmor, relates the first settlement of the Fir-bolg in
Ireland, under their leader Larthon. Morning comes. Sul-malla retires to the valley of
Lona. A lyric song concludes the book.
From the wood-skirted waters of Lego ascend, at times, gray-bosomed mists;
when the gates of the west are closed, on the sun's eagle eye. Wide, over Lara's
stream, is poured the vapor dark and deep: the moon, like a dim shield, lay swimming
through its folds. With this, clothe the spirits of old their sudden gestures on the wind,
when they stride, from blast to blast, along the dusky night. Often, blended with the
gale, to some warrior's grave, they roll the mist a gray dwelling to his ghost, until the
songs arise.
A sound came from the desert; it was Conar, king of Inis-fail. He poured his
mist on the grave of Fillan, at blue-winding Lubar. Dark and mournful sat the ghost,
in his gray ridge of smoke. The blast, at times, rolled him together; but the form
returned again. It returned with bending eyes, and dark winding of locks of mist.
It was dark. The sleeping host were still in the skirts of night. The flame
decayed, on the hill of Fingal; the king lay lonely on his shield. His eyes were half
clothed in sleep: the voice of Fillan came. "Sleeps the husband of Clatho? Dwells the
father of the fallen in rest? Am I forgot in the folds of darkness; lonely in the season
of night?"
"Why dost thou mix," said the king, "with the dreams of my father? Can I
forget thee, my son, or thy path of fire in the field? Not such come the deeds of the
valiant on the soul of Fingal. They are not a beam of lightning, which is seen and is
then no more. I remember thee, O Fillan! and my wrath begins to rise."
The king took his deathful spear, and struck the deeply-sounding shield: his
shield, that hung high in night, the dismal sign of war. Ghosts fled on every side, and
rolled their gathered forms on the wind. Thrice from the winding vales arose the voice
of deaths. The harps of the bards, untouched, sound mournful over the hill.
He struck again the shield; battles rose in the dreams of his host. The widetumbling strife is gleaming over their souls. Blue-shielded kings descended to war.
Backward-looking armies fly; and mighty deeds are half hid in the bright gleams of
steel.
But when the third sound arose, deer started from the clefts of their rocks. The
screams of fowl are heard in the desert, as each flew frightened on his blast. The sons
of Selma half rose and half assumed their spears. But silence rolled back on the host:
they knew the shield of the king. Sleep returned to their eyes; the field was dark and
still.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 265 -
No sleep was thine in darkness, blue-eyed daughter of Conmor! Sul-malla
heard the dreadful shield, and rose, amid the night. Her steps are towards the king of
Atha. "Can danger shake his daring soul?" In doubt, she stands with bending eyes.
Heaven burns with all its stars.
Again the shield resounds! She rushed. She stopt. Her voice half rose. It failed.
She saw him, amidst his arms, that gleamed to heaven's fire. She saw him dim in his
locks, that rose to nightly wind. Away, for fear, she turned her steps. "Why should the
king of Erin awake? Thou art not a dream to his rest, daughter of Inis-huna."
More dreadful rings the shield. Sul-malla starts. Her helmet fails. Loud echoes
Lubar's rock, as over it rolls the steel. Bursting from the dreams of night, Cathmor
half rose beneath his tree. He saw the form of the maid above him, on the rock. A red
star, with twinkling beams, looked through her floating hair.
"Who comes through night to Cathmor in the season of his dreams? Bring'st
thou aught of war? Who art thou, son of night? Stand'st thou before me, a form of the
times of old? a voice from the fold of a cloud, to warn me of the danger of Erin?"
"Nor lonely scout am I, nor voice from folded cloud," she said, "but I warn
thee of the danger of Erin. Dost thou hear that sound? It is not the feeble, king of
Atha, that rolls his signs on night."
"Let the warrior roll his signs," he replied, "To Cathmor they are the sounds of
harps. My joy is great, voice of night, and burns over all my thoughts. This is the
music of kings, on lonely hills, by night; when they light their daring souls, the sons
of mighty deeds! The feeble dwell alone, in the valley of the breeze; where mists lift
their morning skirts, from the blue-winding streams."
"Not feeble, king of men, were they, the fathers of my race. They dwelt in the
folds of battle, in their distant lands. Yet delights not my soul in the signs of death!
Lie, who never yields, comes forth: O send the bard of peace!"
Like a dropping rock in the desert, stood Cathmor in his tears. Her voice came,
a breeze on his soul, and waked the memory of her land; where she dwelt by her
peaceful streams, before he came to the war of Conmor.
"Daughter of strangers," he said, (she trembling turned away,) "long have I
marked thee in thy steel, young pine of Inis-huna. But my soul, I said, is folded in a
storm. Why should that beam arise, till my steps return in peace? Have I been pale in
thy presence, as thou bid'st me to fear the king? The time of danger, O maid, is the
season of my soul; for then it swells a mighty stream, and rolls me on the foe.
"Beneath the moss-covered rock of Lona, near his own loud stream; gray in
his locks of age, dwells Clonmal king of harps. Above him is his echoing tree, and the
dun bounding of roes. The noise of our strife reaches his ear, as he bends in the
thoughts of years. There let thy rest be, Sul-malla, until our battle cease. Until I return,
in my arms, from the skirts of the evening mist, that rises on Lona, round the dwelling
of my love."
JAMES MACPHERSON
-266-
A light fell on the soul of the maid: it rose kindled before the king. She turned
her face to Cathmor, from amidst her waving locks. "Sooner shall the eagle of heaven
be torn from the stream of his roaring wind, when he sees the dun prey before him, the
young sons of the bounding roe, than thou, O Cathmor, be turned from the strife of
renown. Soon may I see thee, warrior, from the skirts of the evening mist, when it is
rolled around me, on Lona of the streams. While yet thou art distant far, strike,
Cathmor, strike the shield, that joy may return to my darkened soul, as I lean on the
mossy rock. But if thou shouldst fall, I am in the land of strangers; O send thy voice
from thy cloud, to the midst of Inis-huna!"
"Young branch of green-headed Lumon, why dost thou shake in the storm?
Often has Cathmor returned, from darkly rolling wars. The darts of death are but hail
to me; they have often rattled along my shield. I have risen brightened from battle,
like a meteor from a stormy cloud. Return not, fair beam, from thy vale, when the roar
of battle grows. Then might the foe escape, as from my fathers of old.
"They told to Son-mor, of Clunar, who was slain by Cormac in fight. Three
days darkened Son-mor, over his brother's fall. His spouse beheld the silent king and
foresaw his steps in war. She prepared the bow, in secret, to attend her blue-shielded
hero. To her dwelt darkness at Atha, when he was not there. From their hundred
streams, by night, poured down the sons of Alnecma. They had heard the shield of the
king, and their rage arose. In clanging arms, they moved along towards Ullin of the
groves. Son-mor struck his shield, at times the leader of the war.
"Far behind followed Sul-allin, over the streamy hills. She was a light on the
mountain, when they crossed the vale below. Her steps were stately on the vale, when
they rose on the mossy hill. She feared to approach the king, who left her in echoing
Atha. But when the roar of battle rose; when host was rolled on host, when Son-mor
burnt, like the fire of heaven in clouds, with her spreading hair came Sul-allin, for she
trembled for her king. He stopt the rushing strife to save the love of heroes. The foe
fled by night; Clunar slept without his blood; the blood which ought to be poured
upon the warrior's tomb.
"Nor rose the rage of Son-mor, but his days were silent and dark. Sul-allin
wandered by her gray stream. with her tearful eyes. Often did she look on the hero,
when he was folded in his thoughts. But she shrunk from his eyes, and turned her lone
steps away. Battles rose, like a tempest, and drove the mist from his soul. He beheld
with joy her steps in the hall, and the white rising of her hands on the harp."
In his arms strode the chief of Atha, to where his shield hung, high, in night:
high on a mossy bough over Lubar's streamy roar. Seven bosses rose on the shield; the
seven voices of the king, which his warriors received, from the wind, and marked over
all the tribes.
On each boss is placed a star of night: Canmathon with beams unshorn; Colderna rising from a cloud; U-leicho robed in mist; and the soft beam of Cathlin
glittering on a rock. Smiling, on its own blue wave, Rel-durath half sinks its western
light. The red eye of Berthin looks, through a grove, on the hunter, as he returns, by
night, with the spoils of the bounding roe. Wide, in the midst, rose the cloudless
beams of Ton-théna, that star, which looked by night on the course of the sea-tossed
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 267 -
Larthon: Larthon, the first of Bolga's race, who travelled on the winds. Whitebosomed spread the sails of the king, towards streamy Inis-fail; dun night was rolled
before him, with its skirts of mist. Unconstant blew the winds, and rolled him from
wave to wave. Then rose the fiery-haired Ton-théna, and smiled from her parted
cloud. Larthon blessed the well-known beam, as it faint gleamed on the deep.
Beneath the spear of Cathmor rose that voice which awakes the bards. They
came, dark winding from every side: each with the sound of his harp. Before him
rejoiced the king, as the traveller, in the day of the sun; when he hears, far rolling
around, the murmur of mossy streams: streams that burst in the desert from the rock
of roes.
"Why," said Fonar, "hear we the voice of the king in the season of his rest?
Were the dim forms of thy fathers bending in thy dreams? Perhaps they stand on that
cloud, and wait for Fonar's song; often they come to the fields where their sons are to
lift the spear. Or shall our voice arise for him who lifts the spear no more; he that
consumed the field, from Moma of the groves?"
"Not forgot is that cloud in war, bard of other times. High shall his tomb rise,
on Moi-lena, the dwelling of renown. But, now, roll back my soul to the times of my
fathers: to the years when first they rose, on Inis-huna's waves. Nor alone pleasant to
Cathmor is the remembrance of wood-covered Lumon. <1> Lumon of the streams, the
dwelling of white-bosomed maids."
"Lumon of the streams, thou risest on Fonar's soul! Thy sun is on thy side, on
the rocks of thy bending trees. The dun roe is seen from thy furze; the deer lifts its
branchy head; for he sees, at times, the hound on the half-covered heath. Slow, on the
vale, are the steps of maids; the white-armed daughters of the bow: they lift their blue
eyes to the hill, from amidst their wandering locks. Not there is the stride of Larthon,
chief of Inis-huna. He mounts the wave on his own dark oak, in Cluba's ridgy bay.
That oak which he cut from Lumon, to bound along the sea. The maids turn their eyes
away, lest the king should be lowly laid; for never had they seen a ship, dark rider of
the wave!
"Now he dares to call the winds, and to mix with the mist of ocean. Blue Inisfail rose, in smoke; but dark-skirted night came down. The sons of Bolga feared. The
fiery-haired Ton-théna rose. Culbin's bay received the ship, in the bosom of its
echoing woods. There issued a stream from Duthuma's horrid cave; where spirits
gleamed, at times, with their half finished forms.
"Dreams descended on Larthon: he saw seven spirits of his fathers. He heard
their half-formed words, and dimly beheld the times to come. He beheld the kings of
Atha, the sons of future days. They led their hosts along the field, like ridges of mist,
which winds pour in autumn, over Atha of the groves.
Larthon raised the hall of Semla, to the music of the harp. He went forth to the
roes of Erin, to their wonted streams. Nor did he forget green-headed Lumon; he often
bounded over his seas, to where white-handed Flathal looked from the hill of roes.
Lumon of the foamy streams, thou risest on Fonar's soul!"
JAMES MACPHERSON
-268-
Mourning pours from the east. The misty heads of the mountains rise. Valleys
show, on every side, the gray winding of the streams. His host heard the shield of
Cathmor: at once they rose around; like a crowded sea, when first it feels the wings of
the wind, The waves know not whither to roll; they lift their troubled heads.
Sad and slow retired Sul-malla to Lona of the streams. She went, and often
turned; her blue eyes rolled in tears. But when she came to the rock, that darkly
covered Lona's vale, she looked, from her bursting soul, on the king; and sunk, at
once, behind.
Son of Alpin, strike the string. Is there aught of joy in the harp? Pour it then on
the soul of Ossian: it is folded in mist. I hear thee, O bard! in my night. But cease the
lightly-trembling sound. The joy of grief belongs to Ossian, amidst his dark-brown
years.
Green thorn of the hill of ghosts, that shakest thy head to nightly winds! I hear
no sound in thee, is there no spirit's windy skirt now rustling in thy leaves? Often are
the steps of the dead, in the dark-eddying blasts; when the moon, a dun shield, from
the east is rolled along the sky.
Ullin, Carril, and Ryno, voices of the days of old! Let me hear you, while yet
it is dark, to please and awake my soul. I hear you not, ye sons of song; in what hall of
the clouds is your rest? Do you touch the shadowy harp, robed with morning mist,
where the rustling sun comes forth from his green-headed waves?
<1> Lumon: A hill in Inis-huna, near the residence of Sul-malla.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 269 -
TEMORA — BOOK VIII
It was the spirit of Cathmor, stalking, large, a gleaming form.
ARGUMENT.
The fourth morning from the opening of the poem comes on Fingal, still continuing in
the place to which he had retired on the preceding sight, is seen, at intervals, through
the mist which covered the rock of Cormul. The descent of the king is described. He
orders Gaul, Dermid, and Carril the bard, to go to the valley of China, and conduct
from thence the Caledonian army, Ferad-artho, the son of Cairbar, the only person
remaining of the family of Conar, the first king of Ireland. The king makes the
command of the army, and prepares for battle. Marching towards the enemy, he
comes to the cave of Lubar, where the body of Fillan lay. Upon seeing his dog, Bran,
who lay at the entrance of the cave, his grief returns. Cathmor arranges the Irish army
in order of battle. The appearance of that hero. The general conflict is described. The
actions of Fingal and Cathmor. A storm. The total rout of the Fir-bolg. The two kings
engage, in a column of mist, on the banks of Lubar, Their attitude and conference
after the combat. The death of Cathmor. Fingal resigns the spear of Trenmor to
JAMES MACPHERSON
-270-
Ossian. The ceremonies observed on that occasion. The spirit of Cathmor, in the mean
time, appears to Sul-malla, in the valley of Lona. Her sorrow. Evening comes on. A
feast is prepared. The coming of Ferad-artho is announced by the songs of a hundred
bards. The poem closes with a speech of Fingal.
As when the wintry winds have seized the waves of the mountain lake, have
seized them in stormy night, and clothed them over with ice; white to the hunter's
early eye, the billows still seem to roll. He turns his ear to the sound of each unequal
ridge. But each is silent, gleaming, strewn with boughs, and tufts of grass, which
shake and whistle to the wind, over their gray seats of frost. So silent shone to the
morning the ridges of Morven's host, as each warrior looked up from his helmet
towards the hill of the king; the cloud-covered hill of Fingal, where he strode in the
folds of mist. At times is the hero seen, greatly dim in all his arms. From thought to
thought tolled the war, along his mighty soul.
Now is the coming forth of the king. First appeared the sword of Luno; the
spear half issuing from a cloud, the shield still dim in mist. But when the stride of the
king came abroad, with all his gray dewy locks in the wind; then rose the shouts of his
host over every moving tribe. They gathered, gleaming round, with all their echoing
shields. So rise the green seas round a spirit, that comes down from the squally wind.
The traveller hears the sound afar, and lifts his head over the rock. He looks on the
troubled bay, and thinks he dimly sees the form. The waves sport, unwieldy, round,
with all their backs of foam.
Far distant stood the son of Morni, Duthno's race, and Cona's bard. We stood
far distant; each beneath his tree. We shunned the eyes of the king: we had not
conquered in the field. A little stream rolled at my feet: I touched its light wave, with
my spear. I touched it with my spear: nor there was the soul of Ossian. It darkly rose,
from thought to thought, and sent abroad the sigh.
"Son of Morni," said the king, "Dermid, hunter of roes! why are ye dark, like
two rocks, each with its trickling waters? No wrath gathers on Fingal's soul, against
the chiefs of men. Ye are my strength in battle; the kindling of my joy in peace. My
early voice has been a pleasant gale to your years, when Fillan prepared the bow. The
son of Fingal is not here, nor yet the chase of the bounding roes. But why should the
breakers of shields stand, darkened, far way?"
Tall they strode towards the king: they saw him turned to Morn's wind. His,
tears came down for his blue-eyed son, no slept in the cave of streams. But he
brightened before them, and spoke to the broad-shielded kings.
"Crommal, with woody rocks, and misty top, the field of winds, pours forth, to
the sight, blue Lubar's streamy roar. Behind it rolls clear-winding Lavath, in the still
vale of deer. A cave is dark in a rock; above it strong-winged eagles dwell; broad-
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 271 -
headed oaks, before it, sound in Cluna's wind. Within, in his locks of youth, is Feradartho, blue-eyed king, the son of broad-shielded Cairbar, from Ullin of the roes. He
listens to the voice of Condan, as gray he bends in feeble light. He listens, for his foes
dwell in the echoing halls of Temora. He comes, at times, abroad in the skirts of mist,
to pierce the bounding roes. When the sun looks on the field, nor by the rock, nor
stream, is he! He shuns the race of Bolga, who dwell in his father's hall. Tell him, that
Fingal lifts the spear, and that his foes, perhaps, may fail.
"Lift up, O Gaul, the shield before him. Stretch, Dermid, Temora's spear. Be
thy voice in his ear, O Carril, with the deeds of his fathers. Lead him to green Moilena, to the dusky field of ghosts; for there, I fall forward, in battle, in the folds of war.
Before dun night descends, come to high Dunmora's top. Look, from the gray skirts of
mist, on Lena of the streams. If there my standard shall float on wind, over Lubar's
gleaming stream, then has not Fingal failed in the last of his fields."
Such were his words; nor aught replied the silent striding kings. They looked
sidelong on Erin's host, and darkened as they went. Never before had they left the
king, in the midst of the stormy field. Behind them, touching at times his harp, the
gray-haired Carril moved. He foresaw the fall, of the people, and mournful was the
sound! It was like a breeze that comes, by fits, over Lego's reedy lake; when sleep half
descends on the hunter, within his mossy cave.
"Why bends the bard of Cona," said Fingal, "over his secret stream? Is this a
time for sorrow, father of low-laid Oscar? Be the warriors remembered in peace;
when echoing shields are heard no more. Bend, then, in grief, over the flood, where
blows the mountain breeze. Let them pass on thy soul, the blue-eyed dwellers of the
tomb. But Erin rolls to war; wide tumbling, rough, aid dark. Lift, Ossian, lift the
shield. I am alone, my son
As comes the sudden voice of winds to the becalmed ship of Inis-huna, and
drives it large, along the deep, dark rider of the wave; so the voice of Fingal sent
Ossian, tall along the heath. He lifted high his shining shield, in the dusky wing of
war; like the broad, blank moon, in the skirt of a cloud, before the storms. arise.
Loud, from moss-covered Mora, poured down, at once, the broad-winged war.
Fingal led his people forth, king of Morven of streams. On high spreads the eagle's
wing. His gray hair is poured on his shoulders broad. In thunder are his mighty
strides. He often stood, and saw, behind, the wide-gleaming rolling of armor. A rock
he seemed, gray over with ice, whose woods are high in wind. Bright streams leapt
from its head, and spread their foam on blasts.
Now he came to Lubar's cave, where Fillan darkly slept. Bran still lay on the
broken shield: the eagle-wing is strewed by the winds. Bright, from withered furze,
looked forth the hero's spear. Then grief stirred the soul of the king, like whirlwinds
blackening on a lake. He turned his sudden step, and leaned on his bending spear.
White-breasted Bran came bounding with joy to the known path of Fingal. He
came, and looked towards the cave, where the blue-eyed hunter lay, for he was wont
to stride, with morning, to the dewy bed of the roe. It was then the tears of the king
came down and all his soul was dark. But as the rising wind rolls away the storm of
JAMES MACPHERSON
-272-
rain, and leaves the white streams to the sun, and high hills with their heads of grass;
so the returning war brightened the mind of Fingal. He bounded, on his spear, over
Lubar, and struck his echoing shield. His ridgy host bend forward, at once, with all
their pointed steel.
Nor Erin heard, with fear, the sound: wide they come rolling along. Dark
Malthos, in the wing of war, looks forward from shaggy brows. Next rose that beam
of light, Hidalla! then the sidelong-looking gloom of Maronnan. Blue-shielded Clonar
lifts the spear: Cormar shakes his bushy locks on the wind. Slowly, from behind a
rock, rose the bright form of Atha. First appeared his two-pointed spears, then the half
of his burnished shield: like the rising of a nightly meteor, over the valley of ghosts.
But when ha shone all abroad, the hosts plunged, at once, into strife. The gleaming
waves of steel are poured on either side.
As meet two troubled seas, with the rolling of all their waves, when they feel
the wings of contending winds, in the rock-sided firth of Lumon; along the echoing
hills in the dim course of ghosts: from the blast fall the torn groves on the deep,
amidst the foamy path of whales. So mixed the hosts! Now Fingal; now Cathmor
came abroad. The dark tumbling of death is before them: the gleam of broken steel is
rolled on their steps, as, loud, the high-bounding kings hewed down the ridge of
shields.
Maronnan fell, by Fingal, laid large across a stream. The waters gathered by
his side, and leapt gray over his bossy shield. Clonar is pierced by Cathmor; nor yet
lay the chief on earth. An oak seized his hair in his fall. His helmet rolled on the
ground. By its thong, hung his broad shield; over it wandered his streaming blood.
Tla-min shall weep, in the hall, and strike her heaving breast. Nor did Ossian
forget the spear, in the wing of his war. He strewed the field with dead. Young
Hidallan came. "Soft voice of streamy Clonra! why dost thou lift the steel? O that we
met in the strife of song, in thine own rushy vale!" Malthos beheld him low, and
darkened as he rushed along. On either side of a stream, we bent in the echoing strife.
Heaven comes rolling down; around burst the voices of squally winds. Hills are
clothed, at times, in fire. Thunder rolls in wreaths of mist. In darkness shrunk the foe:
Morven's warriors stood aghast. Still I bent over the stream, amidst my whistling
locks.
Then rose the voice of Fingal, and the sound of the flying foe. I saw the king,
at times, in lightning, darkly striding in his might. I struck my echoing shield, and
hung forward on the steps of Alnecma; the foe is rolled before me, like a wreath of
smoke.
The sun looked forth from his cloud. The hundred streams of Moi-lena shone.
Slow rose the blue columns of mist, against the glittering hill. Where are the mighty
kings? Nor by that stream, nor wood, are they! I hear the clang of arms! Their strife is
in the bosom of that mist. Such is the contending of spirits in a nightly cloud, when
they strive for the wintry wings of winds, and the rolling of the foam-covered waves.
I rushed along. The gray mist rose. Tall, gleaming, they stood at Lubar.
Cathmor leaned against a rock. His half-fallen shield received the stream, that leapt
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 273 -
from the moss above. Towards him is the stride of Fingal: he saw the hero's blood.
His sword fell slowly to his side. He spoke, amidst his darkening joy.
"Yields the race of Borbar-duthul? Or still does he lift the spear? Not unheard
is thy name, at Atha, in the green dwelling of strangers. It has come, like the breeze of
his desert, to the ear of Fingal. Come o my hill of feasts: the mighty fail, at times. No
fire am I to low-laid foes; I rejoice not over the fall of the brave. To close the wound
is mine: I have known the herbs of the hills. I seized their fair heads, on high, as they
waved by their secret streams. Thou art dark and silent, king of Atha of strangers!"
"By Atha of the stream," he said, "there rises a mossy rock. On its head is the
wandering of boughs, within the course of winds. Dark, in its face, is a cave, with its
own loud rill. There have I heard the tread of strangers, when they passed to my hall
of shells. Joy rose, like a flame, on my soul; I blest the echoing rock. Here be my
dwelling, in darkness; in my grassy vale. From this I shall mount the breeze, that
pursues my thistle's beard; or look down on blue-winding Atha, from its wandering
mist."
"Why speaks the king of the tomb? Ossian, the warrior has failed! Joy meet
thy soul, like a stream, Cathmor friend of strangers! My son, I hear the call of years;
they take my spear as they pass along. Why does not Fingal, they seem to say, rest
within his hall? Dost thou always delight in blood? In the tears of the sad? No; ye
dark-rolling years, Fingal delights not in blood. Tears are wintry streams that waste
away my soul. But when I lie down to rest, then comes the mighty voice of war. It
awakes me in my hall and calls forth all my steel. It shall call it forth no more; Ossian,
take thou thy father's spear. Lift it, in battle, when the proud arise.
"My fathers, Ossian, trace my steps; my deeds are pleasant to their eyes.
Wherever I come forth to battle, on my field, are their columns of mist. But mine arm
rescued the feeble! the haughty found my rage was fire. Never over the fallen did
mine eye rejoice. For this, my fathers shall meet me, at the gates of their airy halls,
tall, with robes of light, with mildly-kindled eyes. But to the proud in arms, they are
darkened moons in heaven, which send the fire of night red wandering over their face.
"Father of heroes, Trenmor, dweller of eddying winds, I give thy spear to
Ossian: let thine eye rejoice. Thee have I seen, at times, bright from between thy
clouds; so appear to my son, when he is to lift the spear: then shall he remember thy
mighty deeds, though thou art now but a blast."
He gave the spear to my hand, and raised at once a stone on high, to speak to
future times, with its gray head of moss. Beneath he placed a sword in earth, and one
bright boss from his shield. Dark in thought awhile he bends: his words at length
came forth.
"When thou, O stone, shalt moulder down, and lose thee in the moss of years,
then shall the traveller come, and whistling pass away. Thou knowest not, feeble man,
that fame once shone on Moi-lena. Here Fingal resigned his spear, after the last of his
fields. Pass away, thou empty shade! in thy voice there is no renown. Thou dwellest
by some peaceful stream; yet a few years, and thou art gone. No one remembers thee,
JAMES MACPHERSON
-274-
thou dweller of thick mist! But Fingal shall be clothed with fame, a beam of light to
other times; for he went forth, with echoing steel, to save the weak in arms."
Brightening, in his fame, the king strode to Lubar's sounding oak, where it
bent, from its rock, over the bright tumbling stream. Beneath it is a narrow plain, and
the sound of the fount of the rock. Here the standard of Morven poured its wreaths on
the wind, to mark the way of Ferad-artho from his secret vale. Bright, from his parted
west, the son of heaven looked abroad. The hero saw his people, and heard their
shouts of joy. In broken ridges round, they glittered to the beam. The king rejoiced, as
a hunter in his own green vale, when, after the storm is rolled away, he sees the
gleaning sides of the rocks. The green thorn shakes its head in their face; from their
top look forward the roes.
Gray, at his mossy cave, is bent the aged form of Clonmal. The eyes of the
bard had failed. He leaned forward on his staff. Bright in her locks, before him, Sulmalla listened to the tale; the tale of the kings of Atha, in the days of old. The noise of
battle had ceased in his Sir: he stopt and raised the secret sigh. The spirits of the dead,
they said, often lightened along his soul. He saw the king of Atha low, beneath his
bending tree.
"Why art thou dark?" said the maid." The strife of arms is past. Soon shall he
come to thy cave, over thy winding streams. The sun looks from the rocks of the west.
The mists of the lake arise. Gray they spread on that hill, the rushy dwelling of roes.
From the mist shall my king appear! Behold, he comes in his arms. Come to the cave
of Clonmal, O my best beloved!"
It was the spirit of Cathmor, stalking, large, a gleaming form. He sunk by the
hollow stream, that roared between the hills. "It was but the hunter," she said," who
searches for the bed of the roe. His steps are not forth to war; his spouse expects him
with night. He shall, whistling, return with the spoils of the dark-brown hinds." Her
eyes were turned to the bill; again the stately form came down. She rose in the midst
of joy. He retired again in mist. Gradual vanish his limbs of smoke, and mix with the
mountain wind. Then she knew that he fell! "King of Erin, art thou low!" Let Ossian
forget her grief; it wastes the soul of age.
Evening came down on Moi-lena. Gray rolled the streams of the land. Loud
came forth the voice of Fingal: the beam of oaks arose. The people gathered round
with gladness, with gladness blended with shades. They sidelong looked to the king,
and beheld his unfinished joy. Pleasant from the way of the desert, the voice of music
came. It seemed, at first, the noise of a stream, far distant on its rocks. Slow it rolled
along the hill, like the ruffled wing of a breeze, when it takes the tufted beard of the
rocks, in the still season of night. It was the voice of Condon, mixed with Carril's
trembling harp. They came, with blue-eyed Ferad-artho, to Mora of the streams.
Sudden bursts the song from our bards, on Lena: the host struck their shields
midst the sound. Gladness rose brightening on the king, like the beam of a cloudy day,
when it rises on the green hill, before the roar of winds. He struck the bossy shield of
kings; at once they cease around. The people lean forward, from their spears, towards
the voice of their land.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 275 -
"Sons of Morven, spread the feast; send the night away in song. Ye have shone
around me, and the dark storm is past. My people are the windy rocks, from which I
spread my eagle wings, when I rush forth to renown, and seize it on its field. Ossian,
thou hast the spear of Fingal; it is not the staff of a boy with which he strews the
thistles round, young wanderer of the field. No: it is the lance of the mighty, with
which they stretched forth their hands to death. Look to thy fathers, my son; they are
awful beams. With morning lead Ferad-artho forth to the echoing halls of Temora.
Remind him of the kings of Erin: the stately forms of old. Let not the fallen be forgot:
they were mighty in the field. Let Carril pour his song, that the kings may rejoice in
their mist. To morrow I spread my sails to Selma's shaded walls: where streamy Duthula winds through the seats of roes."