FINGAL: AN ANCIENT EPIC POEM
FINGAL — BOOK I.
ARGUMENT.
Cuthullin (general of the Irish tribes, in the minority of Cormac, king of Ireland)
sitting alone beneath a tree, at the gate of Tura, a castle of Ulster (the other chiefs
having gone on a hunting party to Cromla, a neighboring hill,) is informed of the
landing of Swaran, king of Lochlin, by Moran, the son of Fithil, one of his scouts. He
convenes the chiefs; a council is held, and disputes run high about giving battle to the
enemy. Connal, the petty king of Togorma, and an intimate friend of Cuthullin, was
for retreating, till Fingal, king of those Caledonians who inhabited the north-west
coast of Scotland, whose aid had been previously solicited, should arrive; but Calmar,
the son of Matha, lord of Lara, a country in Connaught, was for engaging the enemy
immediately. Cuthullin, of himself willing to fight, went into the opinion of Calmar.
Marching towards the enemy, he missed three of his bravest heroes, Fergus,
Duchômar, and Cáthba. Fergus arriving, tells Cuthullin of the death of the two other
chiefs: which introduces the affecting episode of Morna, the daughter of Cormac. The
army of Cuthullin is descried at a distance by Swaran, who sent the son of Arno to
observe the motions of the enemy, while he himself ranged his forces in order of
battle. The son of Arno returning to Swaran, describes to him Cuthullin's chariot, and
the terrible appearance of that hero. The armies engage, but night coming on, leaves
the victory undecided. Cuthullin, according to the hospitality of the times, sends to
Swaran a formal invitation to a feast, by his bard Carril, the son of Kinfena. Swaran
refuses to come. Carril relates to Cuthullin the story of Grudar and Brassolis. A party,
by Connal's advice, is sent to observe the enemy; which closes the action of the first
day.
CUTHULLIN sat by Tura's wall; by the tree of the rustling sound. His spear
leaned against the rock. His shield lay on the grass by his side. Amid his thoughts of
mighty Cairbar, a hero slain by the chief in war; the scout of ocean comes, Moran the
son of Fithil!
"Arise," said the youth, "Cuthullin, arise. I see the ships of the north! Many,
chief of men, are the foe. Many the heroes of the sea-borne Swaran!" — "Moran!"
replied the blue-eyed chief "thou ever tremblest, son of Fithil! Thy fears have
increased the foe. It is Fingal, king of deserts, with aid to green Erin of streams." — "I
beheld their chief," says Moran, "tall as a glittering rock. His spear is a blasted pine.
His shield the rising moon! He sat on the shore! like a cloud of mist on the silent hill!
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 165 -
Many, chief of heroes! I said, many are our hands of war. Well art thou named, the
mighty man; but many mighty men are seen from Tura's windy walls.
"He spoke, like a wave on a rock, 'Who in this land appears like me? Heroes
stand not in my presence: they fall to earth from my hand. Who can meet Swaran in
fight? Who but Fingal, king of Selma of storms? Once we wrestled on Malmor; our
heels overturned the woods. Rocks fell from their place; rivulets, changing their
course, fled murmuring from our side. Three days we renewed the strife; heroes stood
at a distance and trembled. On the fourth, Fingal says, that the king of the ocean fell!
but Swaran says he stood! Let dark Cuthullin yield to him, that is strong as the storms
of his land!'
"No!" replied the blue-eyed chief, "I never yield to mortal man! Dark
Cuthullin shall be great or dead! Go, son of Fithil, take my spear. Strike the sounding
shield of Semo. It hangs at Tura's rustling gale. The sound of peace is not its voice!
My heroes shall hear and obey." He went. He struck the bossy shield. The hills, the
rocks reply. The sound spreads along the wood: deer start by the lake of roes. Curach
leaps from the sounding rock! and Connal of the bloody spear! Crugal's breast of
snow beats high. The son of Favi leaves the dark-brown hind. It is the shield of war,
said Ronnart; the spear of Cuthullin, said Lugar! Son of the sea, put on thy arms!
Calmar, lift thy sounding steel! Puno! dreadful hero, arise! Cairbar, from thy red tree
of Cromla! Bend thy knee, O Eth! descend from the streams of Lena Caolt, stretch thy
side as thou movest along the whistling heath of Mora: thy side that is white as the
foam of the troubled sea, when the dark winds pour it on rocky Cuthon.
Now I behold the chiefs, in the pride of their former deeds! Their souls are
kindled at the battles of old; at the actions of other times. Their eyes are flames of fire.
They roll in search of the foes of the land. Their mighty hands are on their swords.
Lightning pours from their sides of steel. They come like streams from the mountains;
each rushes roaring from the hill. Bright are the chiefs of battle, in the armor of their
fathers. Gloomy and dark, their heroes follow like the gathering of the rainy clouds
behind the red meteors of heaven. The sounds of crashing arms ascend. The gray dogs
howl between. Unequal bursts the song of battle. Rocking Cromla echoes round. On
Lena's dusky heath they stand, like mist that shades the hills of autumn; when broken
and dark it settles high, and lifts its head to heaven.
"Hail," said Cuthullin, "Sons of the narrow vales! hail, hunters of the deer!
Another sport is drawing near: it is like the dark rolling of that wave on the coast! Or
shall we fight, ye sons of war! or yield green Erin to Lochlin? O Connal! speak, thou
first of men! thou breaker of the shields! thou hast often fought with Lochlin: wilt
thou lift thy father's spear?"
"Cuthullin!" calm the chief replied, "the spear of Connal is keen. it delights to
shine in battle, to mix with the blood of thousands. But though my hand is bent on
fight, my heart is for the peace of Erin. <1> Behold, thou first in Cormac's war, the
sable fleet of Swaran. His masts are many on our coasts, like reeds on the lake of
Lego. His ships are forests clothed with mists, when the trees yield by turns to the
squally wind. Many are his chiefs in battle. Connal is for peace! Fingal would shun
his arm, the first of mortal men! Fingal who scatters the mighty, as stormy winds the
echoing Cona; and night settles with all her clouds on the hill!"
JAMES MACPHERSON
-166-
"Fly, thou man of peace!" said Colmar, "fly," said the son of Matha; "go,
Connal, to thy silent hills, where the spear never brightens in war! Pursue the darkbrown deer of Cromla: stop with thine arrows the bounding roes of Lena. But blueeyed son of Semo, Cuthullin, ruler of the field, scatter thou the Sons of Lochlin! <2>
roar through the ranks of their pride. Let no vessel of the kingdom of snow bound on
the dark-rolling waves of Inistore. <3> Rise, ye dark winds of Erin, rise! roar,
whirlwinds of Lara of hinds! Amid the tempest let me die, torn, in a cloud, by angry
ghosts of men; amid the tempest let Calmar die, if ever chase was sport to him, so
much as the battle of shields!
"Calmar!" Connal slow replied, "I never fled, young son of Matha! I was swift
with my friends in fight; but small is the fame of Connal! The battle was won in my
presence! the valiant overcame! But, son of Semo, hear my voice, regard the ancient
throne of Cormac. Give wealth and half the land for peace, till Fingal shall arrive on
our coast. Or, if war be thy choice, I lift the sword and spear. My joy shall be in midst
of thousands; my soul shall alighten through the gloom of the fight!"
"To me," Cuthullin replies, "pleasant is the noise of arms! pleasant as the
thunder of heaven, before the shower of spring! But gather all the shining tribes, that I
may view the sons of war! Let then pass along the heath, bright as the sunshine before
a storm; when the west wind collects the clouds, and Morven echoes over all her
oaks! But where are my friends in battle? the supporters of my arm in danger? Where
art thou, white-bosomed Câthba? Where is that cloud in war, Duchômar? Hast thou
left me, O Fergus! in the day of the storm? Fergus, first in our joy at the feast! son of
Rossa! arm of death!
comest thou like a roe from Malmor? like a hart from thy echoing hills? Hall, thou son
of Rossa! what shades the soul of war?"
"Four stones," <4> replied the chief, "rise on the grave of Câthba. These hands
have laid in earth Duchômar, that cloud in war! Câthba, son of Torman! thou wert a
sunbeam in Erin. And thou, O valiant Duchômar! a mist of the marshy Lano; when it
moves on the plains of autumn, bearing the death of thousands along. Morna! fairest
of maids! calm is thy sleep in the cave of the rock! Thou hast fallen in darkness, like a
star, that shoots across the desert; when the traveller is alone, and mourns the transient
beam!"
"Say," said Semo's blue-eyed son, "say how fell the chiefs of Erin. Fell they by
the sons of Lochlin, striving in the battle of heroes? Or what confines the strong in
arms to the dark and narrow house?"
"Câthba," replied the hero, " fell by the sword of Duchômar at the oak of the
noisy streams. Duchômar came to Tura's cave; he spoke to the lovely Morna. 'Morna,
fairest among women, lovely daughter of strong-armed Cormac! Why in the circle of
stones: in the cave of the rock alone? The stream murmurs along. The old tree groans
in the wind. The lake is troubled before thee: dark are the clouds of the sky! But thou
art snow on the heath; thy hair is the mist of Cromla; when it curls on the hill, when it
shines to the beam of the west! Thy breasts are two smooth rocks seen from Branno of
streams. Thy arms, like two white pillars in the halls of the great Fingal.'
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 167 -
"'From whence,' the fair-haired maid replied, 'from whence Duchômar, most
gloomy of men? Dark are thy brows and terrible! Red are thy rolling eyes! Does
Swaran appear on the sea? What of the foe, Duchômar?' 'From the hill I return, O
Morna, from the hill of the dark-brown hinds. Three have I slain with my bended yew.
Three with my long-bounding dogs of the chase. Lovely daughter of Cormac, I love
thee as my soul: I have slain one stately deer for thee. High was his branchy head-and
fleet his feet of wind.' 'Duchômar!' calm the maid replied, 'I love thee not, thou
gloomy man! hard is thy heart of rock; dark is thy terrible brow. But Câthba, young
son of Torman, thou art the love of Morna. Thou art a sunbeam, in the day of the
gloomy storm. Sawest thou the son of Torman, lovely on the hill of his hinds? Here
the daughter of Cormac waits the coming of Câthba!"
"'Long shall Morna wait,' Duchômar said, 'long shall Morna wait for Câthba!
Behold this sword unsheathed! Here wanders the blood of Câthba. Long shall Morna
wait. He fell by the stream of Branno. On Croma I will raise his tomb, daughter of
blue-shielded Cormac! Turn on Duchômar thine eyes; his arm is strong as a storm.' 'Is
the son of Torman fallen?' said the wildly-bursting voice of the maid; 'is he fallen on
his echoing hills, the youth with the breast of snow? the first in the chase of hinds! the
foe of the strangers of ocean! Thou art dark <5> to me, Duchômar; cruel is thine arm
to Morna! Give me that sword, my foe! I loved the wandering blood of Câthba!'
"He gave the sword to her tears. She pierced his manly breast! He fell, like the
bank of a mountain stream, and stretching forth his hand, he spoke: 'Daughter of blueshielded Cormac! Thou hast slain me in youth! the sword is cold in my breast! Morna;
I feel it cold. Give me to Moina the maid. Duchômar was the dream of her night! She
will raise my tomb; the hunter shall raise my fame. But draw the sword from my
breast, Morna, the steel is cold!' She came, in all her tears she came; she drew the
sword from his breast. He pierced her white side! He spread her fair locks on the
ground! Her bursting blood sounds from her side: her white arm is stained with red.
Rolling in death she lay. The cave re-echoed to her sighs."
"Peace," said Cuthullin, "to the souls of the heroes! their deeds were great in
fight. Let them ride around me on clouds. Let them show their features of war. My
soul shall then be firm in danger; mine arm like the thunder of heaven! But be thou on
a moonbeam, O Morna! near the window of my rest; when my thoughts are of peace;
when the din of arms is past. Gather the strength of the tribes! Move to the wars of
Erin! Attend the car of my battles! Rejoice in the noise of my course! Place three
spears by my side: follow the bounding of my steeds! that my soul may be strong in
my friends, when battle darken around the beams of my steel!
As rushes a stream of foam from the dark shady deep of Cromla, when the
thunder is traveling above, and dark-brown night sits on half the hill. Through the
breaches of the tempest look forth the dim faces of ghosts. So fierce, so vast, so
terrible rushed on the sons of Erin. The chief, like a whale of ocean, whom all his
billows pursue, poured valor forth, as a stream, rolling his might along the shore. The
sons of Lochlin heard the noise, as the sound of a winter storm. Swaran struck his
bossy shield: he called the son of Arno. "What murmur rolls along the hill, like the
gathered flies of the eve? The sons of Erin descend, or rustling winds roar in the
distant wood! Such is the noise of Gormal, before the white tops of my waves arise. O
son of Arno! ascend the hill; view the dark face of the heath!"
JAMES MACPHERSON
-168-
He went. He trembling swift returned. His eyes rolled wildly round. His heart
beat high against his side. His words were faltering, broken, slow. "Arise, son of
ocean, arise, chief of the dark-brown shields! I see the dark, the mountain-stream of
battle! the deep. moving strength of the sons of Erin! the car of war comes on, like the
flame of death! the rapid car of Cuthullin, the noble son of Semo! It bends behind like
a wave near a rock; like a sun-streaked mist of the heath. Its sides are embossed with
stones, and sparkle like the sea round the boat of night. Of polished yew is its beam;
its seat of the smoothest bone. The sides are replenished with spears; the bottom is the
foot-stool of heroes! Before the right side of the car is seen the snorting horse! the
high-maned, broad-breasted, proud, wide-leaping strong steed of the hill. Loud and
resounding is his hoof: the spreading of his mane above is like a stream of smoke on a
ridge of rocks. Bright are the sides of his steed! his name Sulin-Sifadda!
"Before the left side of the car is seen the snorting horse! The thin-maned,
high-headed, strong-hoofed fleet-bounding son of the hill: His name is Dusronnal,
among the stormy sons of the sword! A thousand thongs bind the car on high. Hard
polished bits shine in wreath of foam. Thin thongs, bright studded with gems, bend on
the stately necks of the steeds. The steeds, that like wreaths of mist fly over the
streamy vales! The wildness of deer is in their course, the strength of eagles
descending on the prey. Their noise is like the blast of winter, on the sides of the
snow-headed Gormal.
"Within the car is seen the chief; the strong-armed son of the sword. The
hero's name is Cuthullin, son of Semo, king of shells. His red cheek is like my
polished yew. The look of his blue-rolling eye is wide, beneath the dark arch of his
brow. His hair flies from his head like a flame, as bending forward he wields the
spear. Fly, king of ocean, fly! He comes, like a storm along the streamy vale!
"When did I fly?" replied the king; " when fled Swaran from the battle of
spears? When did I shrink from danger, chief of the little soul? I met the storm of
Gormal when the foam of my waves beat high. I met the storm of the clouds; shall
Swaran fly from a hero? Were Fingal himself before me, my soul should not darken
with fear. Arise to battle, my thousands! pour round me like the echoing main, gather
round the bright steel of your king; strong as the rocks of my land; that meet the storm
with joys and stretch their dark pines to the wind!"
Like autumn's dark storms pouring from two echoing hills, towards each other
approached the heroes. Like two deep streams from high rocks meeting, mixing
roaring on the plain; loud, rough, and dark in battle meet Lochlin and Ins-fail. Chief
mixes his strokes with chief, and man with man: steel, clanging, sounds on steel.
Helmets are cleft on high. Blood bursts and smokes around. Strings murmur on the
polished yews. Darts rush along the sky. Spears fall like the circles of light, which
gild the face of night: as the noise of the troubled ocean, when roll the waves on high.
As the last peal of thunder in heaven, such is the din of war! Though Cormac's
hundred bards were there to give the fight to song; feeble was the voice of a hundred
bards to send the deaths to future times! For many were the deaths of heroes; wide
poured the blood of the brave!
Mourn, ye sons of song, mourn the death of the noble Sithállin. Let the sons of
Fiona rise, on the lone plains of her lovely Ardan. They fell, like two hinds of the
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 169 -
desert, by the hands of the mighty Swaran; when, in the midst of thousands, he roared
like the shrill spirit of a storm. He sits dim on the clouds of the north, and enjoys the
death of the mariner. Nor slept thy hand by thy side, chief of the isle of mist! <6>
Many were the deaths of thine arm, Cuthullin, thou son of Semo! His sword was like
the beam of heaven when it pierces the sons of the vale: when the people are blasted
and fall, and all the hills are burning around. Dusronnal snorted over the bodies of
heroes. Sifadda bathed his hoof in blood. The battle lay behind them, as groves
overturned on the desert of Cromla; when the blast has passed the heath, laden with
the spirits of night!
Weep on the rocks of roaring winds, O maid of Inistore! Bend thy fair head
over the waves, thou lovelier than the ghost of the hills, when it moves on the sunbeam, at noon, over the silence of Morven. He is fallen: thy youth is low! pale beneath
the sword of Cuthullin! No more shall valor raise thy love to match the blood of
kings. Trenar, graceful Trenar died, O maid of Inistore! His gray dogs are howling at
home: they see his passing ghost. His bow is in the hall unstrung. No sound is in the
hall of his hinds!
As roll a thousand waves to the rocks, so Swaran's host came on. As meets a
rock a thousand waves, so Erin met Swaran of spears. Death raises all his voices
around, and mixes with the sounds of shields. Each hero is a pillar of darkness; the
sword abeam of fire in his hand. The field echoes from wing to wing, as a hundred
hammers, that rise, by turns, on the red son of the furnace. Who are these on Lena's
heath, these so gloomy and dark? Who are these like two clouds, and their swords like
lightning. above them? The little hills are troubled around; the rocks tremble with all
their moss. Who is it but ocean's son and the car-borne chief of Erin? Many are the
anxious eyes of their friends, as they see them dim on the heath. But night conceals
the chiefs in clouds, and ends the dreadful fight!
It was on Cromla's shaggy side that Dorglas had placed the deer; the early
fortune of the chase, before the heroes left the hill. A hundred youths collect the
heath; ten warriors make the fire; three hundred choose the polished stones. The feast
is smoking wide! Cuthullin, chief of Erin's war, resumed his mighty soul. He stood
upon his beamy spear, and spoke to the son of songs; to Carril of other times, the
gray-headed son of Kinfena. "Is this feast spread for me alone, and the king of
Lochlin on Erin's shore, far from the deer of his hills, and sounding halls of his feasts?
Rise, Carril of other times, carry my words to Swaran. Tell him from the roaring of
waters, that Cuthullin gives his feast. Here let him listen to the sound of my groves,
amidst the clouds of night, for cold and bleak the blustering winds rush over the foam
of his seas. Here let him praise the trembling harp, and hear the songs of heroes!"
Old Carril went with softest voice. He called the king of dark-brown shields!
Rise, from the skins of thy chase; rise, Swaran, king of groves! Cuthullin gives the joy
of shells. Partake the feast of Erin's blue-eyed chief! He answered like the sullen
sound of Cromla before a storm. Though all thy daughters, Inis-fail, should stretch
their arms of snow, should raise the heavings of their breasts, softly roll their eyes of
love, yet fixed as Lochlin's thousand rocks here Swaran should remain, till morn, with
the young beams of the east, shall light me to the death of Cuthullin. Pleasant to my
ear is Lochlin's wind! It rushes over my seas! It speaks aloft in all my shrouds, and
brings my green forests to my mind: the green forests of Gormal, which often echoed
JAMES MACPHERSON
-170-
to my winds when my spear was red in the chase of the boar. Let dark Cuthullin yield
to me the ancient throne of Cormac, or Erin's torrents shall show from their hills the
red foam of the blood of his pride!
"Sad is the sound of Swaran's voice," said Carril other times! "Sad to himself
alone," said the blue-eyed son of Semo. "But, Carril, raise the voice on high; tell the
deeds of other times. Send thou the night away in song, and give the joy of grief. For
many heroes and maids of love have moved on Inis-fail, and lovely are the songs of
wo that are heard on Albion's rocks, when the noise of the chase is past, and the
streams of Cona <7> answer to the voice of Ossian.
"In other days," Carril replies, "came the sons of ocean to Erin; a thousand
vessels bounded on waves to Ullin's lovely plains. The sons of Inis-fail arose to meet
the race of dark-brown shields. Cairbar, first of men, was there, and Grudar, stately
youth! Long had they strove for the spotted bull that towed on Golbun's echoing
heath. Each claimed him as his own. Death was often at the point of their steel. Side
by side the heroes fought: the strangers of ocean fled. Whose name was fairer on the
hill than the name of Cairbar and Grudar? But, ah! why ever lowed the bull on
Golbun's echoing heath? they saw him leaping like snow. The wrath of the chiefs
returned.
"On Lubar's <8> grassy banks they fought; Grudar fell in his blood. Fierce Cairbar
came to the vale, where Brassolis, fairest of his sisters, all alone, raised the song of
grief. She sung of the actions of Grudar, the youth of her secret soul. She mourned
him in the field of blood, but still she hoped for his return. Her white bosom is seen
from her robe, as the moon from the clouds of night, when its edge heaves white on
the view from the darkness which covers its orb). Her voice was softer than the harp
to raise the song of grief. Her soul was fixed on Grudar. The secret look of her eye
was his. 'When shalt thou come in thine arms, thou mighty in the war?'
"'Take, Brassolis,' Cairbar came and said; 'take, Brassolis, this shield of blood.
Fix it on high within my hall, the armor of my foe!' Her soft heart beat against her
side. Distracted, pale, she flew. She found her youth in all his blood; she died on
Cromla's heath. Here rests their dust, Cuthullin! these lonely yews sprung from their
tombs, and shade them from the storm. Fair was Brassolis on the plain! Stately was
Grudar on the hill! The bard shall preserve their names, and send them down to future
times!"
"Pleasant is thy voice, O Carril," said the blue-eyed chief of Erin. Pleasant are
the words of other times. They are like the calm shower of spring, when the sun looks
on the field, and the light cloud flies over the hills. O strike the harp in praise of my
love, the lonely sunbeam of Dunscaith! Strike the harp in the praise of Bragéla, she
that I left in the isle of mist, the spouse of Semo's son! Dost thou raise thy fair face
from the rock to find the sails of Cuthullin? The sea is rolling distant far: its white
foam deceives thee for my sails. Retire, for it is night, my love; the dark winds sigh in
thy hair. Retire to the halls of my feasts, think of the times that are past. I will not
return till the storm of war is ceased. O Connal! speak of war and arms, and send her
from my mind. Lovely with her flowing hair is the white-bosomed daughter of
Sorglan."
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 171 -
Connal, slow to speak, replied, "Guard against the race of ocean. Send thy
troop of night abroad, and watch the strength of Swaran. Cuthullin, I am for peace till
the race of Selma come, till Fingal come, the first of men, and beam, like the sun on
our fields!" The hero struck the shield of alarms, the warriors of the night moved on.
The rest lay in the heath of the deer, and slept beneath the dusky wind. The ghosts
<9> of the lately dead were near, and swam on the gloomy clouds; and far distant in
the dark silence of Lena, the feeble voices of death were faintly heard.
<1> Erin, a name of Ireland; for "ear," or "iar," west, and "in", an island.
<2> Lochlin: The Gaelic name of a Scandinavian general.
<3> Inistore: The Orkney islands.
<4> This passage alludes to the manner of burial among the ancient Scots. They
opened a grave six or eight feet deep; the bottom was lined with fine clay; and on this
they laid the body of the deceased, and, if a warrior, his sword, and the heads of
twelve arrows by his side. Above they laid another stratum of clay, in which they
placed the horn of a deer, the symbol of hunting. The whole was covered with a fine
mould, and four stones placed on end to mark the extent of the grave. These are the
four stones alluded to here.
<5> Thou art dark to me: She alludes to his name the " dark man."
<6> The isle of mist: The isle of Sky; not improperly called the "isle of mist," as its
high hills, which catch the clouds from the Western Ocean, occasion almost continual
rains.
<7> The Cona here mentioned is the small river that runs through Glenco in
Argyleshire.
<8> Lubar, a river in Ulster; "Labhar," loud, noisy.
<9> It was long the opinion of the ancient Scots, that a ghost was heard shrieking near
the place where a death was to happen soon after.
JAMES MACPHERSON
-172-
FINGAL — BOOK II.
The ships, he cried, the ships of the lonely isles.
ARGUMENT.
The ghost of Crugal, one of the Irish heroes who was killed in battle, appearing to
Connal, foretells the defeat of Cuthullin in the next battle, and earnestly advises him
to make peace with Swaran. Connal communicates the vision; but Cuthullin is
inflexible; from a principle of honor he would not be the first to sue for peace, and he
resolved to continue the war. Morning comes; Swaran proposes dishonorable terms to
Cuthullin, which are rejected. The battle begins, and is obstinately fought for some
time, until, upon the flight of Grumal, the whole Irish army gave way. Cuthullin and
Connal cover their retreat. Carril leads them to a neighboring hill, whither they are
soon followed by Cuthullin himself; who descries the fleet of Fingal making towards
their coast; but night coming on, he lost sight of it again. Cuthullin, dejected after his
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 173 -
defeat, attributes his ill success to the death of Ferda, his friend, whom he had killed
some time before. Carril, to show that ill success did not always attend those who
innocently killed their friends, introduces the episode of Connal and Galvina.
Connal lay by the sound of the mountain-stream, beneath the aged tree. A
stone, with its moss, supported his head. Shrill, through the heath of Lena, he heard
the voice of night. At distance from the heroes he lay; the son of the sword feared no
foe! The hero beheld, in his rest, a dark-red stream of fire rushing down from the hill.
Crugal sat upon the beam, a chief who fell in fight. He fell by the hand of Swaran,
striving in the battle of heroes. His face is like the beam of the setting moon. His robes
are of the clouds of the hill. His eyes are two decaying flames.
Dark is the wound of his breast! "Crugal," said the mighty Connal, "son of
Dedgal famed on the hill of hinds! Why so pale and sad, thou breaker of shields?
Thou hast never been pale for fear! What disturbs the departed Crugal?" Dim, and in
tears he stood, and stretched his pale hand over the hero. Faintly he raised his feeble
voice, like the gale of the reedy Lego.
"My spirit, Connal, is on my hills; my course on the sands of Erin. Thou shalt
never talk with Crugal, nor find his lone steps in the heath. I am light as the blast of
Cromla. I move like the shadow of mist! Connal, son of Colgar, I see a cloud of death:
it hovers dark over the plains of Lena. The Sons of green Erin must fall. Remove from
the field of ghosts." Like the darkened moon he retired, in the midst of the whistling
blast. "Stay," said the mighty Connal " stay, my dark-red friend. Lay by that beam of
heaven, son of windy Cromla! What cave is thy lonely house? What green-headed hill
the place of thy repose? Shall we not hear thee in the storm? in the noise of the
mountain-stream? when the feeble Sons of the wind come forth, and, scarcely seen,
pass over the desert?"
The soft-voiced Connal rose, in the midst of his sounding arms. He struck his
shield above Cuthullin. The son of battle waked. "Why," said the ruler of the car,
"comes Connal through my night? My spear might turn against the sound, and
Cuthullin mourn the death of his friend. Speak, Connal; son of Colgar, speak; thy
counsel is the sun of heaven!" "Son of Semo!" replied the chief, "the ghost of Crugal
came from his cave. The stars dim twinkled through his form His voice was like the
sound of a distant stream He is a messenger of death! He speaks of the dark and
narrow house! Sue for peace, O chief of Erin!, or fly over the heath of Lena!"
"He spoke to Connal," replied the hero, "though stars dim twinkled through his
form. Son of Colgar, it was the wind that murmured across thy car. Or if it was the
form of Crugal, why didst thou not force him to my sight? Hast thou inquired where is
his cave? the house of that son of wind? My sword might find that voice, and force his
knowledge from Crugal. But small is his knowledge, Connal; he was here to-day. He
could not have gone beyond our hills! who could tell him there of our fall?" "Ghosts
JAMES MACPHERSON
-174-
fly on clouds, and ride on winds," said Connal's voice of wisdom. "They rest together
in their caves, and talk of mortal men."
"Then let them talk of mortal men; of every man but Erin's chief. Let me be
forgot in their cave. I will not fly from Swaran! If fall I must, my tomb shall rise
amidst the fame of future times. The hunter shall shed a tear on my stone: sorrow shall
dwell around the high-bosomed Bragéla. I fear not death; to fly I fear! Fingal has seen
me victorious! Thou dim phantom of the hill, show thyself to me! come on thy beam
of heaven, show me my death in thine hand! yet I will not fly, thou feeble son of the
wind! Go, son of Colgar, strike the shield. It hangs between the spears. Let my
warriors rise to the sound in the midst of the battles of Erin. Though Fingal delays his
coming with the race of his stormy isles, we shall fight; O Colgar's son, and die in the
battle of heroes!"
The sound spreads wide. The heroes rise, like the breaking of a blue-rolling
wave. They stood on the heath, like oaks with all their branches round them, when
they echo to the stream of frost, and their withered leaves are rustling to the wind!
High Cromla's head of clouds is gray. Morning trembles on the half-enlightened
ocean. The blue mist swims slowly by, and hides the Sons of Inis-fail!
"Rise ye," said the king of the dark-brown shields, "ye that came from
Lochlin's waves. The sons of Erin have fled from our arms; pursue them over the
plains of Lena! Morla, go to Cormac's hall. Bid them yield to Swaran, before his
people sink to the tomb, and silence spread over his isle." They rose, rustling like a
flock of sea-fowl, when the waves expel them from the shore. Their sound was like a
thousand streams, that meet in Cona's vale, when after a stormy night, they turn their
dark eddies beneath the pale light of the morn.
As the dark shades of autumn fly over the hills of grass, so gloomy, dark,
successive came the chiefs of Lochlin's echoing woods. Tall as the stag of Morven,
moved stately before them the king. His shining shield is on his side, like a flame on
the heath at night, when the world is silent and dark, and the traveller sees some
ghosts sporting in the beam! Dimly gleam the hills around, and show indistinctly their
oaks! A blast from the troubled ocean removed the settled mist. The Sons of Erin
appear, like a ridge of rocks on the coast; when mariners, on shores unknown, are
trembling at veering winds!
"Go, Morla, go," said the king of Lochlin, "offer peace to these. Offer the
terms we give to kings, when nations bow down to our swords. When the valiant are
dead in war; when virgins weep on the field!" Tall Morla came, the son of Swaran,
and stately strode the youth along! He spoke to Erin's blue-eyed chief, among the
lesser heroes. "Take Swaran's peace," the warrior spoke, "the peace he gives to kings
when nations bow to his sword. Leave Erin's streamy plains to us, and give thy spouse
and dog. Thy spouse, high-bosomed heaving fair! Thy dog that overtakes the wind!
Give these to prove the weakness of thine arm, live then beneath our power!"
"Tell Swaran, tell that heart of pride, Cuthullin never yields! I give him the
dark-rolling sea; I give his people graves in Erin. But never shall a stranger have the
pleasing sunbeam of my love. No deer shall fly on Lochlin's hills, before swift-footed
Luäth." "Vain ruler of the car," said Morla, " wilt thou then fight the king? the king
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 175 -
whose ships of many groves could carry off thine isle! So little is thy green-hilled Erin
to him who rules the stormy waves!" " In words I yield to many, Morla. My sword
shall yield to none. Erin shall own the sway of Cormac while Connal and Cuthullin
live! O Connal, first of mighty men, thou hearest the words of Morla. Shall thy
thoughts then be of peace, thou breaker of the shields? Spirit of fallen Crugal, Why
didst thou threaten us with death? The narrow house shall receive me in the midst of
the light of renown. Exalt, ye sons of Erin, exalt the spear and bend the bow; rush on
the foe in darkness, as the spirits of stormy nights!"
Then dismal, roaring fierce and deep, the gloom of battle poured along, as mist
that is rolled on a valley when storms invade the silent sunshine of heaven. Cuthullin
moves before me in arms, like an angry ghost before a cloud, when meteors enclose
him with fire; when the dark winds are in his hand. Carril, far on the heath, bids the
horn of battle sound. He raises the voice of song, and pours his soul into the minds of
the brave.
"Where," said the mouth of the song, "where is the fallen Crugal? He lies
forgot on earth; the hall of shells <1> is silent. Sad is the spouse of Crugal. She is a
stranger in the hall of her grief. But who is she that, like a sunbeam, flies before the
ranks of the foe? It is Degrena, lovely fair, the spouse of fallen Crugal. Her hair is on
the wind behind. Her eye is red; her voice is shrill. Pale, empty, is thy Crugal now!
His form is in the cave of the hill. He comes to the ear of rest; he raises his feeble
voice, like the humming of the mountain-bee, like the collected flies of the eve! But
Degrena falls like a cloud of the morn; the sword of Lochlin is in her side. Cairbar,
she is fallen, the rising thought of thy youth! She is fallen, O Cairbar! the thought of
thy youthful hours!"
Fierce Cairbar heard the mournful sound. He rushed along like ocean's whale.
He saw the death of his daughter: he roared in the midst of thousands. His spear met a
son of Lochlin! battle spreads from wing to wing! As a hundred winds in Lochlin's
groves, as fire in the pines of a hundred hills, so loud, so ruinous, so vast, the ranks of
men are hewn down. Cuthullin cut off heroes like thistles; Swaran wasted Erin.
Curach fell by his hand, Cairbar of the bossy shield! Morglan lies in lasting rest! Caolt trembles as he dies! His white breast is stained with blood! his yellow hair
stretched in the dust of his native land! He often had spread the feast where he fell. He
often there had raised the voice of the harp, when his dogs leapt round for joy, and the
youths of the chase prepared the bow!
Still Swaran advanced, as a stream that bursts from the desert. The little hills
are rolled in its course, the rocks are half-sunk by its side. But Cuthullin stood before
him, like a hill, that catches the clouds of heaven. The winds contend on its head of
pines, the hail rattles on its rocks. But, firm in its strength, it stands, and shades the
silent vale of Cona. So Cuthullin shaded the sons of Erin, and stood in the midst of
thousands. Blood rises like the fount of a rock from panting heroes around. But Erin
falls on either wing, like snow in the day of the sun.
O sons of Erin," said Grumal, "Lochlin conquers in the field. Why strive we as
reeds against the wind? Fly to the hill of dark-brown hinds." He fled like the stag of
Morven; his spear is a trembling beam of light behind him. Few fled with Grumal,
chief of the little soul: they fell in the battle of heroes on Lena's echoing heath. High
JAMES MACPHERSON
-176-
on his car of many gems the chief of Erin stood. He slew a mighty son of Lochlin, and
spoke in haste to Connal. "O Connal, first of mortal men, thou hast taught this arm of
death! Though Erin's Sons have fled, shall we not fight the foe? Carril, son of other
times, carry my friends to that bushy hill. Here, Connal, let us stand like rocks, and
save our flying friends."
Connal mounts the car of gems. They stretch their shields, like the darkened
moon, the daughter of the starry skies, when she moves a dun circle through heaven,
and dreadful change is expected by men. Sith-fadda panted up the hill, and Stronnal,
haughty steed. Like waves behind a whale, behind them rushed the foe. Now on the
rising side of Cromla stood Erin's few sad sons: like a grove through which the flame
had rushed, hurried on by the winds of the stormy night; distant, withered, dark, they
stand, with not a leaf to shake in the vale.
Cuthullin stood beside an oak. He rolled his red eye in silence, and heard the
wind in his bushy hair; the scout of ocean came, Moran the son of Fithil "The ships,"
he cried, "the ships of the lonely isles. Fingal comes, the first of men, the breaker of
the shields! The waves foam before his black prows! His masts with sails are like
groves in clouds!" — "Blow," said Cuthullin, "blow, ye winds that rush along my isle
of mist. Come to the death of thousands, O king of resounding Selma! Thy sails, my
friend, are to me the clouds of the morning; thy ships the light of heaven; and thou
thyself a pillar of fire that beams on the world by night. O Connal, first of men, how
pleasing in grief are our friends! But the night is gathering around. Where now are the
ships of Fingal? Here let us pass the hours of darkness; here wish for the moon of
heaven."
The winds came down on the woods. The torrents rush from the rocks. Rain
gathers round the head of Cromla. The red stars tremble between the flying clouds.
Sad, by the side of a stream, whose sound is echoed by a tree, sad by the side of a
stream the chief of Erin sits. Connal, son of Colgar, is there, and Carril of other times.
"Unhappy is the hand of Cuthullin," said the son of Semo, "unhappy is the hand of
Cuthullin since he slew his friend! Ferda, son of Damman, I loved thee as myself!"
"How, Cuthullin, son of Semo, how fell the breaker of the shields? Well I
remember," said Connal, "the son of the noble Damman. Tall and fair, he was like the
rainbow of heaven. Ferda from Albion came, the chief of a hundred hills. In Muri's
<2> hall he learned the sword, and won the friendship of Cuthullin. We moved to the
chase together: one was our bed in the heath."
Deugala was the spouse of Cairbar, chief of the plains of Ullin. She was
covered with the light of beauty, but her heart was the house of pride. She loved that
sunbeam of youth, the son of the noble Damman. "Cairbar," said the white-armed
Deugala, "give me half of the herd. No more I will remain in your halls. Divide the
herd, dark Cairbar!" "Let Cuthullin," said Cairbar, "divide my herd on the hill.
His breast is the seat of justice. Depart, thou light of beauty!" I went and
divided the herd. One snow-white bull remained. I gave that bull to Cairbar. The
wrath of Deugala rose!
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 177 -
"Son of Damman," began the fair, "Cuthullin hath pained my soul. I must hear
of his death, or Lubar's stream shall roll over me. My pale ghost shall wander near
thee, and mourn the wound of my pride. Pour out the blood of Cuthullin, or pierce this
heaving breast." "Deugala," said the fair-haired youth, "how shall I slay the son of
Semo? He is the friend of my secret thoughts. Shall I then lift the sword?" She wept
three days before the chief; on the fourth he said he would fight. "I will fight my
friend, Deugala, but may I fall by his sword! Could I wander on the hill alone? Could
I behold the grave of Cuthullin?" We fought on the plain of Mori. Our swords avoid a
wound. They slide on the helmets of steel, or sound on the slippery shields. Deugala
was near with a smile, and said to the son of Damman: "Thine arm is feeble, sunbeam
of youth! Thy years are not strong for steel. Yield to the son of Semo. He is a rock on
Malmor."
The tear is in the eye of youth. He faltering said to me: "Cuthullin, raise thy
bossy shield. Defend thee from the hand of thy friend. My soul is laden with grief, for
I must slay the chief of men." I sighed as the wind in the cleft of a rock. I lifted high
the edge of my steel. The sunbeam of battle fell: the first of Cuthullin's friends!
Unhappy is the hand of Cuthullin since the hero fell!"
""Mournful is thy tale, son of the car," said Carril of other times. "It sends my
soul back to the ages of old, to the days of other years. Often have I heard of Comal,
who slew the friend he loved; yet victory attended his steel: the battle was consumed
in his presence!"
Comal was the son of Albion, the chief of a hundred hills! His deer drunk of a
thousand streams. A thousand rocks replied to the voice of his dogs. His face was the
mildness of youth; his hand the death of heroes. One was his love, and fair was she,
the daughter of the mighty Conloch. She appeared like a sunbeam among women. Her
hair was the wing of the raven. Her dogs were taught to the chase. Her bowstring
sounded on the winds. Her soul was fixed on Comal. Often met their eyes of love.
Their course in the chase was one. Happy were their words in secret. But Grumal
loved the maid, the dark chief of the gloomy Ardven. He watched her lone steps in the
heath, the foe of unhappy Comal.
One day, tired of the chase, when the mist had concealed their friends, Comal
and the daughter of Conloch met in the cave of Ronan. It was the wonted haunt of
Comal. Its sides were hung with his arms. A hundred shields of thongs were there; a
hundred helms of sounding steel. "Rest here," he said, "my love, Galbina: thou light
of the cave of Ronan! A deer appears on Mora's brow. I go; but I will soon return." "I
fear," she said, "dark Grumal, my foe: he haunts the cave of Ronan! I will rest among
the arms; but soon return, my love!"
He went to the deer of Mora. The daughter of Conloch would try his love. She
clothed her fair sides with his armor: she strode from the cave of Ronan! he thought it
was his foe. His heart beat high. His color changed, and darkness dimmed his eyes.
He drew the bow. The arrow flew. Galbina fell in blood! He run with wildness in his
steps: he called the daughter of Conloch. No answer in the lonely rock. Where art
thou, O my love? He saw at length her heaving heart, beating around the arrow he
threw. "O Conloch's daughter! is it thou?" He sunk upon her breast! The hunters
found the hapless pair! He afterward walked the hill. But many and silent were his
JAMES MACPHERSON
-178-
steps round the dark dwelling of his love. The fleet of the ocean came. He fought; the
strangers fled. He searched for death along the field. But who could slay the mighty
Coma!? He threw away his dark-brown shield. An arrow found his manly breast. He
sleeps with his loved Galbina at the noise of the sounding surge! Their green tombs
are seen by the mariner, when he bounds on the waves of the north.
<1> The ancient Scots, well as the present Highlanders, drunk in shells; hence it is,
that we so often meet in the old poetry with "chief of shells," and "the hall of shells."
<2> Muri: A place in Ulster.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 179 -
FINGAL — BOOK III
ARGUMENT.<1>
Cuthullin, pleased with the story of Carril, insists with that bard for more of his songs.
He relates the actions of Fingal in Lochlin, and death of Agandecca, the beautiful
sister of Swaran. He had scarce finished, when Calmar, the son of Matha, who had
advised the first battle, came wounded from the field, and told them of Swaran's
design to surprise the remains of the Irish army. He himself proposes to withstand
singly the whole force of the enemy, in a narrow pass, till the Irish should make good
their retreat. Cuthullin, touched with the gallant proposal of Calmar, resolves to
accompany him and orders Carril to carry off the few that remained of the Irish.
Morning comes, Calmar dies of his wounds; and the ships of the Caledonians
appearing, Swaran gives over the pursuit of the Irish, and returns to oppose Fingal's
landing. Cuthullin, ashamed, after his defeat, to appear before Fingal re tires to the
cave of Tura. Fingal engages the enemy, puts them to flight: but the coming on of
night makes the victory not decisive. The king, who had observed the gallant behavior
of his grandson Oscar, gives him advice concerning his conduct in peace and war. He
recommends to him to place the example of his fathers before his eyes, as the best
model for his conduct; which introduces the episode concerning Fainasóllis, the
daughter of the king of Craca, whom Fingal had taken under his protection in his
youth. Fillan and Oscar are despatched to observe the motions of the enemy by night:
Gaul, the son of Morni, desires the command of the army in the next battle, which
Fingal promises to give him. Some general reflections of the poet close the third day.
"PLEASANT are the words of the song! "said Cuthullin, "lovely the tales of
other times! They are like the calm dew of the morning on the hill of roes! when the
sun is faint on its side, and the lake is settled and blue on the vale. O Carril, raise
again thy voice! let me hear the song of Selma: which was sung in my halls of joy,
when Fingal, king of shields, was there, and glowed at the deeds of his fathers.
"Fingal! thou dweller of battle," said Carril, "early were thy deeds in arms.
Lochlin was consumed in thy wrath, when thy youth strove in the beauty of maids.
They smiled at the fair-blooming face of the hero; but death was in his hands. He was
strong as the waters of Lora. His followers were the roar of a thousand streams. They
took the king of Lochlin in war; they restored him to his ship. His big heart swelled
with pride; the death of the youth was dark in his soul. For none ever but Fingal, had
overcome the strength of the mighty Starno. He sat in the hall of his shells in
Lochlin's woody land. He called the gray-haired Snivan, that often sung round the
circle of Loda; when the stone of power heard his voice <2>, and battle turned in the
field of the valiant!
JAMES MACPHERSON
-180-
"'Go, gray-haired Snivan,' Starno said: 'go to Ardven's sea-surrounded rocks.
Tell to the king of Selma; he the fairest among his thousands; tell him I give to him
my daughter, the loveliest maid that ever heaved a breast of snow. Her arms are white
as the foam of my waves. Her soul is generous and mild. Let him come with his
bravest heroes to the daughter of the secret hall!' Snivan came to Selma's hall: fairhaired Fingal attended his steps. His kindled soul flew to the maid, as he bounded on
the waves of the north. 'Welcome,' said the dark-brown Starno, 'welcome, king of
rocky Morven! welcome his heroes of might, sons of the distant isle! Three days
within thy halls shall we feast; three days pursue my boars; that your fame may reach
the maid who dwells in the secret hall.'
"Starno designed their death. He gave the feast of shells. Fingal, who doubted
the foe, kept on his arms of steel. The sons of death were afraid: they fled from the
eyes of the king. The voice of sprightly mirth arose. The trembling harps of joy were
strung. Bards sung the battles of heroes; they sung the heaving breast of love. Ullin,
Fingal's bard, was there: the sweet voice of resounding Cona. He praised the daughter
of Lochlin; and Morven's <3> high-descended chief. The daughter of Lochlin
overheard. She left the hall of her secret sigh! She came in all her beauty, like the
moon from the cloud of the east. Loveliness was round her as light. Her steps were the
music of songs. She saw the youth and loved him. He was the stolen sigh of her soul.
Her blue eyes rolled on him in secret: she blessed the chief of resounding Morven.
"The third day, with all its beams, shone bright on the wood of boars. Forth
moved the dark-browed Starno; and Fingal, king of shields. Half the day they spent in
the chase; the spear of Selma was red in blood. It was then the daughter of Starno,
with blue eyes rolling in tears; it was then she came with her voice of love, and spoke
to the king of Morven. 'Fingal, high-descended chief, trust not Starno's heart of pride.
Within that wood he has placed his chiefs. Beware of the wood of death. But
remember, son of the isle, remember Agandecca; save me from the wrath of my
father, king of the windy Morven!'
"The youth with unconcern went on; his heroes by his side. The sons of death
fell by his hand; and Germal echoed around! Before the halls of Starno the sons of the
chase convened. The king's dark brows were like clouds; his eyes like meteors of
night. 'Bring hither,' he said, 'Agandecca to her lovely king of Morven! His hand is
stained with the blood of my people; her words have not been in vain!' She came with
the red eye of tears. She came with loosely flowing locks. Her white breast heaved
with broken sighs, like the foam of the streamy Lubar. Starno pierced her side with
steel. She fell, like a wreath of snow, which slides from the rocks of Ronan, when the
woods are still, and echo deepens in the vale! Then Fingal eyed his valiant chiefs: his
valiant chiefs took arms! The gloom of battle roared: Lochlin fled or died. Pale in his
bounding ship he closed the maid of the softest soul. Her tomb ascends on Ardven;
the sea roars round her narrow dwelling."
"Blessed be her soul," said Cuthullin; "blessed be the mouth of the song!
Strong was the youth of Fingal; strong is his arm of age. Lochlin shall fall again
before the king of echoing Morven. Show thy face from a cloud, O moon! light his
white sails on the wave: and if any strong spirit of heaven sits on that low-hung cloud;
turn his dark ships from the rock, thou rider of the storm!"
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 181 -
Such were the words of Cuthullin at the sound of the mountain stream; when
Calmar ascended the hill, the wounded son of Matha. From the field he came in his
blood. He leaned on his bending spear. Feeble is the arm of battle! but strong the soul
of the hero! "Welcome! O son of Matha," said Connal, "welcome art thou to thy
friends! Why bursts that broken sigh from the breast of him who never feared
before?" "And never, Connal, will he fear, chief of the pointed steel! My soul
brightens in danger; in the noise of arms I am of the race of battle. My fathers never
feared.
"Cormar was the first of my race. He sported through the storms of waves. His
black skiff bounded on ocean; he travelled on the wings of the wind. A spirit once
embroiled the night. Seas swell and rocks resound. Winds drive along the clouds. The
lightning flies on wings of fire. He feared, and came to land, then blushed that he
feared at all. He rushed again among the waves, to find the son of the wind. Three
youths guide the bounding bark: he stood with sword unsheathed. When the low-hung
vapor passed, he took it by the curling head. He searched its dark womb with his steel.
The son of the wind forsook the air. The moon and the stars returned! Such was the
boldness of my race. Calmar is like his fathers. Danger flies from the lifted sword.
They best succeed who dare!
"But now, ye sons of green Erin, retire from Lena's bloody heath. Collect the
sad remnant of our friends, and join the sword of Fingal. I heard the sound of
Lochlin's advancing arms: Calmar will remain and fight. My voice shall be such, my
friends, as if thousands were behind me. But, son of Semo, remember me. Remember
Calmar's lifeless corse. When Fingal shall have wasted the field, place me by some
stone of remembrance, that future times may hear my fame; that the mother of Calmar
may rejoice in my renown."
"No: son of Matha," said Cuthullin, "I will never leave thee here. My joy is in
an unequal fight: my soul increases in danger. Connal, and Carril of other times, carry
off the sad sons of Erin. When the battle is over, search for us in this narrow way. For
near this oak we shall fall, in the streams of the battle of thousands! O Fithal's son,
with flying speed rush over the heath of Lena. Tell to Fingal that Erin is fallen. Bid
the king of Morven come. O let him come like the sun in a storm, to lighten, to restore
the isle!"
Morning is gray on Cromla. The sons of the sea ascend. Calmar stood forth to
meet them in the pride of his kindling soul. But pale was the face of the chief. He
leaned on his father's spear. That spear which he brought from Lara, when the soul of
his mother was sad; the soul of the lonely Alcletha, waning in the sorrow of years. But
slowly now the hero falls, like a tree on the plain. Dark Cuthullin stands alone like a
rock in a sandy vale. The sea comes with its waves, and roars on its hardened sides.
Its head is covered with foam; the hills are echoing round.
Now from the gray mist of the ocean the white-sailed ships of Fingal appear.
High is the grove of their masts, as they nod, by turns, on the rolling wave. Swaran
saw them from the hill. He returned from the sons of Erin. As ebbs the resounding
sea, through the hundred isles of Inistore; so loud, so vast, so immense, returned the
sons of Lochlin against the king. But bending, weeping, sad, and slow, and dragging
his long spear behind, Cuthullin sunk in Cromla's wood, and mourned his fallen
JAMES MACPHERSON
-182-
friends. He feared the face of Fingal, who was wont to greet him from the fields of
renown!
"How many lie there of my heroes! the chiefs of Erin's race! they that were
cheerful in the hall, when the sound of the shells arose! No more shall I find their
steps in the heath! No more shall I hear their voice in the chase. Pale, silent, low on
bloody beds, are they who were my friends! O spirits of the lately dead, meet
Cuthullin on his heath! Speak to him on the winds, when the rustling tree of Tura's
cave resounds. There, far remote, I shall lie unknown. No bard shall hear of me. No
gray stone shall rise to my renown. Mourn me with the dead, O Bragéla! departed is
my fame." Such were the words of Cuthullin, when he sunk in the woods of Cromla!
Fingal, tall in his ship, stretched his bright lance before him. Terrible was the
gleam of his steel: It was like the green meteor of death, setting in the heath of
Malmor, when the traveller is alone, and the broad moon is darkened in heaven.
"The battle is past," said the king. "I behold the blood of my friends. Sad is the
heath of Lena! mournful the oaks of Cromla! The hunters have fallen in their strength:
the son of Semo is no more! Ryno and Fillan, my sons, sound the horn of Fingal!
Ascend that hill on the shore; call the children of the foe. Call them from the grave of
Lamderg, the chief of other times. Be your voice like that of your father, when he
enters the battles of his strength! I wait for the mighty stranger. I wait on Lena's shore
for Swaran. Let him come with all his race; strong in battle are the friends of the
dead!"
Fair Ryno as lightning gleamed along: dark Fillan rushed like the shade of
autumn. On Lena's heath their voice is heard. The sons of ocean heard the horn of
Fingal. As the roaring eddy of ocean returning from the kingdom of snows: so strong,
so dark, so sudden, came down the sons of Lochlin. The king in their front appears, in
the dismal pride of his arms! Wrath burns on his dark-brown face; his eyes roll in the
fire of his valor. Fingal beheld the son of Starno: he remembered Agandecca. For
Swaran with tears of youth had mourned his white-bosomed sister. He sent Ullin of
songs to bid him to the feast of shells: for pleasant on Fingal's soul returned the
memory of the first of his loves!
Ullin came with aged steps, and spoke to Starno's son. "O thou that dwellest
afar, surrounded, like a rock, with thy waves! come to the feast of the king, and pass
the day in rest. To-morrow let us fight, O Swaran, and break the echoing shields." —
"To-day," said Starno's wrathful son, "we break the echoing shields: to-morrow my
feast shall be spread; but Fingal shall lie on earth." — "To-morrow let his feast be
spread," said Fingal, with a smile. "To-day, O my sons! we shall break the echoing
shields. Ossian, stand thou near my arm. Gaul, lift thy terrible sword. Fergus, bend thy
crooked yew. Throw, Fillan, thy lance through heaven. Lift your shields, like the
darkened moon. Be your spears the meteors of death. Follow me in the path of my
fame. Equal my deeds in battle."
As a hundred winds on Morven; as the streams of a hundred hills; as clouds fly
successive over heaven; as the dark ocean assails the shore of the desert: so roaring,
so vast, so terrible, the armies mixed on Lena's echoing heath. The groans of the
people spread over the hills: it was like the thunder of night, when the cloud bursts on
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 183 -
Cona; and a thousand ghosts shriek at once on the hollow wind. Fingal rushed on in
his strength, terrible as the spirit of Trenmor; when in a whirlwind he comes to
Morven, to see the children of his pride. The oaks resound on their mountains, and the
rocks fall down before him. Dimly seen as lightens the night, he strides largely from
hill to hill. Bloody was the hand of my father, when he whirled the gleam of his
sword. He remembers the battles of his youth. The field is wasted in its course!
Ryno went on like a pillar of fire. Dark is the brow of Gaul. Fergus rushed
forward with feet of wind; Fillin like the mist of the hill. Ossian, like a rock, came
down. I exulted in the strength of the king. Many were the deaths of my arm! dismal
the gleam of my sword! My locks were not then so gray; nor trembled my hands with
age. My eyes were not closed in darkness; my feet failed not in the race!
Who can relate the deaths of the people? who the deeds of mighty heroes?
when Fingal, burning in his wrath, consumed the sons of Lochlin? Groans swelled on
groans from hill to hill, till night had covered all. Pale, staring like a herd of deer, the
sons of Lochlin convene on Lena. We sat and heard the sprightly harp, at Lubar's
gentle stream. Fingal himself was next to the foe. He listened to the tales of his bards.
His godlike race were in the song, the chiefs of other times. Attentive, leaning on his
shield, the king of Morven sat. The wind whistled through his locks; his thoughts are
of the days of other years. Near him, on his bending spear, my young, my valiant
Oscar stood. He admired the king of Morven: his deeds were swelling in his soul.
"Son of my son," began the king, "O Oscar, pride of youth: I saw the shining
of the sword. I gloried in my race. Pursue the fame of our fathers; be thou what they
have been, when Trenmor lived, the first of men, and Trathal, the father of heroes!
They fought the battle in their youth. They are the song of bards. O Oscar! bend the
strong in arm; but spare the feeble hand. Be thou a stream of many tides against the
foes of thy people; but like the gale, that moves the grass. to those who ask thine aid.
So Trenmor lived; such Trathal was; and such has Fingal been. My arm was the
support of the injured; the weak rested behind the lightning of my steel.
"Oscar! I was young, like thee, when lovely Fainasóllis came: that sunbeam!
that mild light of love! the daughter of Craca's <4> king. I then returned from Cona's
heath, and few were in my train. A white-sailed boat appeared far off; we saw it like a
mist that rode on ocean's wind. It soon approached. We saw the fair. Her white breast
heaved with sighs. The wind was in her loose dark hair; her rosy cheek had tears.
'Daughter of beauty,' calm I said, 'what sigh is in thy breast? Can I, young as I am,
defend thee, daughter of the sea? My sword is not unmatched in war, but dauntless is
my heart."
"'To thee I fly,' with sighs she said, 'O prince of mighty men! To thee I fly,
chief of the generous shells, supporter of the feeble hand! The king of Craca's echoing
isle owned me the sunbeam of his race. Cromla's hills have heard the sighs of love for
unhappy Fainasóllis! Sora's chief beheld me fair; he loved the daughter of Craca. His
sword is a beam of light upon the warrior's side. But dark is his brow; and tempests
are in his soul. I shun him on the roaring sea; but Sora's chief pursues.'
"'Rest thou,' I said, 'behind my shield! rest in peace, thou beam of light! The
gloomy chief of Sora will fly, if Fingal's arm is like his soul. In some lone cave I
JAMES MACPHERSON
-184-
might conceal thee, daughter of the sea. But Fingal never flies. Where the danger
threatens, I rejoice in the storm of spears.' I saw the tears upon her cheek. I pitied
Craca's fair. Now, like a dreadful wave afar, appeared the ship of stormy Borbar. His
masts high-bended over the sea behind their sheets of snow. White roll the waters on
either side. The strength of ocean sounds. 'Come thou,' I said, 'from the roar of ocean,
thou rider of the storm. Partake the feast within my hall. It is the house of strangers.'
"The maid stood trembling by my side. He drew the bow. She fell. 'Unerring is
thy hand,' I said, 'but feeble was the foe.' We fought, nor weak the strife of death. He
sunk beneath my sword. We laid them in two tombs of stone; the hapless lovers of
youth! Such have I been, in my youth, O Oscar! be thou like the age of Fingal. Never
search thou for battle; nor shun it when it comes.
"Fillan and Oscar of the dark-brown hair! ye that are swift in the race fly over
the heath in my presence. View the sons of Lochlin. Far off I hear the noise of their
feet, like distant sounds in woods. Go: that they may not fly from my sword, along the
waves of the north. For many chiefs of Erin's race lie here on the dark bed of death.
The children of war are low; the sons of echoing Cromla."
The heroes flew like two dark clouds: two dark clouds that are the chariots of
ghosts; when air's dark children come forth to frighten hapless men. It was then that
Gaul, the son of Morni, stood like a rock in night. His spear is glittering to the stars;
his voice like many streams.
"Son of battle," cried the chief, "O Fingal, king of shells! let the bards of many
songs soothe Erin's friends to rest. Fingal, sheath thou thy sword of death; and let thy
people fight. We wither away without our fame; our king is the only breaker of
shields! When morning rises on our hills, behold at a distance our deeds. Let Lochlin
feel the sword of Morni's son; that bards may sing of me. Such was the custom
heretofore of Fingal's noble race. Such was thine own, thou king of swords, in battles
of the spear."
O son of Morni," Fingal replied, "I glory in thy fame. Fight; but my spear shall
be near, to aid thee in the midst of danger. Raise, raise the voice, ye sons of song, and
lull me into rest. Here will Fingal lie, amidst the wind of night. And if thou,
Agandecca, art near, among the children of thy land; if thou sittest on a blast of wind,
among the high-shrouded masts of Lochlin; come to my dreams, my fair one! Show
thy bright face to my soul ."
Many a voice and many a harp, in tuneful sounds arose. Of Fingal noble deeds
they sung; of Fingal's noble race: and sometimes, on the lovely sound was heard the
name of Ossian. I often fought, and often won in battles of the spear. But blind, and
tearful, and forlorn, I walk with little men! O Fingal, with thy race of war I now
behold thee not. The wild roes feed on the green tomb of the mighty king of Morven!
Blest be thy soul, thou king of swords, thou most renowned on the hills of Cona!
<1> The second night, since the opening of the poem, continues; and Cuthullin,
Connal, and Carril, still sit in the place described in the preceding book.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 185 -
<2> This passage most certainly alludes to the religion of Lochlin, and "the stone of
power," here mentioned, is the image of one of the deities of Scandinavia.
<3> All the Northwest coast of Scotland probably went, of old under the name of
Morven, which signifies a ridge of very high hills
<4> What the Craca here mentioned was, it is not, at this distance of time, easy to
determine. The most probable opinion is, that it was one of the Shetland Isles.
JAMES MACPHERSON
-186-
FINGAL — BOOK IV.
ARGUMENT.
The action of the poem being suspended by night, Ossian takes the opportunity to
relate his own actions at the lake of Lego, and his courtship of Everallin, who was the
mother of Oscar, and had died some time before the expedition of Fingal into Ireland.
Her ghost appears to him, and tells him that Oscar, who had been sent, the beginning
of the night, to observe the enemy, was engaged with an advanced party, and almost
overpowered. Ossian relieves his son; and an alarm is given to Fingal of the approach
of Swaran. The king rises, calls his army together, and, as he had promised the
preceding night, devolves the command on Gaul the son of Morni, while he himself,
after charging his sons to behave gallantly and defend his people, retires to a hill, from
whence he could have a view of the battle. The battle joins; the poet relates Oscar's
great actions. But when Oscar, in conjunction with his father, conquered in one wing,
Gaul, who was attacked by Swaran in person, was on the point of retreating in the
other. Fingal sends Ullin his bard to encourage them with a war song, but
notwithstanding Swaran prevails; and Gaul and his army are obliged to give way.
Fingal descending from the hill, rallies them again; Swaran desists from the pursuit,
possesses himself of a rising ground, restores the ranks, and waits the approach of
Fingal. The king, having encouraged his men, gives the necessary orders, and renews
the battle. Cuthullin, who, with his friend Connal, and Carril his bard, had retired to
the cave of Tura, hearing the noise, came to the brow of the hill, which overlooked the
field of battle, where he saw Fingal engaged with the enemy. He, being hindered by
Connal from joining Fingal, who was himself upon the point of obtaining a complete
victory, sends Carril to congratulate that hero on success.
Who comes with her songs from the hill, like the bow of the showery Lena? It
is the maid of the voice of love: the white-armed daughter of Toscar! Often hast thou
heard my song; often given the tear of beauty. Hast thou come to the wars of thy
people? to hear the actions of Oscar? When shall I cease to mourn, by the streams of
resounding Cona? My years have passed away in battle. My age is darkened with
grief!
"Daughter of the hand of snow, I was not so mournful and blind; I was not so
dark and forlorn, when Everallin loved me! Everallin with the dark-brown hair, the
white-bosomed daughter of Branno. A thousand heroes sought the maid, she refused
her love to a thousand. The sons of the sword were despised: for graceful in her eyes
was Ossian. I went, in suit of the maid, to Lego's sable surge. Twelve of my people
were there, the sons of streamy Morven! We came to Branno, friend of strangers!
Branno of the sounding mail! 'From whence,' he said, 'are the arms of steel? Not easy
to win is the maid, who has denied the blue-eyed sons of Erin. But blest be thou, O
son of Fingal! Happy is the maid that waits thee! Though twelve daughters of beauty
were mine, thine were the choice, thou son of fame!'
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 187 -
"He opened the hall of the maid, the dark-haired Everallin. Joy kindled in our
manly breasts. We blest the maid of Branno. Above us on the hill appeared the people
of stately Cormac. Eight were the heroes of the chief. The heath flamed wide with
their arms. There Colla; there Durra of wounds; there mighty Toscar, and Tago; there
Fresta the victorious stood; Dairo of the happy deeds; Dala the battle's bulwark in the
narrow way! The sword flamed in the hand of Cormac. Graceful was the look of the
hero! Eight were the heroes of Ossian. Ullin, stormy son of war. Mullo of the
generous deeds. The noble, the graceful Scelacha. Oglan, and Cerdan the wrathful.
Dumariccan's brows of death. And why should Ogar be the last; so wide-renowned on
the hills of Ardven?
"Ogar met Dala the strong face to face, on the field of heroes. The battle of the
chiefs was like wind, on ocean's foamy waves. The dagger is remembered by Ogar;
the weapon which he loved. Nine times he drowned it in Dala's side. The stormy
battle turned. Three times I broke on Cormac's shield: three times he broke his spear.
But, unhappy youth of love! I cut his head away. Five times I shook it by the lock.
The friends of Cormac fled. Whoever would have told me, lovely maid, when then I
strove in battle, that blind, forsaken, and forlorn, I now should pass the night; firm
ought his mail to have been; unmatched his arm in war."
On Lena's gloomy heath the voice of music died away. The inconstant blast
blew hard. The high oak shook its leaves around. Of Everallin were my thoughts,
when in all the light of beauty she came; her blue eyes rolling in tears. She stood on a
cloud before my sight, and spoke with feeble voice! "Rise, Ossian, rise, and save my
son; save Oscar, prince of men. Near the red oak of Luba's stream he fights with
Lochlin's sons." She sunk into her cloud again. I covered me with steel. My spear
supported my steps; my rattling armor rung. I hummed, as I was wont in danger, the
songs of heroes of old. Like distant thunder Lochlin heard. They fled; my son
pursued.
I called him like a distant stream. "Oscar, return over Lena. No further pursue
the foe," I said, "though Ossian is behind thee." He came! and pleasant to my ear was
Oscar's sounding steel. "Why didst thou stop my hand," he said, "till death had
covered all? For dark and dreadful by the stream they met thy son and Fillin. They
watched the terrors of the night. Our swords have conquered some. But as the winds
of night pour the ocean over the white sands of Mora, so dark advance the sons of
Lochlin, over Lena's rustling heat! The ghosts of night shriek afar: I have seen the
meteors of death. Let me awake the king of Morven, he that smiles in danger! He that
is like the sun of heaven, rising in a storm!"
Fingal had started from a dream, and leaned on Trenmor's shield! the darkbrown shield of his fathers, which they had lifted of old in war. The hero had seen, in
his rest, the mournful form of Agandecca. She came from the way of the ocean. She
slowly, lonely, moved over Lena. Her face was pale, like the mist of Cromla. Dark
were the tears of her cheek. She often raised her dim hand from her robe, her robe
which was of the clouds of the desert: she raised her dim hand over Fingal, and turned
away silent eyes! "Why weeps the daughter of Starno?" said Fingal with a sigh; "why
is thy face so pale, fair wanderer of the clouds?" She departed on the wind of Lena.
She left him in the midst of the night. She mourned the sons of her people, that were
to fall by the hand of Fingal.
JAMES MACPHERSON
-188-
The hero started from rest. Still he beheld her in his soul. The sound of Oscar's
steps approached. The king saw the gray shield on his side: for the faint beam of the
morning came over the waters of Ullin. "What do the foes in their fear?" said the
rising king of Morven: "or fly they through ocean's foam, or wait they the battle of
steel? But why should Fingal ask? I hear their voice on the early wind! Fly over
Lena's heath: O Oscar, awake our friends!"
The king stood by the stone of Lubar. Thrice he reared his terrible voice. The
deer started from the fountains of Cromla. The rocks shook, on all their hills. Like the
noise of a hundred mountain-streams, that burst, and roar, and foam! like the clouds,
that gather to a tempest on the blue face of the sky! so met the sons of the desert,
round the terrible voice of Fingal. Pleasant was the voice of the king of Morven to the
warriors of his land. Often had he led them to battle; often returned with the spoils of
the foe.
"Come to battle," said the king, "ye children of echoing Selma! Come to the
death of thousands! Comhal's son will see the fight. My sword shall wave on the hill,
the defence of my people in war. But never may you need it, warriors; while the son
of Morni fights, the chief of mighty men! He shall lead my battle, that his fame may
rise in song! O ye ghosts of heroes dead! ye riders of the storm of Cromla! receive my
falling people with joy, and bear them to your hills. And may the blast of Lena carry
them over my seas, that they may come to my silent dreams, and delight my soul in
rest. Fillan and Oscar of the dark-brown hair! fair Ryno, with the pointed steel!
advance with valor to the fight. Behold the son of Morni! Let your swords be like his
in strife: behold the deeds of his hands. Protect the friends of your father. Remember
the chiefs of old. My children, I will see you yet, though here you should fall in Erin.
Soon shall our cold pale ghosts meet in a cloud, on Cona's eddying winds."
Now like a dark and stormy cloud, edged round with the red lightning of
heaven, flying westward from the morning's beam, the king of Selma removed.
Terrible is the light of his armor; two spears are in his hand. His gray hair falls on the
wind. He often looks back on the war. Three bards attend the son of fame, to bear his
words to the chiefs high on Cromla's side he sat, waving the Lightning of his sword,
and as he waved we moved.
Joy rises in Oscar's face. His cheek is red. His eye sheds tears. The sword is a
beam of fire in his hand. He came, and smiling, spoke to Ossian. "O ruler of the fight
of steel! my father, hear thy son! Retire with Morven's mighty chief. Give me the
fame of Ossian. If here I fall, O chief, remember that breast of snow, the lonely
sunbeam of my love, the white-handed daughter of Toscar! For, with red cheek from
the rock, bending over the stream, her soft hair flies about her bosom, as she pours the
sigh for Oscar. Tell her I am on my hills, a lightly-bounding son of the wind; tell her,
that in a cloud I may meet the lovely maid of Toscar." "Raise, Oscar, rather raise my
tomb. I will not yield the war to thee. The first and bloodiest in the strife, my arm
shall teach thee how to fight. But remember, my son, to place this sword, this bow, the
horn of my deer, within that dark and narrow house, whose mark is one gray stone!
Oscar, I have no love to leave to the care of my son. Everallin is no more, the lovely
daughter of Branno!"
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 189 -
Such were our words, when Gaul's loud voice came growing on the wind. He
waved on high the sword of his father. We rushed to death and wounds. As waves,
white bubbling over the deep, come swelling, roaring on; as rocks of ooze meet
roaring waves; so foes attacked and fought. Man met with man, and steel with steel.
Shields sound and warriors fall. As a hundred hammers on the red son of the furnace,
so rose, so rung their swords!
Gaul rushed on, like a whirlwind in Ardven. The destruction of heroes is on
his sword. Swaran was like the fire of the desert in the echoing heath of Gormal! How
can I give to the song the death of many spears? My sword rose high, and flamed in
the strife of blood. Oscar, terrible wert thou, my best, my greatest son! I rejoiced in
my secret soul, when his sword flamed over the slain. They fled amain through Lena's
heath. We pursued and slew. As stones that bound from rock to rock; as axes in
echoing woods; as thunder rolls from hill to hill, in dismal broken peals; so blow
succeeded to blow, and death to death, from the hand of Oscar and mine.
But Swaran closed round Morni's son, as the strength of the tide of Inistore.
The king half rose from his hill at the sight. He half-assumed the spear. "Go, Ullin,
go, my aged bard," began the king of Morven. "Remind the mighty Gaul of war.
Remind him of his fathers. Support the yielding fight with song; for song enlivens
war." Tall Ullin went, with step of age, and spoke to the king of swords. "Son of the
chief of generous steeds! high-bounding king of spears! Strong arm in every perilous
toil! Hard heart that never yields! Chief of the pointed arms of death! Cut down the
foe; let no white sail bound round dark Inistore. Be thine arm like thunder, thine eyes
like fire, thy heart of solid rock. Whirl round thy sword as a meteor at night: lift thy
shield like the flame of death. Son of the chief of generous steeds, cut down the foe!
Destroy!" The hero's heart beat high. But Swaran came with battle. He cleft the shield
of Gaul in twain. The sons of Selma fled.
Fingal at once arose in arms. Thrice he reared his dreadful voice. Cromla
answered around. The sons of the desert stood still. They bent their blushing faces to
earth, ashamed at the presence of the king. He came like a cloud of rain in the day of
the sun, when slow it rolls on the hill, and fields expect the shower. Silence attends its
slow progress aloft; but the tempest is soon to rise. Swaran beheld the terrible king of
Morven. He stopped in the midst of his course. Dark he leaned on his spear, rolling
his red eyes around. Silent and tall he seemed as an oak on the banks of Lubar, which
had its branches blasted of old by the lightning of heaven. It bends over the stream:
the gray moss whistles in the wind: so stood the king. Then slowly he retired to the
rising heath of Lena. His thousands pour round the hero. Darkness gathers on the hill!
Fingal, like a beam of heaven, shone in the midst of his people. His heroes
gather around him. He sends forth the voice of his power. "Raise my standards on
high; spread them on Lena's wind, like the flames of a hundred hills! Let them sound
on the wind of Erin, and remind us of the fight. Ye sons of the roaring streams, that
pour from a thousand hills be near the king of Morven! attend to the words of his
power! Gaul, strongest arm of death! O Oscar, of the future fights! Connal, son of the
blue shields of Sora! Dermid, of the dark-brown hair! Ossian, king of many songs, be
near your father's arm!" We reared the sunbeam <1> of battle; the standard of the
king! Each hero exulted with joy, as, waving, it flew on the wind. It was studded with
JAMES MACPHERSON
-190-
gold above, as the blue wide shell of the nightly sky. Each hero had his standard too,
and each his gloomy men!
"Behold," said the king of generous shells, "how Lochlin divides on Lena!
They stand like broken clouds on a hill, or a half-consumed grove of oaks, when we
see the sky through its branches, and the meteor passing behind! Let every chief
among the friends of Fingal take a dark troop of those that frown so high: nor let a son
of the echoing groves bound on the waves of Inistore!"
"Mine," said Gaul, "be the seven chiefs that came from Lano's lake." "Let
Inistore's dark king," said Oscar, "come to the sword of Ossian's son." "To mine the
king of Iniscon," said Connal, heart of steel!" Or Mudan's chief or I," said brownhaired Dermid, "shall sleep on clay-cold earth." My choice, though now so weak and
dark, was Terman's battling king; I promised with my hand to win the hero's darkbrown shield, "Blest and victorious be my chiefs," said Fingal of the mildest look.
"Swaran, king of roaring waves, thou art the choice of Fingal!"
Now, like a hundred different winds that pour through many vales, divided,
dark the sons of Selma advanced. Cromla echoed around! How can I relate the deaths,
when we closed in the strife of arms? O, daughter of Toscar, bloody were our hands!
The gloomy ranks of Lochlin fell like the banks of roaring Cona! Our arms were
victorious on Lena: each chief fulfilled his promise. Beside the murmur of Branno
thou didst often sit, O maid! thy white bosom rose frequent, like the down of the swan
when slow she swims on the lake, and sidelong winds blow on her ruffled wing. Thou
hast seen the sun retire, red and slow behind his cloud: night gathering round on the
mountain, while the unfrequent blast roared in the narrow vales. At length the rain
beats hard: thunder rolls in peals. Lightning glances on the rocks! Spirits ride on
beams of fire! The strength of the mountain streams comes roaring down the hills.
Such was the noise of battle, maid of the arms of snow! Why. daughter of Toscar,
why that tear? The maids of Lochlin have cause to weep! The people of their country
fell. Bloody were the blue swords of the race of my heroes! But I am sad, forlorn, and
blind: no more the corn ion of heroes! Give, lovely maid to me thy tears. I have seen
the tombs of all my friends!
It was then, by Fingal's hand, a hero fell, to his grief! Gray-haired he rolled in
the dust. He lifted his faint eyes to the king. "And is it by me thou hast fallen," said
the son of Comhal, "thou friend of Agandecca? I have seen thy tears for the maid of
my love in the halls of the bloody Starno! Thou hast been the foe of the foes of my
love, and hast thou fallen by my hand? Raise Ullin, raise the grave of Mathon, and
give his name to Agandecca's song. Dear to my soul hast thou been, thou darklydwelling maid of Ardven!"
Cuthullin, from the cave of Cromla, heard the noise of the troubled war. He
called to Connal, chief of swords: to Carril of other times. The gray-haired heroes
heard his voice. They took their pointed spears. They came, and saw the tide of battle,
like ocean's crowded waves, when the dark wind blows from the deep, and rolls the
billows through the sandy vale! Cuthullin kindled at the sight. Darkness gathered on
his brow. His hand is on the sword of his fathers: his red-rolling eyes on the foe. He
thrice attempted to rush to battle. He thrice was stopped by Connal. "Chief of the isle
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 191 -
of mist," he said, "Fingal subdues the foe. Seek not a part of the fame of the king;
himself is like the storm!"
"Then, Carril, go," replied the chief, "go greet the king of Morven. When
Lochlin falls away like a stream after rain; when the noise of the battle is past; then be
thy voice sweet in his ear to praise the king of Selma! Give him the sword of Caithbat.
Cuthullin is not worthy to lift the arms of his fathers! Come, o ye ghosts of the lonely
Cromla! ye souls of chiefs that are no more! be near the steps of Cuthullin; talk to him
in the cave of his grief. Never more shall I be renowned among the mighty in the land.
I am a beam that has shone; a mist that has fled away when the blast of the morning
came, and brightened the shaggy side of the hill. Connal, talk of arms no more!
departed is my fame. My sighs shall be on Cromla's wind, till my footsteps cease to be
seen. And thou, white-bosomed Bragéla! mourn over the fall of my fame: vanquished,
I will never return to thee, thou sunbeam of my soul!"
<1> Fingal's standard was distinguished by the name of "sunbeam", probably on
account of its bright colour, and its being studded with gold. To begin a battle is
expressed, in old composition, by "lifting of the sunbeam."
JAMES MACPHERSON
-192-
FINGAL — BOOK V.
ARGUMENT.
Cuthullin and Connal still remain on the hill. Fingal and Swaran meet: the combat is
described. Swaran is overcome, bound, and delivered over as a prisoner to the care of
Ossian, and Gaul, the son of Morni; Fingal, his younger sons and Oscar still pursue
the enemy. The episode of Orla, a chief of Lochlin, who was mortally wounded in the
battle, is introduced. Fingal, touched with the death of Orla, orders the pursuit to be
discontinued; and calling his sons together, he is informed that Ryno, the youngest of
them, was slain. He laments his death, hears the story of Lamderg and Gelchossa, and
returns towards the place where he had left Swaran. Carril, who had been sent by
Cuthullin to congratulate Fingal on his victory, comes in the mean time to Ossian. The
conversation of the two poets closes the action of the fourth day.
On Cromla's resounding side Connal spoke to the chief of the noble car. Why
that gloom, son of Semo? Our friends are the mighty in fight. Renowned art thou, O
warrior! many were the deaths of thy steel. Often has Bragéla met, with blue-rolling
eyes of joy: often has she met her hero returning in the midst of the valiant, when his
sword was red with slaughter, when his foes were silent in the fields of the tomb.
Pleasant to her ears were thy bards, when thy deeds, arose in song.
But behold the king of Morven! He moves, below, like a pillar of fire. His
strength is like the stream of Lubar, or the wind of the echoing Cromla, when the
branchy forests of night are torn from all their rocks. Happy are thy people, O Fingal!
thine arm shall finish their wars. Thou art the first in their dangers: the wisest in the
days of their peace. Thou speakest, and thy thousands obey: armies tremble at the
sound of thy steel. Happy are thy people, O Fingal! king of resounding Selma. Who is
that so dark and terrible coming in the thunder of his course? who but Starno's son, to
meet the king of Morven? Behold the battle of the chiefs! it is the storm of the ocean,
when two spirits meet far distant, and contend for the rolling of waves. The hunter
hears the noise on his bill. He sees the high billows advancing to Ardven's shore.
Such were the words of Connal when the heroes met in fight. There was the
clang of arms! there every blow, like the hundred hammers of the furnace! Terrible is
the battle of the kings; dreadful the look of their eyes. Their dark-brown shields are
cleft in twain. Their steel flies, broken, from their helms. They fling their weapons
down. Each rushes to his hero's grasp; their sinewy arms bend round each other: they
turn from side to side, and strain and stretch their large-spreading limbs below. But
when the pride of their strength arose they shook the hill with their heels. Rocks
tumble from their places on high; the green-headed bushes are overturned. At length
the strength of Swaran fell; the king of the groves is bound. Thus have I seen on
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 193 -
Cona; but Cona I behold no more! thus have I seen two dark hills removed from their
place by the strength of their bursting stream. They turn from side to side in their fall;
their tall oaks meet one another on high. Then they tumble together with all their
rocks and trees. The streams are turned by their side. The red ruin is seen afar.
"Sons of distant Morven, "said Fingal, "guard the king of Lochlin. He is strong as his
thousand waves. His hand is taught to war. His race is of the times of old. Gaul, thou
first of my heroes; Ossian, king of songs attend. He is the friend of Agandecca; raise
to joy his grief. But Oscar, Fillan, and Ryno, ye children of the race, pursue Lochlin
over Lena, that no vessel may hereafter bound on the dark-rolling waves of Inistore."
They flew sudden across the heath. He slowly moved, like a cloud of thunder,
when the sultry plain of summer is silent and dark. His sword is before him as a
sunbeam; terrible as the streaming meteor of night. He came towards a chief of
Lochlin. He spoke to the son of the wave. — "Who is that so dark and sad, at the rock
of the roaring stream? He cannot bound over its course. How stately is the chief! His
bossy shield is on his side; his spear like the tree f the desert. Youth of the dark-red
hair, art thou of the foes of Fingal?"
"I am a son of Lochlin," he cries; "strong is my arm in war. My spouse is
weeping at home. Orla shall never return!" "Or fights or yields the hero?" said Fingal
of the noble deeds; "foes do not conquer in my presence: my friends are renowned in
the hall. Son of the wave, follow me: partake the feast of my shells: pursue the deer of
my desert: be thou the friend of Fingal." "No," said the hero: "I assist the feeble. My
strength is with the weak in arms. My sword has been always unmatched, O warrior!
let the king of Morven yield!" "I never yielded, Orla. Fingal never yielded to man.
Draw thy sword, and choose thy foe. Many are my heroes!"
"Does then the king refuse the fight?" said Orla of the dark-brown shield.
"Fingal is a match for Orla; and he alone of all his race! But, king of Morven, if I shall
fall, as one time the warrior must die; raise my tomb in the midst: let it be the greatest
on Lena. Send over the dark-blue wave, the sword of Orla to the spouse of his love,
that she may show it to her son, with tears to kindle his soul to war." "Son of the
mournful tale," said Fingal, "why dost thou awaken my tears! One day the warriors
must die, and the children see their useless arms in the hall. But, Orla, thy tomb shall
rise. Thy white-bosomed spouse shall weep over thy sword."
They fought on the heath of Lena. Feeble was the arm of Orla. The sword of
Fingal descended, and cleft his shield in twain. It fell and glittered on the ground, as
the moon on the ruffled stream. "King of Morven," said the hero, "lift thy sword and
pierce my breast. Wounded and faint from battle, my friends have left me here. The
mournful tale shall come to my love on the banks of the streamy Lota, when she is
alone in the wood, and the rustling blast in the leaves!"
"No," said the king of Morven: "I will never wound thee, Orla. On the banks
of Lota let her see thee, escaped from the hands of war. Let thy gray-haired father,
who, perhaps, is blind with age, let him hear the sound of thy voice, and brighten
within his hall. With joy let the hero rise, and search for the son with his hands!" "But
never will he find him, Fingal," said the youth of the streamy Lota: "on Lena's heath I
JAMES MACPHERSON
-194-
must die: foreign bards shall talk of me. My broad belt covers my wound of death. I
give it to the wind!"
The dark blood poured from his side; he fell pale on the heath of Lena. Fingal
bent over him as he died, and. called his younger chiefs. "Oscar and Fillan, my sons,
raise high the memory of Orla. Here let the dark-haired hero rest, far from the spouse
of his love. Here let him rest in his narrow house, far from the sound of Lota. The
feeble will find his bow at home, but will not be able to bend it. His faithful dogs
howl on his hills; his boars which he used to pursue, rejoice. Fallen is the arm of
battle! the mighty among the valiant is low! Exalt the voice, and blow the horn, ye
sons of the king of Morven! Let us go back to Swaran, to send the night away in song.
Fillan, Oscar, and Ryno, fly over the heath of Lena. Where, Ryno, art thou, young son
of fame? thou art not wont to be the last to answer thy father's voice!"
"Ryno," said Ullin, first of bards, "is with the awful forms of his fathers. With
Trathal, king of shields; with Trenmor of mighty deeds. The youth is low, the youth is
pale, he lies on Lena's heath!" "Fell the swiftest of the race," said the king, "the first to
bend the bow? Thou scarce hast been known to me! Why did young Ryno fall? But
sleep thou softly on Lena; Fingal shall soon behold thee. Soon shall my voice be
heard no more, and my footsteps cease to be seen. The bards will tell of Fingal's
name. The stones will talk of me. But, Ryno, thou art low, indeed: thou hast not
received thy fame. Ullin, strike the harp for Ryno; tell what the chief would have
been. Farewell, thou first in every field. No more shall I direct thy dart. Thou that hast
been so fair! I behold thee not. Farewell." The tear is on the cheek of the king, for
terrible was his son in war. His son that was like a beam of fire by night on a hill,
when the forests sink down in its course, and the traveller trembles at the sound. But
the winds drive it beyond the steep. It sinks from sight, and darkness prevails.
"Whose fame is in that dark-green tomb?" began the king of generous shells:
"four stones with their heads of moss stand there. They mark the narrow house of
death. Near it let Ryno rest. A neighbor to the brave let him lie. Some chief of fame is
here, to fly with my son on clouds. O Ullin! raise the songs of old. Awake their
memory in their tomb. If in the field they never fled, my son shall rest by their side.
He shall rest, far distant from Morven, on Lena's resounding plains."
"Here," said the bard of song, "here rest the first of heroes. Silent is Lamderg
in this place, dumb is Ullin, king of swords. And who, soft smiling from her cloud,
shows me her face of love? Why, daughter, why so pale art thou, first of the maids of
Cromla? Dost thou sleep with the foes in battle, white-bosomed daughter of Tuathal?
Thou hast been the love of thousands, but Lamderg was thy love. He came to Tura's
mossy towers, and striking his dark buckler, spoke: 'Where is Gelchossa, my love, the
daughter of the noble Tuathal? I left her in the hall of Tura, when I fought with the
great Ulfada. Return soon, O Lamderg! she said, for here I sit in grief. Her white
breast rose with sighs. Her cheek was wet with tears. But I see her not coming to meet
me to soothe my soul after war. Silent is the hull of my joy. I near not the voice of the
bard. Bran does not shake his chains at the gate, glad at the coming of Lamderg.
Where is Gelchossa, my love, the mild daughter of generous Tuathal?'
"'Lamderg,' says Ferchios, son of Aidon, 'Gelchossa moves stately on Cromla.
She and the maids of the bow pursue the flying deer!' 'Ferchios!' replied the chief of
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 195 -
Cromla, 'no noise meets the ear of Lamderg! No sound is in the woods of Lena. No
deer fly in my sight. No panting dog pursues. I see not Gelchossa, my love, fair as the
full moon setting on the hills.. Go, Ferchios, go to Allad, the gray-haired son of the
rock. His dwelling is in the circle of stones He may know of the bright Gelchossa!'
"The son of Aidon went. He spoke to the ear of age. 'Allad, dweller of rocks,
thou that tremblest alone, what saw thine eyes of age?' 'I saw,' answered Allad the old,
'Ullin the son of Cairbar. He came, in darkness, from Cromla. He hummed a surly
song, like a blast in a leafless wood. He entered the hall of Tura. "Lamderg," he said,
"most dreadful of men, fight or yield to Ullin." "Lamderg," replied Gelchossa, "the
son of battle is not here. He fights Ulfada, mighty chief. He is not here, thou first of
men! But Lamderg never yields. He will fight the son of Cairbar!" "Lovely thou," said
terrible Ullin, "daughter of the generous Tuathal. I carry thee to Cairbar's halls. The
valiant shall have Gelchossa. Three days I remain on Cromla, to wait that son of
battle, Lamderg. On the fourth Gelchossa is mine, if the mighty Lamderg flies."'
"'Allad,' said the chief of Cromla, 'peace to thy dreams in the cave! Ferchios,
sound the horn of Lamderg, that Ullin may hear in his halls.' Lamderg, like a roaring
storm ascended the hill from Tura. He hummed a surly song as he went, like the noise
of a falling stream. He darkly stood upon the hill, like a cloud varying its form to the
wind. He rolled a stone, the sign of war. Ullin heard in Cairbar's hall. The hero heard,
with joy, his foe. He took his father's spear. A smile brightens his dark-brown cheek,
as he places his sword by his side. The dagger glittered in his hand, he whistled as he
went.
"Gelchossa saw the silent chief, as a wreath of mist ascending the hill. She
struck her white and heaving breast; and silent, tearful, feared for Lamderg. 'Cairbar,
hoary chief of shells,' said the maid of the tender hand, 'I must bend the bow on
Cromla. I see the dark-brown hinds.' She hasted up the hill. In vain the gloomy heroes
fought. Why should I tell to Selma's king how wrathful heroes fight? Fierce Ullin fell.
Young Lamderg came, all pale, to the daughter of generous Tuathal! 'What blood, my
love;' she trembling said, 'what blood runs down my warrior's side?' ' It is Ullin's
blood,' the chief replied, 'thou fairer than the snow! Gelchossa, let me rest here a little
while.' The mighty Lamderg died! 'And sleepest thou so soon on earth, O chief of
shady Tura?' Three days she mourned beside her love. The hunters found her cold.
They raised this tomb above the three. Thy son, O king of Morven, may rest here with
heroes!"
"And here my son shall rest," said Fingal. "The voice of their fame is in mine
ears. Fillan and Fergus, bring hither Orla, the pale youth of the stream of Lota! not
unequalled shall Ryno lie in earth, when Orla is by his side. Weep, ye daughters of
Morven! ye maids of the streamy Lota, weep! Like a tree they grew on the hills. They
have fallen like the oak of the desert, when it lies across a stream, and withers in the
wind. Oscar, chief of every youth, thou seest how they have fallen. Be thou like them
on earth renowned. Like them the song of bards. Terrible were their forms in battle;
but calm was Ryno in the days of peace. He was like the bow of the shower seen far
distant on the stream, when the sun is setting on Mora, when silence dwells on the hill
of deer. Rest, youngest of my sons! rest, O Ryno! on Lena. We too shall be no more.
Warriors one day must fall!"
JAMES MACPHERSON
-196-
Such was thy grief, thou king of swords, when Ryno lay on earth. What must
the grief of Ossian be, for thou thyself art gone! I hear not thy distant voice on Cona.
My eyes perceive thee not. Often forlorn and dark I sit at thy tomb, and feel it with
my hands. When I think I hear thy voice, it is but the passing blast. Fingal has long
since fallen asleep, the ruler of the war!
Then Gaul and Ossian sat with Swaran, on the soft green banks of Lubar. I
touched the harp to please the king; but gloomy was his brow. He rolled his red eyes
towards Lena. The hero mourned his host. I raised mine eyes to Cromla's brow. I saw
the son of generous Semo. Sad and slow he retired from his hilt, towards the lonely
cave of Tura. He saw Fingal victorious, and mixed his joy with grief. The sun is bright
on his armor. Connal slowly strode behind. They sunk behind the hill, like two pillars
of the fire of night, when winds pursue them over the mountain, and the flaming death
resounds! Beside a stream of roaring foam his cave is in a rock. One tree bends above
it. The rushing winds echo against its sides. Here rests the chief of Erin, the son of
generous Semo. His thoughts are on the battles he lost. The tear is on his cheek. He
mourned the departure of his fame, that fled like the mist of Cona. O Bragéla! thou art
too far remote to cheer the soul of the hero. But let him see thy bright form in his
mind, that his thoughts may return to the lonely sunbeam of his love!
Who comes with the locks of age? It is the son of songs. "Hail, Carril of other
times! Thy voice is like the harp in the halls of Tura. Thy words are pleasant as the
shower which falls on the sunny field. Carril of the times of old, why comest thou
from the son of the generous Semo?"
"Ossian, king of swords," replied the bard, "thou best canst raise the song.
Long hast thou been known to Carril, thou ruler of war! Often have I touched the harp
to lovely Everallin. Thou too hast often joined my voice in Branno's hall of generous
shells. And often, amidst our voices, was heard the mildest Everallin. One day she
sung of Cormac's fall, the youth who died for her love. I saw the tears on her cheek,
and on thine, thou chief of men. Her soul was touched for the unhappy, though she
loved him not. How fair among a thousand maids was the daughter of generous
Branno!"
Bring not, Carril," I replied, "bring not her memory to my mind. My soul must
melt at the remembrance. My eyes must have their tears. Pale in the earth is she, the
softly-blushing fair of my love! But sit thou on the heath, O bard! and let us hear thy
voice. It is pleasant as the gale of spring, that sighs on the hunter's ear, when he
awakens from dreams of joy, and has heard the music of the spirits of the hill!"
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 197 -
FINGAL — BOOK VI.
ARGUMENT.
Night comes on. Fingal gives a feast to his army, at which Swaran is present. The king
commands Ullin his bard to give "the song of peace;" a custom always observed at the
end of a war. Ullin relates the actions of Trenmor, great-grandfather to Fingal, in
Scandinavia, and his marriage with Inibaca, the daughter of a king of Lochlin, who
was ancestor to Swaran; which consideration, together with his being brother to
Agandecca, with whom Fingal was in love in his youth, induced the king to release
him, and permit him to return with the remains of his army into Lochlin, upon his
promise of never returning to Ireland in a hostile manner. The night is spent in settling
Swaran's departure, in songs of bards, and in a conversation in which the story of
Grumal is introduced by Fingal. Morning comes. Swaran departs. Fingal goes on a
hunting party, and finding Cuthullin in the cave of Tura, comforts him, and sets sail
the next day for Scotland, which concludes the poem.
THE clouds of night came rolling down. Darkness rests on the steeps of
Cromla. The stars of the north arise over the rolling of Erin's waves; they show their
heads of fire through the flying mist of heaven. A distant wind roars in the wood.
Silent and dark is the plain of death! Still on the dusky Lena arose in my ears the
voice of Carril. He sung of the friends of our youth; the days of former years; when
we met on the banks of Lego; when we sent round the joy of the shell. Cromla
answered to his voice. The ghosts of those he sung came in their rustling winds. They
were seen to bend with joy, towards the sound of their praise!
Be thy soul blest, O Carril! in the midst of thy eddying winds. O that thou
wouldst come to my hall, when I am alone by night! And thou dost come, my friend. I
hear often thy light hand on my harp, when it hangs on the distant wall, and the feeble
sound touches my ear. Why dost thou not speak to me in my grief: and tell when I
shall behold my friends? But thou passest away in thy murmuring blast; the wind
whistles through the gray hair of Ossian!
Now, on the side of Mora, the heroes gathered to the feast. A thousand aged
oaks are burning to the wind. The strength of the shell goes round. The souls of
warriors brighten with joy. But the king of Lochlin is silent. Sorrow reddens in the
eyes of his pride. He often turned towards Lena. He remembered that he fell. Fingal
leaned on the shield of his fathers. His gray locks slowly waved on the wind, and
glittered to the beam of night. He saw the grief of Swaran, and spoke to the first of
bards.
JAMES MACPHERSON
-198-
"Raise, Ullin, raise the song of peace. O soothe my soul from war! Let mine
ear forget, in the sound, the dismal noise of arms. Let a hundred harps be near to
gladden the king of Lochlin. He must depart from us with joy. None ever went sad
from Fingal. Oscar! the lightning of my sword is against the strong in fight. Peaceful
it lies by my side when warriors yield in war."
"Trenmor," said the mouth of songs, "lived in the days of other years. He
bounded over the waves of the north; companion of the storm! The high reeks of the
land of Lochlin, its groves of murmuring sounds, appeared to the hero through mist;
he bound his white. bosomed sails. Trenmor pursued the boar that roared through the
woods of Gormal. Many had fled from its presence; but it rolled in death on the spear
of Trenmor. Three chiefs, who beheld the deed, told of the mighty stranger. They told
that he stood, like a pillar of fire, in the bright arms of his valor. The king of Lochlin
prepared the feast. He called the blooming Trenmor. Three days he feasted at
Gormal's windy towers, and received his choice in the combat. The land of Lochlin
had no hero that yielded not to Trenmor. The shell of joy went round with songs in
praise of the king of Morven. He that came over the waves, the first of mighty men.
"Now when the fourth gray morn arose, the hero launched his ship. He walked
along the silent shore, and called for the rushing wind; for loud and distant he heard
the blast murmuring behind the groves. Covered over with arms of steel, a son of the
woody Gormal appeared. Red was his cheek, and fair his hair. His skin was like the
snow of Morven. Mild rolled his blue and smiling eye, when he spoke to the king of
swords.
"'Stay, Trenmor, stay, thou first of men; thou hast not conquered Lonval's son.
My sword has often met the brave. The wise shun the strength of my bow.' 'Thou fairhaired youth,' Trenmor replied, 'I will not fight with Lonval's son. Thine arm is feeble,
sunbeam of youth! Retire to Gormal's dark-brown hinds.' 'But I will retire,' replied the
youth, 'with the sword of Trenmor; and exult in the sound of my fame. The virgins
shall gather with smiles around him who conquered mighty Trenmor. They shall sigh
with the sighs of love, and admire the length of thy spear: when I shall carry it among
thousands; when I lift the glittering point to the sun.'
"'Thou shalt never carry my spear,' said the angry king of Morven. 'Thy
mother shall find thee pale on the shore; and looking over the dark-blue deep, see the
sails of him that slew her son!' 'I will not lift the spear,' replied the youth, 'my arm is
not strong with years. But with the feathered dart I have learned to pierce a distant
foe. Throw down that heavy mail of steel. Trenmor is covered from death. I first will
lay my mail on earth. Throw now thy dart, thou king of Morven!' He saw the heaving
of her breast. It was the sister of the king. She had seen him in the hall: and loved his
face of youth. The spear dropt from the hand of Trenmor: he bent his red cheek to the
ground. She was to him a beam of light that meets the sons of the cave; when they
revisit the fields of the sun, and bend their aching eyes!
"'Chief of the windy Morven,' began the maid of the arms of snow, 'let me rest
in thy bounding ship, far from the love of Corlo. For he, like the thunder of the desert,
is terrible to Inibaca. He loves me in the gloom of pride. He shakes ten thousand
spears!' — ' Rest thou in peace,' said the mighty Trenmor, 'rest behind the shield of
my fathers. I will not fly from the chief, though he shakes ten thousand spears.' Three
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 199 -
days he waited on the shore. He sent his horn abroad. He called Corlo to battle, from
all his echoing hills. But Corlo came not to battle. The king of Lochlin descends from
his hall. He feasted on the roaring shore. He gave the maid to Trenmor!"
"King of Lochlin," said Fingal, "thy blood flows in the veins of thy foe. Our
fathers met in battle, because they loved the strife of spears. But often did they feast in
the hall, and send round the joy of the shell. Let thy thee brighten with gladness, and
thine ear delight in the harp. Dreadful as the storm of thine ocean, thou hast poured
thy valor forth; thy voice has been like the voice of thousands when they engage in
war. Raise, to-morrow, raise thy white sails to the wind, thou brother of Agandecca!
Bright as the beam of noon, she comes on my mournful soul. I have seen thy tears for
the fair one. I spared thee in the halls of Starno; when my sword was red with
slaughter: when my eye was full of tears for the maid. Or dost thou choose the fight?
The combat which thy fathers gave to Trenmor is thine! that thou mayest depart
renowned, like the sun setting in the west!"
"King of the race of Morven!" said the chief of resounding Lochlin, "never
will Swaran fight with thee, first of a thousand heroes! I have seen thee in the halls of
Starno; few were thy years beyond my own. When shall I, I said to my soul, lift the
spear like the noble Fingal? We have fought heretofore, O warrior, on the side of the
shaggy Malmor; after my waves had carried me to thy halls, and the feast of a
thousand shells was spread. Let the bards send his name who overcame to future
years, for noble was the strife of Malmor! But many of the ships of Lochlin have lost
their youths on Lena. Take these, thou king of Morven, and be the friend of Swaran!
When thy sons shall come to Gormal, the feast of shells shall be spread, and the
combat offered on the vale."
"Nor ship," replied the king, "shall Fingal take, nor land of many hills. The desert is
enough to me, with all its deer and woods. Rise on thy waves again, thou noble friend
of Agandecca! Spread thy white sails to the beam of the morning; return to the
echoing hills of Gormal." — "Blest be thy soul, thou king of shells," said Swaran of
the dark-brown shield." In peace thou art the gale of spring; in war the mountain
storm. Take now my hand in friendship, king of echoing Selma! Let thy bards mourn
those who fell. Let Erin give the sons of Lochlin to earth. Raise high the mossy stones
of their fame: that the children of the north hereafter may behold the place where their
fathers fought. The hunter may say, when he leans on a mossy tomb, Here Fingal and
Swaran fought, the heroes of other years. Thus hereafter shall he say, and our fame
shall last for ever."
"Swaran," said the king of hills, "to-day our fame is greatest. We shall pass
away like a dream. No sound will remain in our fields of war. Our tombs will be lost
in the heath. The hunter shall not know the place of our rest. Our names may be heard
in song. What avails it, when our strength hath ceased? O Ossian, Carril, and Ullin!
you know of heroes that are no more. Give us the song of other years. Let the night
pass away on the sound, and morning return with joy."
We gave the song to the kings. A hundred harps mixed their sound with our
voice. The face of Swaran brightened, like the full moon of heaven; when the clouds
vanish away, and leave her calm and broad in the midst of the sky.
JAMES MACPHERSON
-200-
"Where, Carril," said the great Fingal, "Carril of other times! where is the son
of Semo, the king of the isle of mist? Has he retired like the meteor of death, to the
dreary cave of Tura?" — "Cuthullin," said Carril of other times, "lies in the dreary
cave of Tura. His hand is on the sword of his strength. His thoughts on the battles he
lost. Mournful is the king of spears: till now unconquered in war. He sends his sword,
to rest on the side of Fingal: for, like the storm of the desert, thou hast scattered all his
foes. Take, O Fingal! the sword of the hero. His fame is departed like mist, when it
flies, before the rustling wind, along the brightening vale."
"No," replied the king, "Fingal shall never take his sword. His arm is mighty
in war: his fame shall never fail. Many have been overcome in battle; whose renown
arose from their fall. O Swaran, king of resounding woods, give all thy grief away.
The vanquished, if brave, are renowned. They are like the sun in a cloud, when he
hides his face in the south, but looks again on the hills of grass."
"Grumal was a chief of Cona. He sought the battle on every coast. His soul
rejoiced in blood; his ear in the din of arms. He poured his warriors on Craca; Craca's
king met him from his grove; for then, within the circle of Brumo, he spoke to the
stone of power. Fierce was the battle of the heroes, for the maid of the breast of snow.
The fame of the daughter of Craca had reached Grumal at the streams of Cona; he
vowed to have the white-bosomed maid, or die on echoing Craca. Three days they
strove together, and Grumal on the fourth was bound. Far from his friends they placed
him in the horrid circle of Brumo; where often, they said, the ghosts of the dead
howled round the stone of their fear. But he afterward shone, like a pillar of the light
of heaven. They fell by his mighty hand. Grumal had all his fame!
"Raise, ye bards of other times," continued the great Fingal, "raise high the
praise of heroes: that my soul may settle on their fame; that the mind of Swaran may
cease to be sad." They lay in the heath of Mora. The dark winds rustled over the
chiefs. A hundred voices, at once, arose; a hundred harps were strung. They sung of
other times; the mighty chiefs of former years! When now shall I hear the bard? When
rejoice at the fame of my fathers? The harp is not strung on Morven. The voice of
music ascends not on Cona. Dead, with the mighty, is the bard. Fame is in the desert
no more."
Morning trembles with the beam of the east; it glimmers on Cromla's side.
Over Lena is heard the horn of Swaran. The sons of the ocean gather around. Silent
and sad they rise on the wave. The blast of Erin is behind their sails. White, as the
mist of Morven, they float along the sea. "Call," said Fingal, "call my dogs, the longbounding sons of the chase. Call white-breasted Bran, and the surly strength of Luath!
Fillan, and Ryno; — but he is not here! My son rests on the bed of death. Fillan and
Fergus! blow the horn, that the joy of the chase may arise; that the deer of Cromla
may hear, and start at the lake of roes."
The shrill sound spreads along the wood. The sons of heathy Cromla arise. A
thousand dogs fly off at once, gray-bounding through the heath. A deer fell by every
dog; three by the white-breasted Bran. He brought them, in their flight, to Fingal, that
the joy of the king might be great! One deer fell at the tomb of Ryno. The grief of
Fingal returned. He saw how peaceful lay the stone of him, who was the first at the
chase! "No more shalt thou rise, O my son! to partake of the feast of Cromla. Soon
THE POETICAL WORKS OF OSSIAN
- 201 -
will thy tomb be hid, and the grass grow rank on thy grave. The sons of the feeble
shall pass along. They shall not know where the mighty lie.
"Ossian and Fillan, sons of my strength! Gaul, chief of the blue steel of war!
Let us ascend the hill to the cave of Tura. Let us find the chief of the battles of Erin.
Are these the walls of Tura? gray and lonely they rise on the heath. The chief of shells
is sad, and the halls are silent and lonely. Come, let us find Cuthullin, and give him all
our joy. But is that Cuthullin, O Fillan, or a pillar of smoke on the heath? The wind of
Cromla is on my eyes. I distinguish not my friend."
"Fingal!" replied the youth, "it is the son of Semo! Gloomy and sad is the
hero! his hand is on his sword. Hail to the son of battle, breaker of the shields!" "Hail
to thee," replied Cuthullin, "hail to all the sons of Morven! Delightful is thy presence,
O Fingal! it is the sun on Cromla: when the hunter mourns his absence for a season,
and sees him between the clouds. Thy sons are like stars that attend thy course. They
give light in the night! It is not thus thou hast seen me, O Fingal! returning from the
wars of thy land: when the kings of the world had fled, and joy returned to the hills of
hinds!"
"Many are thy words, Cuthullin," said Connan of small renown. "Thy words
are many, son of Semo, but where are thy deeds in arms? Why did we come, over
ocean, to aid thy feeble sword? Thou fliest to thy cave of grief, and Connan fights thy
battles. Resign to me these arms of light. Yield them, thou chief of Erin." — "No
hero," replied the chief," ever sought the arms of Cuthullin! and had a thousand
heroes sought them, it were in vain, thou gloomy youth! I fled not to the cave of grief,
till Erin failed at her streams."
"Youth of the feeble arm," said Fingal, "Connan, cease thy words! Cuthullin is
renowned in battle: terrible over the world. Often have I heard thy fame, thou stormy
chief of Inis-fail. Spread now thy white sails for the isle of mist. See Bragéla leaning
on her rock. Her tender eye is in tears, the winds lift her long hair from her heaving
breast. She listens to the breeze of night, to hear the voice of thy rowers; to hear the
song of the sea; the sound of thy distant harps."
"Long shall she listen in vain. Cuthullin shall never return. How can I behold
Bragéla, to raise the sigh of her breast? Fingal, I was always victorious, in battles of
other spears." — "And hereafter thou shalt be victorious," said Fingal of generous
shells. "The fame of Cuthullin shall grow, like the branchy tree of Cromla. Many
battles await thee, O chief! Many shall be the wounds of thy hand! Bring hither,
Oscar, the deer! Prepare the feast of shells; Let our souls rejoice after danger, and our
friends delight in our presence."
We sat. We feasted. We sung. The soul of Cuthullin rose. The strength of his
arm returned. Gladness brightened along his face. Ullin gave the song; Carril raised
the voice. I joined the bards, and sung of battles of the spear. Battles! where I often
fought. Now I fight no more! The fame of my former deeds is ceased. I sit forlorn at
the tombs of my friends!
JAMES MACPHERSON
-202-
Thus the night passed away in song. We brought back the morning with joy.
Fingal arose on the heath, and shook his glittering spear. He moved first to wards the
plains of Lena. We followed in all our arms.
"Spread the sail," said the king, "seize the winds as they pour from Lena." We rose on
the wave with songs. We rushed, with joy, through the foam of the deep.