
HISTORY,OF THE ORIGIN AND PROGRESS,OF THE STATISTICAL ACCOUNT,O F SCOTLAND. AN author, who printed a work, intitled,," Profpeds and Observations on a Tour in "England and Scotland *," soon after the com- mencement of the STATISTICAL ACCOUNT OF SCOTLAND, and who, it would appear, had seen some specimens of that publication, states, in the following words, his opinion, of the impracticabi- lity of so great an undertaking, being completed by the exertions of one individual.," THERE have not been wanting different per- " ons, public-fpirited indeed, but perhaps of too,a "sanguine * Pilblilled by leffrs Robinftbus London, in one vol. 4to, an. 1791.
"sanguine dispositions, who, struck with the sub- " ferviency of parochial diftinaion, to the advance- "ment of both civil and natural history, have ad- "drefled letters to the different parilhes in Scot- "land, and particularly to the Clergy, inviting "them to a correspondence, on whatever might " appear most curious and interelting in their re- " fpective divilions. T5hese Gentlemen do not reflec, " that there is no individual, however difiingujibed "by genius, rank, or fortune, or even by a happy or "rare union of all these advantages, who can possibly "be confidered, by a vwhole Nation, as a ft centre "so firJcb general co-operation *.",IT is certain, that not only this ingenious travel- ler, but also many of the Author's friends, on whose judgment he could best rely, were in gene- ral of the fame opinion, and adverse to his enga- ging in the attempt on so great a scale. It is pro- per, therefore, that the. history of the accomplifl - ment of such an undertaking, and of the means by which it was completed, in the midst of a va- riety of other important avocations, flould be pre- ierved, as a memorial,. of what may be effected by unceasing energy and perseverance.,AT an early period of life, I felt a strong pre- dileEtion for literary pursuits, and, as far back. as October I769, when only about fifteen years and a half old, began to fend to the newspapers, and,othe, s See Ncie T's i;t;c;; p. 4 ',.
hlier.periodical publications, various communica- tions, specimens of which, merely as Boyish Com- positions, I have thought it might not be.improper to rescue from oblivion. (See Appendix, A). But, above all, I preferred engaging.in inquiries connec- ted with political fiubjes, and colleEted, many *years-ago, very extensive materials, -for works on questions of that nature, which, probably, I lall never have leisure to execute. Fortunately, how- ever, I found time fifficient, to iketch out the Hi- fIory of the Public Revenue of the Britilh Em- pire *, (for the Work, as printed, is only a iketch), which, though it contains:the enfence of many hun- dred publications, was executed in a very {hort period of time. The firit volume, I think, was both written and printed in the space of about fix months, anno 1785, and the.other, in about the fame period of time, anno 1790. The materi- als, however, of both had been previously collec- .ted. I have ever confidered.it, indeed, as the best mode of composition, to collet the materials for any work, as leisure would permit, and when they were colleded, to dedicate a certain space of time, to that subject exclusively, and not to susser any other matter to break in upon.the proposed inve- .figation.,AT the conclusion of the Hittory of the Reve- nue, it was my intention to have laid before the Public, a General View of the Political Circum-,stances * Thi; work is in three parts. The two firll were printed in x Sj, and -the third in 1793.
stances of the Country; but, after taking every possible pains to become maiter of the subjed, all the information I could obtain, was so extremely defective, that it was necessary to give up the idea; which 1 did with a considerable degree of reluc- tance.,ON my arrival at Edinburgh, in May 1790, to attend theGeneral Afembly of the Church of Scot- land, of which Assembly I was a Lay Member, anJ with the leaders of which, I lived on terms of intimacy and friendlhip, it fortunately occurred to m;:, tha, I might prevail upon that refpedable body, to furnish such information, refpeding the general state of Scotland, as might enable me to give a sufficient idea of the political situation of that parr of the Britifi empire. My original in- tention was, to have drawn up a General Statifti- ca! View of North Britain, without any particular reference to parochial difiricts; but I found such merit and ability, and so many useful fads and im- portant observations, in the communications which wvere lent me, that I could not think of depriving the Clergy, of the credit they were entitled to de- rive, from such laborious exertions, and thence was induced, to give the Work to the Public, in the manner in which it has been printed. It is my intention, at the fame time, as soon as leisure from other piuifliits will admit of it, to draw up the result of the whole inquiry, in a publication to be enti- tled, " Analy!is of the Political State of Scotland,,"with
is with a View of the Principles of Statistical "Philosophy," a work which, I hope, it will be in my power to lay before the public at the com- mencement of the ensuing century.,THE most natural mode of obtaining informa- tion, and the one which I originally adopted, was that of printing and circulating Queries, as many individuals might be inclined to fend answers to any questions put to them, who would not take the trouble of drawing up a'regular Report. I ac- cordingly addressed a Letter to the Clergy, and in- closed Queries in it, which will be found in Ap- pendix B.,MArN people were at first surprised, at my using the new words, Statiflics and Statifiical, as it was supposed, that some term in our own language, might have exprefled the fame meaning. But, in the course of a very extensive tour, through the northern parts of Europe, which I happened to take in 1786, I found, that in Germany they were en- gaged in a species of political inquiry, to which they had given the name of Statillics; and though 1 ap- ply a different idea to that word, for by Statistical is meant in Germany, an inquiry for the purpose of ascertaining the political strength of a country, or questions refpeting matters offlate; whereas, the idea I annex to the term, is an inquiry into the slate of a country, for the purpose of ascertaining the quantum-ofhappinefs enjoyed by its inhabitants, and the means of its future improvement; yet, as,I
[ thought that a new word, might attraOt more public attention, I resolved on adopting it, and I hope that it is now completely naturalised and incorporated with our language.,HAVING received a number of returns in con- sequence of the Queries circulated, and some of them being drawn up in the form of a regular Re- port, I resolved to try the effeEt of publishing a *volume of parochial accounts; and having return- ed from London, (where I had gone.to attend my -duty. in Parliament), to Edinburgh, in January 179I, I commenced the undertaking, by printing the reports of the four parishes with which the first volume of the- Statistical Account commences, namely, those of Jedburgh, Holywood, Port-Pa- trick,. and Hounam, and having thrown off icco .extra copies of those four parishes, sent them, by .way of a specimen, to every Clergyman in Scot- land, accompanied with another Letter, to be found in Appendix C.,BY dint of great exertions, the first volume of -the Work was published on the 25th of May 1791, exac&ly z1 months from the commencement of the undertaking. It gave, on the whole, very general satisfaction. Some of the Clergy, indeed, were diflatisfied, at the freedom used with their com- ·munications, .(it being thought necessary to con- dense them as much as.poffiblc); and others, una- ware of the difficulty of printing corre(tly, parti- cularly from manuscripts written by so many dif- £erent hands, were difplcafcd with a few typogra-,phicel
phical errors. It so far surpassed, however, any thing of the kind that had ever been hitherto at- tempted, that every individual, who wished well to the improvement of the country, or the wel- fare of its inhabitants, became desirous of pro- moting it, and hence I had some reason to flatter myself, that the whole Work would be completed in a short period of time.,BEING so frequently out of Scotland, I have in general been obliged, to rely upon the afliftance of others, for preparing the communications of the Clergy, and correcting the press. The second vo- lume, however, I was enabled to undertake my- self, during a Parliamentary recess; and I do not recollect, to have met with a greater mass of curi- ous and interesting information, in any publication of that extent. It begins with a parifi near the borders, that of Tortherswald, and ends with Mid and South Yell in Shetland, the parifles gradual- ly proceeding northwards. Those who can peruse that volume, without pleasure and improvement, must have little real turn or disposition for such in- veftigations.,IT was natural to suppose, that the most zealous friends to the cause, would early come forward with their communications, and that some induce- ment must be held forth to those, who were incli- ned to be backward, to prevail upon them to make the necefflry inquiries. From the beginning, i had proposed that the profits arising from the pub-,lication,
lication, should be given to the Society institutcd for the benefit of the Sons of the Clergy. It ac- cidentally also occurred to me, that it would be possible to procure a Royal Grant for the fame be- nevolent purpose; and having, with that view, ap- plied to Mr Secretary DUNDAS, his Majesty, in consequence of his recommendation, was graci- oufly pleated to grant L. 20zo to that Society; I availed myfelfofthat opportunity, to make a third application to the deficient Clergy, (fee Appendix, D), which I flattered myself would have been ve- ry generally successful. EXPERIENCE, however, soon proved, that alho' considerable progress might thus be made, yet that it was impossible to expect, without fill greater exertions, the unanimous assistance of so numerous a body as the Clergy of Scotland. Many circum- stances prevented unanimity on such an occasion. Some disliked the scheme from the beginning, or, having rashly given an opinion against it; before they had thoroughly understood its nature or ob- jec, were ashamed afterwards to retract. Some were prevented by old age and bodily infirmities, some owing to family difirefs, and some by the jealousy of their parishioners, who thought that the whole was a deep laid scheme, set on foot by Government, with a view to taxation; whilst the tenants, in many country parishes, did not much relish the inquiries which were made into the pro- duce of the foil, the value of their cattle, &c. ap-,prehenfivc
prehenfive that their landlords, might avail them- selves too much of that information. In Ihort, from a combination of fich circumstances, after writing many thousand letters, and the exertions of above two years, I found, on the ift of June 1792, that no less a number than 413 accounts were still wanting.,EVERY measure, either dcvifed by myself, or fuggelled by others, was carried into e'icit, in order to prevail upon the deficient Clergy to com- plete the Work. A recommendation from the Ge- neral Assembly was one of the measures adopted; the diflinguifed Historian of Scotland and Ame- rica, (the late Dr Robertson), was prevailed upon to write to all his contemporaries, requesting their assistance ; many other respectable members of the Church, as Sir Henry Welwood Moncrief, Dr Blair, (the celebrated author of the Sermons, and other valuable publications), Dr Kemp, Dr Hardie, &c. applied to their Clerical friends, to promote the Work within the bounds of their several pref- byteries. The Duke of Argyll, the Earl of Le- ven, (whose lituation as Com millioner to the Gene- ral Assembly gave him much weight with the Church), the Earl of Fife, and several other great Proprietors in Scotland, wrote to the different Mi- nifters, whom they had presented to livings, or with whom they had any particular coinneclion; and from time to time, I took every opportunity that occurred, of reminding the Clergy, by va- rious letters, which will be seen in Appendix, E,b but
but I still found, not only that several indivi- duals could not be prevailed upon to draw up their accounts, but indeed that some, from a procrafti- nating spirit, and unwillingness to engage in, or to complete, any laborious undertaking, could not be depended on, after they had promised to transmit them.,DETERMINED, however, to complete the Wbrk, I then relbived to fend Statiflical Migionaries to different parts of the country, one to the Western Islands, another over the counties of Aberdeen and Banff, a third to the prefbyteries of Dunkeld and Perth, a fourth to Dumfries-fhire and Galloway, and a fifth to the Orkney Islands; and by that means, several accounts, to the amount of about 25, that would otherwise have been wanting, were procured.,WHEN the whole Work was nearly brought to a conclusion, and lifts of the different parishes were made up, an unfortunate circumstance occur- red, of the most discouraging nature. The ac- counts were sent by the Clergy to me, and many of them were received in London, and thence transmitted to Scotland, to be incorporated in the Work. Upon making up the lift, in June 1796, no less than twelve accounts, which I thought had been received, were not to be found ; and it be- came necessary, again to apply to the Clergy to make up the loss. I do not recolleA any circum- fiance, in the whole course of the undertaking, that gave me so much uneasiness.,A-r
AT last, on the ift day of January 1798 *, or fe- ven years, seven months, and seven days, from the commencement of the attempt, an account of eve- ry parifm in Scotland, was either given in, or might be relied on, in the space of a few days. The reader will easily conceive the fatisfac2ion which that circumstance occalioncd; and as, undoubt- edly, no instance is recorded in history, of such a number as above 9Do persons, engaging in so laborious an undertaking, more especially at the request of a private individual, it may not be im- proper, briefly to slate the circumstances to which it may be attributed.,IN the first place, I had made it a rule, from an early period of life, to behave with attention and civility to those with whom I happened to be in company; and many of the Clergy afterwards in- formed me, that nothing induced them more to comply with my request, than their recollection of little incidents of that nature. I mention this' cir- cumftance, as a proof of the advantage to be de- rived from such a tile of behaviour; for I had little reason to imagine, that a young clergyman, to whom I might accidentally flew any little mark of civility, could ever have had it in his power to make any return for it.,IN the second place, having an estate in the most northern part of the kingdom, where I occalional- ly resided, I had better access to information re- garding the remoter diftrics, than falls to the lot,of * Only four accounts were wanting on that day.
of the generality of my countrymen, and thence indeed had an opportunity of cultivating a more extensive acquaintance, than is commonly in the power of any individual, and of increaring it when neceflary.,IN the third place, I laid it down as a rule, pointedly to answer every letter I received from the Clergy, and to acknowledge the receipt of.all their different communications, which, in some cafes, were very numerous, even from a iingle di- ftric', the mhinifters occasionally fending their reports even in flieets.-I do not know any thing more essentially nectflary for success in bufines, than regularity of correspondence. By delays in anlfwering letters, I have at various times fiffered much, and I attribute my fuccels in this imp.crtant undertaking, in a great meafurc, to the.punctuality with which I carried on my Statistical correspond- ence. Fortunately, at that time, the privilege of franking, was, in regard to the number ofletters, unlimited, and the late refiriCiions upon that right, are much to be regretted, as they disable persons, not in official situations: from carrying on fich ex- tensive inquiries. Had I been confined to the fend- ing of only 70 letters per- : ee; 'free from potlage, I flould scarcely have undertaken, far less carried through, the Statilticai Account of Scotland.,IN the last place, the success of this under- taking is to be attributed, to a spirit of perfeve- rance, which no obitacle could relift, and without,AMA!*~~~W lwhich,
which, no great enterprise can ever be accom- plifhed; a spirit, which was kept up, from time to time, by animating eulogiums, from various refpec. table quarters, both foreign and domestic, some of which, I have thought it proper to insert, in the Appendix to this paper. (See Appendix, F).,I BEG. leave to add, that though the advantages to be derived from such a Work, both by this and by other countries, are many, yet in no refpea is it of more essential consequence, than in proving the praLcicability, of combining the information and intelligence of great numbers of people, in one important literary undertaking. Who, before, could have imagined, that it would be possible to unite the labours of above nine hundred individuals in one Work. By following a similar plan, regard- ing other useful objects of inquiry, there is no art or science, that might not be brought, with confi- derable rapidity, to a greater height of improve- ment, thas can ever otherwise be effected; and thus the lot of the human species, may, in various refpeds, be speedily ameliorated.,I CAINNOT conclude, without returning my warmcft acknowledgments, to the many refpea- able characers, by whose afliifance I have been enabled to complete this Work. By their exer- tions on this occasion, they have immortalized themselves, and the order to which they belong; and the greatest compliment that in future can be paid to any body of men, will be, that they are,as
as learned, as able, and as public-fpirited, as those members of the Church of Scotland, who affilted in draw\ing up the Statistical Accounts of the dif- ferent parifies in North Britain, and enabled the person who engaged in so bold an undertaking, to accomplifih a Work, unequalled, in regard to the success with which it has been attended *,-the number of persons therein employed,-the extent of useful information which it contains,-and the various important advantages to be derived from it.,JOHN SINCLAIR. CIARLOTTE SMQAtE, EDINuORGRH,,Ift January 1798. S * In Appendix, G. there is an account of several attempts of a imilat nature, both in this, and in other countries, the success attending which, was no great inducement to engage in this Work; aud in Appendix, H. a Rtateraent of the progress of the present undertaking.,APPEN-
APPENDIX, A. LettersJigned JULIUS CESAR, thefirty Literary attempts of the Author of the Statifiical Account of Scotland. T HE following letters, written by SIR JoHN SINCLAIR, were printed,in the Caledonian Mercury in Oclober 1769. An anonymous author, under the name of ilercator Caledoniwr, had written letters in that paper, lamenting the necelity which the natives of the Highlands were under, of abandoning their native country, in consequence of the increase of rents, and of emigrating to America. On that occasion, SIR JOHN SINCLAIR was tempted to commdnce author, though then only about fifteen years and a half old. The letters were written merely hy way of an exercise, and trial of Ikill, than with any other view. It is hoped, therefore, that the reader will make allosance for such a circumstance. No person happened to be acquainted with his having written them, and nothing could be more araufing for so young a man, than upon going into company, to hear his works talked of with approbation, inquiries made who the author could be, cr. &c.,N 1. S I R, I OBSERVED at the end of your paper of the id current, that you had er- pInged rome pallges of a letter ligned Icercator Ca!edoi:ius, and in- dred it wouhl have been of no confctluence if yon had erpunged the whole. Cli itlian charity, however, forces me to conclude, that Mr Mercator will make a better figure behind his counter, tying up a pennyworth of filgar, or changing a sixpence to hi belt cultomer, than filling your paper with heavy complaints of no moment or importance. As for my share, Mfr Prin- ter, I lave often travelled through every corner oC the Highlands of Scot-,lawd;
land; it is the place of my birth, and the country of my heart; yet, with all my partiality and prejudice for it, I have seen too many of its inhablitants wvho were pidures of indolence and flodi. Contented to live in inacli- vity and idleness, without even the necefaries of life. they would rather ltarve in the iidit of profifion, than apply themfelvcs to any bufinef., with induRlry and labour; they would rather mount up, with the utmofl difm- cilty, to the top of a bleak and barren mountain, from whence nothing can be seen but the clouds of Heaven, and the Albion filoxs, than nrive to attain to independency and freedom, with the sweat of their brow, or the labour of their hands. They would rather cringe to their landlord and their laird, to obtain the crumbs that fall from his table, than attempt to get a eiccent and comfortable livelihood, by cultivating the lands cntrulecd to their care, or applying themselves to any trade, (which, though it would, perhaps, disgrace the blood, and the race from whence they sprang), yet it would, in time, make them richer even than tle chief of their clan. Wlat, then, can their mailers do with such tenants, and with filch dependent-? Can they fee, without emotion, their lands Iying desolate and uncultivatcd by the foth of its inhabitants ? Can they fee, without emotion, their friends and their neighbours wallowing in riches and plenty, and they themselves funk in poverty and wretchednels ? What significs the trats of land they posess ? Of what avail is the number of the tenants on their eflates, if they scarce receive as much for ten miles of good country, as elsewhere rwould not rent the tenth part of an acre ? But, mulft they flill continue to go on in the fame foolilh and unaccountahle jog-trot ? Will they still contintle to ride through twice tw'enty miles, without feeing the fmioke of a chimney, or hearing the crowing of a cock ? Or, will they not rather attempt, by heightening their rents, to excite the induitry of their people, and fill their eflates with the fober and the diligent? These things, according to Mr Mercator's phrase, grow clanma': for redress; they have been oftn confide- red with the utmoift attention by the landed property in the Highlands. I inyfelf have an ellate in that colutry, an d, I am sure, if this fchemie does not make it better, it cannot make it worse. I fliall not detain you, Mr Printer, any longer at percent, I hope that you will admit their few uncon- nected hints into )our molt entertaining paper; and will only add, that Mr lMercator need not dread, in cafe the Highianders do desert their so nmuch beloved native foil, that they will seize tle small pittance that lie has tira- pccd together, for they never think of attacking those who have nothing to los ; the poor man may whiR!e in the night-time, tlhoigh the sword oftl:e aobber is pointed at his brealt.,I am yours, &c.,JULIUS C S A R. EDINBURGH, ~ 5t!Ot. 1 769. IE.
MERCATOR CALEDONIUS being much difatisfied witl this attack upon his lucubrations, publifled a very angry reply; in coifequence of which the Author wrote the following letter, which ended the contr.- vcrly.,N° II. To, tl.e PltbliJjcr rq' tle Cal'donian AMercury. SIR, THOUGH I h.ve conlidered, Mr Printer, with the utmofl attention, the,situation of some of our wellern Highlanders; thoogh I have alked again and again the Itntimentr of my friends on this intcrelting fubjce, yet I tlill continue in the fame opinion I at first adopted: and so far amn 1 from thinking, that the departure of afru. facious an I id!e Hihlai..ae'-; wculd prove detrime:ntal to these united kingdoms, that I would with a contribu- tion was immediately begun ; let them he llipped offa't the public expen.c, vwhlfl the whim continues, and let them he transported to a rointry, where they y mafi:d a nation perhaps as savage as themfclves, ard, if po!liule, equal!y deltitute of the least appearance of religion and virtue. But I hope that the fober and the diligent will not think of following their example; let them be deterred from executing that scheme. by the diinal mi.sarrlmge of the firfi attemrpt; the news lately arrived in Scotland, that some of these people, who liid left tle friitfiul Argyleillire coails to :lilabt the Ameri- can wilds, ihAd l noet with thalt reception they wilied o0 expected, Ycu might have heard, Mr Printer, that tome of them died, dlurings a long and tedious voyage ; that lome liifsered thie worl ofr deaths, by the want of fib- filtnce ; and that the relt were so ovelcolie by the change of the air, and the inclemency of the weather, that few, if any, exjieceld to fee the return of another flnmmicr. I hope that this news will be of flolie aIdv.r.tage to my deludell countrymen; let them co!nider the danger of periflling in a valft and teinpiellinons oce:i, without a friend or a neigihluur to arlift them in heir dilref: holw they tuf go to. oauntry wl;cr their landigage ii unknown, a:lld their milery will be i!l'regarded; ho,. theyv nlft leavc a beloved wife and tender in.fliits. to bewail their ablenre with unavailing tears, when left to the car; of a tieacherois friend, or a couceca! d encmiy and even fijppofivg that they do sal:ly arrive at tihee b:arren tl;?erts; sup- posing that they can tieak rthe di!c6tc of the country, and that ;t firfl they arc viewved with the tender 'ye of pity and comnpalirn, yet how can they e:;pecd to he long supported by h:l dened avarice, or lagging clhar;ty ? How can they then expea to recciie arilt;lTce and alms from the favges of the desert, or olbtain a fettlemLnt, Crvc int that vail and boundiefs country, with- out the necefllry aids of fricnds :;id money ? and when reduced to the lat extrenity in a foreign courtry, chay will then, perhaps, be worse than the,c Indiamn
Indians themselves, devouring the friend of their bosom, or tearing the filet off their bodies in the pangs of hunger and famine. Read this, my coun- trymen and friends, read it and tremble; refer within yonrfelves, if this was your situation, if you could support it; and if you would winli to pre- serve yourfelvcs, your relations, and friends,'from infamy and disgrace, do not attempt to leave your so ,nzch beloved native comutry, which will soon grow clammit for your continuance in it; and believe him who always wilhed for your safety in his youth, and will always pray for it in his old age.,I am yours, &c.,JULIUS CJESAR. EDINBURGHt, October 9. 1769.,APPENDIX, B. Sit/Z Circular Letter to the Clergy of the Church of Scotland.,SIR, I TAKE the liberty of transmitting the inclosed Queries to you, in hopes,that a plan, which has been fortunate enough to meet with the appro bation of some of the mot refpec&able and diftinguilied charaters in these kingdoms, will be favoured with your affifance. To procure information with regard to the real political situation of a country, is what wife Statefmcn in every age have thought defirahle, but which in these enlightened times is juflly held of dte moG elScutial public importance *.,In '* The ancients frequently inculcated this idea: " Ad confilium de re- , publica dandum, caput eft, nolle rempublicam." Cicero ade Oratorr, lib. 2. " In republica cognofcenda, multam, maglnailquc curam habui, " uti quantum armis, viris, opulentia, ea posct; cognitum habertm." Snl- it. ad Cuefar. de Repttbl. ordin. IEiff. fe, Orat. a. cap. I. And iM. de certiberg, the Pritre Minitcr of Pruliia, very juRly remarks, " Qu'an rc- "connoit de plus en plus, que la grandc politique, nc confille pas dans lc myftere dont les gouvernmens fe couvroient jadis, mais que cecus qui a- "giffent a decouvert avec pullicit6 ct franchise, gagnent beaucoup plus 1i conFanlce, des fitjet,, et des voifins." Dijiertationfur la Population des Etats en ene-ral, et fir cclle des Etats Priffi ns en particnlier. An. 1 7S5.
In many parts of the Continent, more particularly in Germany, Statifi- cal Inquiries, as they are called *, have been carried to a very great ex- tent; but in no country, it is believed, can they be brought to such perfec- tion as in Scotland, which boaifs of an eccceiaftical eftablifliment, whose members will yield to no defeription of men, for public zeal, as well as for private virtue, for intelligence, and for ability. I flatter oyfelf, that upon this occasion, they will not be backward in contributing their aid, to promote ar attempt, which may prove ofconfider- able firvice to the country at large, and cannot fail to dd to the reputa- tion and character, whicl the Church of Scotland ha\ already so defervcdly acquired for public utility.,I have the honour to be,,Sir, your very obedient, And faithful humble servant,,JOHN SINCLAIR. EDtlNBIURGI, 7 May 25. 179o. N. B. It is not expected, t:at all the inclofad Qucries liould be anfiver- ed by any individual; nor is minute exscbnefs looked for: but it is request- ed, that as many queflions may be attended to, as circumltances will ad. nit of. In the event of a vacancy in the parifl, or where the present incumbent i; prevented, by fickne.s or othceswice, fron feniding an aniwer, it is intredt- cd that some neighbouring clergyman would take that trouble upon him- self. It is submitted, whether it might not be proper to infest the Queries and Anfwcrs in any parochial regilter, that in after times the future Itate of the parilb, may be compared iwith its fituliion at present. Any aiilver to therii QOuries miay be directed to Sir John Sinclair of Ulb- ler, Baronet, Member of Palliament, Edinburgh, who will thankfully ac- knowledge the icceipt of any paper upon this fubjiel, that lmay be addrefled to him. It may be proper to add, lhat if it is thought advisable to publish fucil an account of Scotland, as may be drawn up from the materials, to be thus colledled, any profit that can be derived from the publication, is to be dedicated to an institution lately formedl, for the IBenefit of tde Sons of th. Clergy of the Church of Scotlald, which seems to merit every possible en- couragemet.,Copy O Or, Inquirieri 'efpcaing tie Pnpl/atin,' the Political Ceircwtjfar.ct, :e Pi';lclrilio;rr f a Country, n.l otbier h Mltters of State.
Copy of the QUERIES drawn up for the purpose of elucidating tie Natu. ral History and Political State of Scotland, which were inclosed in tie preceding letter. QUo STIONS refptSliii the GEOGRAPHY and NATURAL HISTORY of tle,PAR I511. I. What is the ancient and modern name of the Pariflh ? 2. What is the origin and etymology of the name ? 3. In what county is it situated ? 4. In what prelbytery and fynod ? 5. What is the extent and form of the parifil ? 6. What its length and breadth ? 7. By what parilhes is it bounded ? S. What is the general appearance of tne country? Is it flat or hilly, rocky or mountainous ? 9. What is the nature of the foil ? Is it fertile or barren, deep or fliallow ? no. What is the nature of the air? Is it nmoift or drc, unlhealthy or other- wife ? 1r. What are the mod prevalent dillempers ? and to what circumflances are they to be attributed ? 12. Are there any mineral springs ? and in what difeafC s are they ser- viceable ? 13. Are there any considerable lakes or rivers in the parinl ? 14. What species of sith do they produce ? In what quantities ? What prices do they fetch on the spot ? And in what feafonA are they in the greatest perfeetion ? 15. Are the rivers navigable ? or might they be rendered useful in navi. gation ? i6. Are there any navigable canals in the parifl ? :7. What is the extent of fea-coat ? i8. Is the Ihore flat, sandy, high, or rocky ? ig. What forts of fiih are caught on the coat ? In what qilantity ? At what prices fold ? When most in season ? How taken ? And to what mar- kets sent ? 20. What other sea animals, plants, sponges, coralh, fiells, Ccc. are found on or near the coast ? 21. Are there any remar;able sea weeds ifed for manuring land, or cu. rious on any other account ? 22. Is there any kelp ? And what quantity, at an average, is annual ly .pade ? 23. What are the courses of the tides on the fliore or at sea ? and are there any rocks, currents, &c. worthy of notice,a4. Are
C4. Are there any light-houses, beacons, or land-marks ? or could any be erected that would be of fcrvice ? 25. What are the names of the principal crecks, bays, harbours, head- lands, sands, or islands, near the coast ? 26. Have there been any battles or sea fights near the coat ? and when did any remarkable wrecks or accidents happen, which can give light tG any liftorical sac ? 27. Are there any remarkable mountains ? and what are their heights ? aS. Are the hills covered with heath, green, or rocky ? 29. Are there any volcanic appearances in the parilh ? 30. Are there any figured stones, or any having the imprelion of plants or fifies upon them ? 31. Are there any fofil marine bodies, fuclc as flers, corals, &c. or any petrified part of animals ? or any petrifying springs or waters ? 32. Are there any marble, moor-ftone, free-fone, slate, or other sones ? How are they got at, and what use is made of them ? 33. Are there any mines, particularly coal-mines ? What are they ? To whom do they belong ? And what do they produce ? 34. Is any part of the parish fubjedt to inundaticns or land-floods ? When did any remarkable event of that nature happen ? 35. llath there been any remarkable mifclief done by thunder and lightning, water.spouts or whirlwinds ? 36. Are there any remarkable echoes ? 37. Have any remarkable phenomena been observed in the air ? 3s. Are there any remarkable caves or grottos, natural or artificial ? 39. What quadrupeds and birds are :here in the parifi ? What migratory bilds ? and at wlhat times do they appear and disappear ? 40. Is the parifi remarkable for breeding any species of cattle, hecep, horses, hogs, or goats, of peculiar quality, site, or value ? II. QuECTiONS refpefling kte POPULATION of the PARISH ? 4T. What was the ancient fate of the population of the paribh, so far as it can be traced ? 42. What is now the amount of its pop!ilation ? 43. What may be the number of mals r? 44. What of females; 45. How many reside in towns ? 46. - villages ? 47. - - the country ? eS. What is the annual average of births,49.
49. What is the annual average of deaths - ? 50 ---- --- marriages? 51. fouls unler ro years of age ? 52. from ro to 10 ? 53. -- --o 50 ? * 54.-- - -------- 5 to 7o ? 55. -- -- 70 o loo ? 56. Above oo ? 57. Are there any inltances of long lives well authenticated ? 55. What may be the number of farmers ant! their familie; ? 59. ---- - manufactlrers ? 60. - - ha lndcraftsmeni ? 61. - -- apprentices ? 6. -- -- seamen ? 63,. filheliler l ? 64. ferrymen? 65. ----- mines ? 66. - ----- - houcfhold fersants, miale and female ? 67. - labolring fervantt, male and female ? 6j. ---- lldents at colleges r.nd un;veritie' ? 9. - - - merchants, citizens or tradeficn ? 7o. -- artif s? 7. .------ groes ? 73. -g---- giles ? 74. - --- --- foreigners ? 75. ---- perons born in England, Ireiand, or thc British colonies ?,76. What - It is of peculiar importance to have the quellions 4S and 49 diltinlly anfswered; for it is generally underltood, at least on the Colt inent, that tl.e population of any diltria or country, may be known wi:h filfiiciclt accrra- cy, by multiplying the number of births by 25, or the number of deaths iy 36. In Scotland, on the other hand, Mlr Wilkie, minider of Cult, supposes, that the number either of births and burials, if they are eql;l, should be multiplied by 4o; or, if there is any difference, the half of the ;iolc, (both the births and the burials), fllould be multiplied bIy the cx- fpeiation of an inr.lt's life, adapted to the particular diftric, in order to :fleertain its population. See Statifhical Acc.-nt, vol. 1I. p. 415. It ap- leas, frotp Mr Wilkie's calculations, that the expecation of a life in: Scotlalnd, is much greater than in England, or on the Continent.
76. What may be the number of perions born in other district or pariflhs in Scotland ? 77. What may be the number of the nobility and their families ? 75. -gentry ? 79. ------- clergy ? So. -- - lawyers, and writers or attornic ? S r. What may be the number of phyfidcAns, surgeons, and apothecaries? z5. - the eltablilhed church ? S3. --- seceders ? S.. -- - epifopalians ? Sj. - - -Roman catholics ? S6. Is tie population oi the parifl materially different f;om what it was , 1o, or 25 years ago ? and to what causes is the alteration attributed ? S7. What is the proportion between the annual births and the whole po- pulation ? SS. What is the proportion between the annual marriagcs and the whole piopulation ? S9. What is the proportion between the annual deaths and the whole population ? go. What is the proportion between the batchclors and the married men, widowers included ? gr. How many children does each marriage at an average produce? 92. What may be the causes of depopulation ? 93. Are there any deftrutive epidemical dillcmpers ? 94. Ilave any died from want ? 95. Have any murders or luicides been committed 96. Ilave many emigrated from the parifi ? 97. lave any been banified from it ? 98. Iave any been obliged to leave the parifl for want of employtLeat ? 99. Are there any uninhabited houses ? iso. What may be the number of inhabited houifes, and the number of l:ribls at an average to eachl iniabited hounf ?,IlI. Q~UESTIONs refpdCli/' tle PRODnICTioNS of tie PARISn. atr. What kinds of vegetables, plants, and trees, does the parish pro. dlice ? 1to. What kinds of animals ? o.,. Whatat an average is fupplufed to be the number of cattle, sleep, !1ori'. , hogs, and goats, in the diltril ? I,4. Is there any map of the parifli ? ald has the number of acres in it lbeer afcertined ?,o10. Iiow
Ioj. How many acres at ;a averge may be employed in railing corn; roots, &c. ?,o06. What number of acres to each fort refpeclively, as wheat, barley, rye, oats, potatoes, turnip, cabbage. &c. ? 107. Does the parilh supply itself with provisions ? loS. Does it in general export or import articles of provision ? o09. How many acres are employed in railing hemp or flax ? Ito. How many in sown or artificial graffes ? ile. How many in pifture ? x . When do they in general sow and reap their different crops ? 513. What quantity of ground may lie waste or in common ? 114. What in woods, forests, marihes, lakes, and rivers ? 1r.. Is there any chalk, marl, fillers earth, potters earth, ochre, &c. ? r 6. Are there any bitumen, naptha, or other fubflances of that nature found in the foil?,IV. MISCELLANEOUS QUESTIONS. x17. Has the parilh any peculiar advantages or difadvarntges ? IiS. What language is principally spoken in it? Ir9. From what language do the namesof places in the parifi seem to be derived ? 10a. What are the most remarkable instances of such derivations ? ax1. What may the land rent of the parilh be? iz. What the rent of houses, fishings, &e. ? 123. What is the value of the living, including the glebe ? and who is the patron ? n24. Who is now minister of the parish ? xa5 How long has he been fettled in it? 1r6. What are the names of his predeceiTors as far back as they can now he traced, and the time they refpecaively hleld that office 1I7. Is the minister married, a widower, or single ? x28. If with a family, how many sons, and how many daughters ? 129. When were the church and the manfc built or repaired ? 130. What is the number of heritors, or pofef'ors of landed property in the parifi ? 131. How many of them reside in it ? 132. What is the number of the poor in the parifli receiving alms ? 133. What is the annual amount of the contributions for their relief,'and the produce of alms, legacies, or of any other fund deltined for that purpose ? 134. What are the present or ancient prices of provisions, beef, veal, mutton, lamb, pork, pigs, geese, ducks, chickens, rabbits, butter, chccfe, wheat, barley, oats, &c. ?,135. What
135. What is generally a day's wages for labourers in hulbaridry,-and other work ? and what per day for carpenters, bricklayer, masons, tii. lors, &c. ? 136. What is the fuel commonly made use of? Is it coal, wood; heath, peat, furze, or whins ? What are the prices paid on the spot; and whence is the fuel procured'? 137. What, at an average, may be the expence of a common' laborer, when married'?'and is the wages he receives sufficient to enable him to bring np a family ? 138. What are the usual wages of male and female servants in the dif. ferent branches ofhufbandry ?,39. What the wages of domestic fenrants ? 140. How many ploughs are there in the parifl ? and of what kinds? 141. How many carts and waggons ? 141. How many carriages; arid of wht forts ? 143. Are there any villages in the parili ? and how are they situated ? 144. Are there any crofies or obelilks erected in the parish ? 145. -Are there any remains or ruins of monasteries or religious houses? 146. Are there any Roman, Saxon, Danili, or Picfilh castles, camps, al- tars, roads, forts, or other remains of antiquity ? and what traditions or hi- florical accounts are there of them ? 147. Have there been any medals, coins, arms, or other pieces of anti- quity dog up in the parilh ? When were they found ? And in whose cuf- tody are they now ? 1r4. Are there any barrows, or-tumuli? Have any been opened ? And what has been found therein ? 149. Have there been any remarkable battles fought in the parilh ? On whit spot ? At what time ? By whom ? And what traditions are there re. fpeting the fame ? I o.' Has the parilh either given' birth or burial to any man-eminent for learning, or distinguished for any other valuable qualification'? 151. Arc the people of the country-remarkable for strength, fiue, com- plexion, or any other personal or mental qualities ? 15a. sWhat is the general fize-of the people? 53. What is the greatest height which any individual in.the paris has attained, properly authenticated ? 154. Are the people disposed to industry ? What manufactures are car- ried on in the parilh ? And what number of hands are employed therein ? 155. Are the people fond of a sea-faring life ? What is the number of boats and of larger veflels belonging to the parifl ? And what number of teamen have entered into the navy during any preceding war ?,d 1z56. Ar
156. Are the people fond of a military life? Do many inlif in the army ? And principally in what corps ? 157. Are the people economical, or expensive and luxurious for their cir- cumltances ? Is property, particularly in land, often changing ? And at what prices is it in general fold ? 158. Are the people disposed to humane and generous acions; to pro- tea and relieve the Ihipwreckcd, &c. ? and are there any events which have happened in the parish, which do honour to human nature ? 159. Do the people, on the whole, enjoy, in a reasonable degree, the comforts and advantages of society ? ant are they contented with their fitua- tion and circumRlances ? a6o. Are there any means by which their condition could be ameliora- ted ?,ADDENDA. z. lhat is the fate of the roads and bridges in the parish ? How were they originally made ? How are they kept in repair ? Is the tfatute labour exacted in kind, or commuted ? Are there any turnpikes ? and what is the general opinion of the advantages of turnpike roads ? a. What is in general the rent of the.bes arable and the beR paflure or meadow grounds, per acre ? What the rent of inferior ? 3. What in general is the size and the average rent of the farms in the parish ? And is the number of farms increasing or dininifiing ? 4. Is the parilh in general inclosed, or uninclofed ? And are the people convinced of the advantages of inclofilres ? 5. What was the situation ofthle parifl anno 17S2 and 17S3 ? Please state any curious or important circumtdances connected with that era, or with any other season of scarcity. 6. Are there any curious or important salts tending to prove any great alteration in the manners, cultoms, dress, stile of living, &c. of the inhabi- tants of the paril, now, and 20 or 53 years ago ?,V. B. If you reside in a town or city, please give an account of the hi- flory and antiquities of the place;. of its buildings, age, walls, sieges, char- ters, privileges, immunities, gates, firects, markets, fairs; the number of churches, wards, guilds, companies, fraternities, clubs, &c..: How the town is governed: if it .is represented in parliameilt; to whom does the right of election belong, and what the number of eledors ? together with a compa- rifon between its ancient and modert fate, in regard to population, com- merce, lhipping, fisheries, manufactlures, more particularly at the following peripds, about the time of the Union, fiuce the year 1745, and at present.,It
It may be proper to add, that many important fadls and observations may occur to those to whom this paper is addrcfled, not hinted at in the queries, which it would be particularly obliging in any gentleman to add to any answer which he may take the trouble of drawing up. EDINDBURGI, May 25. 17790.,APPENDIX, C. Setond printed Circular Letter to tbe Clergy, uwitb a Specinen of Four,Pariobt. SIR, T is with infinite pleasure I have the honour of acquainting you, that by the zeal and patriotism of the clergy of Scotland, I have already in my polTefion materials for drawing up a Statifical Account of a considerable part of the whole kingdom; and that in the course of the enfiing spring, (, hich is the season when the miniftets generally take a clerical survey of their refpecive pariles,) I have reason to expec returns from above a half of Scotland. Of the nature and importance of the reports which have been received, you will be able to judge from the specimen I inclose. It is parc of a volume, now in the press, which will be ready for publication by the next meeting of the General Assembly. You will easily perceive the many important advantages which the pub- lic must necelfarily derive, were reports equally accurate with those inclo- fed, sent from every other diltrid in the kingdom, though some yeats were even employed in bringing this great political survey to a concluflon. But I am anxious that the Clergy of Scotland Ihould not only do it well, but quickly; so that the slate of the whole country flould be known, if poflible, at nearly the fame period of time. I therefore hope, Sir, that, for the ho- nour of our national church, you will make every exertion in your pover, to fend me as full, and as accurate an account, as poilible of your parifi, and of any neighbouring ditrict, that by any accidental circumltance, may require your assistance. As a Scotchman, and as a friend to the Kirk of Scotland, I flould feel a very peculiar pride in being able to allen, that, on the a5th of May 1790, I began to circulate my ftatiflical queries among the Clergy; and that before a twelvemonth had elapsed, I had received more fill and fatisfaatory information refpefling the ilite of this country, than had ever been collected concerning any other kingdom.,Yout
You will perceive, that ite inclosed accounts arc fyflematically a:..ar. ged, -from tile anfwvers whicl were sent me It is, however, unneceefary for the Clergy to give themselves that trouble. If the queries which have been already sent, are anfivered with minuteness and accuracy, a complete account can easily be made-from those answers; nevertheless, if any clergy- man has sufficient leisure to draw up a complete and fyftemntical defcrip- tion of his parifl, it cannot be the less acceptable. Some dilfridts, such as the parihl of Hounam, furmifi little room for fla. tiftical invefligation. In-that-cafe, the tate ofpopulation, and fads con. necled with the political circumfnances of the country, are all that is ne. ceflary. Full accounts are desirable; but, at the fame time, no minister ought to hesitate about fending a short one, when there are not means of supplying more important materials. In the queries formerly sent, some particulars were omitted, of which I should be glad to be informed, even from those gentlemen who have alrea- dy favoured me with their anfvers: as,,i. What is the late of the schools in the pariil; the salary and per,,quifites of the fchooulafter: and the number of his scholars ? 2. What is the number of alehouses, inns, &c.; and what- eiBee have,they on the morals of the.people ? 3; What is the. number of-new houfs or cottages which have been,built withhin there ten years pall; and how many old ones have been pulled-down, or have become uninhabitable ? 4. What has been the effed of employing cottagers in agriculture, or,of-working by hired servants in their Head ? and, 5. What has been the number of prisoners in any jail in the diftridc,in the course of the year 1790; and for what causes were they im. prisoned ? Tables of births, marriages, and deaths, kept in any particular parifl, would be very desirable. Nor can the information refpecing all points connected with the population of the country, be too accurate and mi. nute. On the whole, I flatter myself, by your afflfiance, and -that of your bre-- thren, that it will be in my pover to bring a.work to-perfedion, which. will do more credit to the Clergy of the Clurch of Scotland, as a learned, able, and ufefil body, than perhaps has ever.fallen-to the lot of any other description of men. I have the honour to be, with great regard and esteem, Sir, your moit obedient, and very humble fenant -,JOHN SINCLAIR. EnDraInuRcI, .,N.B.
N. B. It is intreated, that at the next meeting of your Prelbytery, some plan may be formed, for completing the survey within its bounds, as expedl- tioufly as may be confident with accurate returns to the different querie;; and that the Moderator, or some member of the meeting, will have the goodness to inform me of the steps which are taken for that purpose. The letters may either be direced to Edinburgh or London. Any of the Clergywho have not received a copy ofthis, or of the former letter and queries, may be aflurcd, that it has only. arisen from milake, and from those errors which cannot be avoided in so extensive a ccrrefpond- ence. It is also requelted, that, in the course of any correspondence with your brethren, you will not fail to recommend as early an attention as poflible tl this inquiry. In regard to any quellion, about the propriety of answering which a dif- ficulty flould arise, no.reply is required.,APPENDIX, D. Third printed Circular Letter to the Clergy, announring the Royal Donatio.,ofL. aooo. S I R% I HAVE at length the fatisfafion to inform you,ltbat the Second Vo; lume of the STATISTICAL ACCOLNT OF SCOTLAN.ZD will be pus blilhed on the i5th current; and that the Third, the Fourth, and the Fifth Volumes of that Work, (which will comprise a considerable propor- tion of the kingdom), are in the prefi, and will be printed without delay. You may easily suppose, how desirable it must be, on many accounts, to have an undertaking of a. nature so laborious and important, brought to a conclusion. The public at large are anxious to have it completed, on ac- count of the many beneficial consequences, which must neceflarily result from it: The sooner it can be finished, the greater will be the credit, which will accrue to those, by whose zeal and exertions, this great Inquiry has been carried forward. And, when the Work'is finiflied, I have the plea- sure of adding, that it will then be in my power, to present to the very ufefu! Society, lately constituted, for the benefit of the Sons of the Clergy, a furn which will enable that Infiitution to begin its laudable pperations ;.,-These * The Society's funds, on 5xth June 179r, amounted to L. io6o; but itdid not propose to distribute any part of its inccmr.e until t':c capital,reachec
-These are consideration, which mull have sufficient weight with every Clergyman, who has either any regard for his own order, or any attachment for the country at large, to make every exertion in tnifinuitting, with all convenient speed, the information that is required. As yet, indeed, there has been no cause for complaint. Returns have already been sent from about one half of the Pariles in Scotland; and, if the remainder were re- ceived, previous to the Meeting of the ensuing General Aflembly, the pa. blication of the STATISTICAL SURVE2 OF SCOTLAND might be com- pleted in the course of the year 1792, or, at farthest, within three years from its commencement, in May 179o; and consequently, with a degree of rapidity and success, which none but the molt sanguine could have looked for.,The reached L. 2coo; which, it was supposed, the sale of the STATISTICAL ACCOUNT OF SCOTLAND would complete. Regretting that any time flould be loft, in commencing so useful a diftribu- tion, I took the liberty of filggelting a petition to the Clownu for some pecu. niary aid. It was with fume difficulty, that I prevailed upon the Society to make the application. At first they were resolved to decline it, as appears from a letter I received from Dr Hardy, dated the gth May 792, in which that re. fpectable Clergyman flates: I have delayed answering your letter, inclosing "a draught of a petition for aid to the Sons of the Clergy, till I should have s converted with several of the members of the Society, who have taken an aeive part in its affairs. We all confider the Society as very much in- debted to you, both upon the ground of the statistical inquiries, and of " your readinelf on this occasion, to exert yourself for fame immediate pe- cuniary grant, to bring its capital into a situation which may authorise a commencement of dlitribution. All of the gentlemen with whom I " have conversed on this point, exprcfs, however, a reluctance to take so " pointed a Itep, as a petition for pecuniary aid in this cafe, as there is no specific fund in view on which a probable claim might be laid, but only the privy purse to which our petition could refer. We are afraid tfiat a repilife might expose the Society to some blame in the view of the public, and our exifence depends on our being able to preserve "the full and unmixed approbation of tie country.". But upon my pressing it again, it was at lalt agreed to, and fortunately succeeded; and now the Society is placed in such a situation, that it cannot fail to prove materially ferviceble to the sons of a molt valuable body of men, and I tnmlt that ere long its funds will enable it to extend its atten- tion to the Daughters of the Clergy also.
The information, which will be accumulated in this great Work, will, it is believed, be found infinitely superior, to that contained in any other publication, of a political or statistical nature. Indeed, what else could be expected, from the united exertions of above a TnOUSAND Individuals of intelligence and ability, who, in a greater or lclrer degree, will contribute to its formation? I am induced, from that circumflance, to fuggelt, that it might not be improper for the Ministers, the Elders, and the principal Heads of Families, to join together, in purchlaing, for each Parilh, a copy of the different Volumes, as they come out. To any mind capable of re- ceiving ifefiul information, no literary performance can furniih so much entertainment. Nor is there any, that will yield more important hints- for the improvement of agriculture-for the extension of commercial in. dulfry-for regulating the condua of individuals,-or for promoting the prosperity of the State. The peculiar form of this Work, also, admirably adapts it for parochial circulation; and were this idea carried into full es. fed, there is every reason to believe, that it would materially contribute, to further the most essential intercfls of the eommunity.-This is a point, therefore, which may deserve to be brought under consideration, at any cn- suing meeting, of the Prelbytery, or the Synod, to which you belong. I have now only to regret the repeated trouble you have received, in the course of this correspondence; but I trust, that you will impute it to the real caufe,-an ardent wifli to promote, so far as I am able, the happi. ness of my native country; and, what is of (much more confeqiecuce, than the exertions of any single individual, to firnifl a numerous and refpee:able body of my fellow-citizens, with an opportunity of proving, to the convic- tion of the world, their patriotifin and abilities. I have the honour to be, swith great regard and esteem, Sir, your very obedient humble servant,,J OHN SINCLAIR. EDIXBURGH, Dee. 5. 179. N. B. Packets of the legal weeight, (or rnder tawo onnce), umay be ad- dreed to Sir John Sinclair, Bart. MI. P. Edinburrgb. Either answers to the original Queries, or aln arranged Parochial At. count, may be sent, as is most convenient and agreeable. It may be remarked, in general, that the great objet of the Inquiry is, to know the prefentflatr of the country, and to ascertain what means are the most likely to promote the real interelts of its inhabitants, and, that deep refcarches, into filbjees of antiquity, arc far from being confidered as Squally cefential, though certainly not to be overlooked.,The
'Tire ammesof the authors will not be inserted, if that omifllon is ie- fired; and no information is wiflied for, that can give uncafinefs to any in- dividual. It may not be improper for every Clergyman, who receives this letter, to acknowledge tie receipt of it, figgelling any hints, at the fame time, that may occur to him respecting the Statistical Inquiry; and, particularly, 2s to the beds mode of supplying any deficiency in the accounts, either by an application to any of the residing Heritors, to some neighbouring Clergy- nian, or to any other individual, who has spirit and capacity, to do justice to filch an undertaking. Any important fads or observations transmitted by the Clergy, which may not be included in tie Statifical Account of Scotland, as now pub- llhed, (to prevent the Work swelling to too great a size), are to be care- fully written out in feveralinterleaved copies of the work, to be deposited in the principal public libraries both of England ard Scotland, forthe pur- Fofe of preservation, and as a foundation for county or provincial his- tories, in which more minute information may be expefed. It might be the means of shortening such accounts considerably, if the information, refpecAing certain articles, were condensed as much aspoflible. in the fliape of a Table, according to the annexed specimen. . STATISTICAL TABLE of the PARISH of LENGTH in English miles, - Number of persons above 0oo, Breadth, - -- - Families, Population, 40 or o5 years ago, -- Houses inhabited, ---, amino 791, - - -- Ditto uninhabited, Increase, (or decrease), - --- New holses built within Average of Births, for any No. there re years,,---of Deaths, of years ---- Old ditto pulled down, -- of Marri- preceding) --- Married persons, ages, 179t, - Children at an average, Inhabitants in towns, - - from each marriage, ----- in villages, -- - Twins, &c. born in the .-- .- in the country, - parilh for the last o Number of Males, - - years,,--- Females, - achelors, or unmarried ·c--- - persons under to years of men above so,,age, - - --- Unmarried women above -----s - liunder 2, - 45 -- --- . ·undler jo, ---. Widow-ers, - ----.- under 70, - -- Widows, --------- nder So, --- lemnbers of the -Efta --1-------- under 90o, blilicd Church,,---- nder ico, - --- Secedtcrs,,Number
Number of Roman Catholics, - Number of Male farm servants, -- Episcopalians, - - Female ditto,,- Males born out of the (Add any other occap-,parilh, - tion, by which a person Females ditto, - gains a livelood in the - Persons bonl abroad, parinl.) ______--in England, - Poor, _ - _________ in Ireland, Capital of their funds,,in the Co- Annual income, lonics, - Young persons taught -- Proprietors residing gli, ngli, riting, &c.,non-refiding, - Latin, .Clergymen, - - - Greek, - Merchants, - - - At the University, _-.- Physicians, -- Ships, - --_- Surgeons, - - -- Small vefels,,Writers, or Attomies, - Boats, - Schoolnaters, - -- Seamen, ·- - - Farmers above L. 5 per --- Fieren, - -,imnum, - -- Persons serving in the - Ditto under L. 5, Navy during the last - . Shopkeepers, - ar, ----- Innkeepers, - - -- Ditto in the Army, -,- Smiths, - - verage of persons, who have set- _ · Mafoos, -tied in the parifl, du-,Carpenters, -ring the lafl.5 or to - Weavers, - years, - - Shoemakers, - Ditto who have emigra- -- - Tailors, ted from it, -,. Butchers, Nurmber of acres, in Scotch or Eng. Millers, lift measure, --- . Bakers, - W- heel Carriages, --- Gardeners, - - - Carts,,-- Male doneftic fervantr, - Ploughs, -- - - Female ditto,,L s. d. Valued rent, in Scotch money, Real rent, nno 17 ', i: Sterling, -- --anno 1791, S Rents spent in the parith, Value of articles exported, -- ditto imported,,VALUE OF STOCK.,L. s. d. L. s. d. Number of Draught horses, - valued at each. Total,,-- -Saddle and carriage horses,--,- es cattle, - - - ----- --Inferior ditto,,Bellt flleep, Inferior ditto, .--*- Goats, rwine, &c.,Total value of flock, L. c ANNU.A
ANNUAL PRODUCE. Number of Produce Price per Total Priceper otal produce Total value. M. caors. Acres under per Acre. Boll. Acre.,each. BOLLS. L. S. D. L. . D. DOLLS. . L. . D. Oats, Bear, - Barley, Wheat, Beans, Peas, Potatoes, Flax, Turnips,,oTurnips, 0NES. PER STONE. STONES. Meadow hay, ort r. natural grass, 3 Sown gral, - . Straw at per boll of corn, - Pafiure at pcr horse; per cow; and per sheep.,Annual produce of Gardens, _- ------ ---- Orchards,,- - oods and Plantations, Fisherics,- Mines, Total Value of Annual Produce, t' For other particulars, reference must be had either to the Queries, formerly printed, fee Appendix, B. or to :Z the Analysis, inserted in tle First Volume of the Statillcal Account of Scotland.-Though many fads,vt~ namay thus be (bortly itated in the form of a table, yet they may often require a numb-r of explanatory,oblcrvations, which may be sent at thle fame time.
APPENDIX, E. Additional VNtes and Letters, sent from time to time, to the defiriert,Clersy. THERE was certainly reason to hope, after having made so considerable,a progress, as that of receiving 5a8 returns, in the fpacc of about two years, that little difficulty would have been found, in collecting the ie- maining accounts, amounting only to 413, in even a lhorter period of time. The contrary, however, turned out to be the cafe. It became necessary there- fore, to reiterate the applications from time to time, to present the Cubjed to the dcficient Clergy in every poflible light, sometimes serious, and forne- times jocular; and to prefi them, by every means that could be suggested, to transmit their refpedlive reports. With that view, the following letters were fucceffivcly written to them. The first one was printed; the reit, to satisfy them how mutch the number of deficient parilhes was diminished, were written in manuscript; and one, sent with my own hand, to demon. firate the particular anxiety I felt to receive a speedy answer. If any one Ihould imagine, that the Statiltical Account of Scotland, could have been more rapidly completed than it was, I trust that he will exculpate the Au- tlor of that undertaking from any blame, after perusing the following fe- rics of notes and letters. Series of Nstes and Letters written to the Clergy of the Church of Scot-,land, during a Period osSi.e Trear, from the sJl December 179:, to the jli of Dcember 1797. No I. Printed Circular Note, dated the 2Sth December 179a. SIR JOHN SINCLAIR prseenti his compliments. He hopes that his ' former communications, refpecling the Statiltical Account of Scot- land, have been received. It is earnestly requested, that such of the Cler- gy as have not yet transmitted their refpeaive accounts, will lose no time in fending them, the Public at large beilg extremely anxious, to have this Work brought to a conclusion, as quickly as possible, as the advantages of wlhich it may be productive, cannot be thoroughly known or felt, until it is completed. Eight volumes, which will contain in all about ;50 parirhes, will be publillied in the coiCfe of January t793, and the remainder of the Work, if the neceiary materials come in, might be finifled soon after the meeting of the ensuing General Assembly, when it is hoped that not a single account will be wanting. The Clergy will hear, with fatisfaAion, that not only in England, but in every p;irt of the Continent, the hliglhelt eulogiums have been bestowed, on the zeal, talents, and industry they have displayed, in carrying on this great undertaking, which, in the opinion of every unprejudiced person, will be of as much confcquence to other countries as even to Scotland.,LONDON, December za. i;t9.5,N.B,
N. B. Nothing could be more difagreable to Sir John Sinclair, than rw he under the neceflity of applying to any other person, than the Minister of the parifl, for the Statistical Account of it; particularly, as it might tend so lelFen the high reputation which the Clergy have already so deservedly acquired by their Statistical exertions. He hopes, therefore, that your as- fiiance will not be wanting, a moment longer than is absolutely necellary; and he shonld be glad to be favoured with your account, directed to him at London, in packets not exceeding two ounces in weight, as speedily as pof- fible. It is not in his power, during the fitting of Parliament, to attend to the printing of tie different returns, but he willies to have the fatisfadtion of reading them over before they are sent to the press, and many refpecA- able literary characers in the church, (in particular those, who have taken an active part in eftablifling the Society for the Benefit of the Sons of the Clergy), have undertaken the trouble of reviling the press at Edinburgh, during his ahfence. He has the pleasure of adding, that there is the profpec of a fund being sion eftablihbed, for the Daughters as well as the Sons of the Clergy ; and though the Clergy engaged in this important Work, without any interelted motives, it cannot be an unpleafing circumRtance, that their labours are ·likely to meet wvitl such solid marks of public approbation, and will pro- bably be productive, not only of personal credit to each individual, but of beneficial consequences to the order in general. It need scarcely be added, that the merit which they have already acqui- red by their Statiltical exertions, must very materially contribute to the fisc- cess of the application now in agitation, for the augmentation of the si- pends of the Clergy. It is indeed an unfortunate circumltance, that the Statistical Account of Scotland was not completed previous to such an ap- plication. However, the greater number of accounts that are received and printed before that question comes on, the better chance there is for success; and it is to be hoped, that at least ten volumes, containing from fix to fe- ven hundred parifies, will be publiihed before the month of April, when that business will, in all probability, come under dicliufion. SIR JOHN SINCLAIR begs to hear from every Minister, who has not yet written him, when his account may he expected. He will have the honour of attending the ensuing General Aflembly, when he hopes some plan will be formed, for having, in each parili, a copy of the Work. In the concluding volume, every neccefary correction which the Clergy will take the trouble of pointing out, lh:ll be attended to, and any additional in- fcrmnation will be inserted, that is judged in ant relpetds of importance.,No Il.
NS It. The first General Circular Letter, written in M. S. to the deficient,Clergy, July 1793. SIR, I HAVE the pleasure to inform you, that the eighth and ninth volumes of the StatiRical Account.of Scotland, are just publilhed; that the tenth is in conGderable forwvardnefs, and that the remaining volumes, are ordleld to be begun. Tlhi deficient pariflcs are now so much reduced in number, that I can at laRt asdlrefs every Clergyman, who has not as yet favoured me with an ac- count of his parifl, by a letter in M. S. inflead of a printed application. I am extremely anxicus, on every account that. can pofibly have any influ- ence on the mind of an Author or of a Citizen, to have this great and la. borious undertaking over; and I am persuaded, that you would not vwifl to be confidered as disinclined to contribute your aid to a Work, which is so strongly recommended, by the inclosed unanimtnoj vote, of the venerable Generl Assembly. If, however, you are prevented by sickness, or other- wife, from fending the account yourself, I will trouble you'to point out any other channel for procuring it, a. speedily as possible, as it would be a dif- grace to the Country, to have a Work, in which th.e.national character is now so much concerned, too tedious in being brought to a concldfion, or to any refpcct defetive. The eitcblifhmcnt of a Board of Agriculture, and Internal Improvement, (which would never have taken place h.d it not been for this inquniry), is a sufficient proof, of die many important confe- quences, of which it may be productive.- Expeting the favour of an an- fwer in course, that I may take the necetasry measures accordingly, in cafe an application to any other person imould be requisite. I remain, with efccm, Sir, your humble and obedient fervent,,JOHN SINCLAIR. N'. B. The anfwver to this letter, or any Statistical information, in packets under two ounces, from this date, till the sit of Anlguft, may be addrefeid to me at Whitehall, London ; and, from that tr.c, to the ItR cf September, (when at fa.rtheit all the necetfary materials, I have no doubt, will be col- leced), may be tranflnitted to Edinburgh. The whole Work will be pub- linled about ChriRmas next, which, though not quite so early as could have been wiflied for, yet, on thle whole, will do no discredit to the partie; itterelted in this important Publication.,Tie
The following is a Copy of the Unanimous Vote of the,General Assembly, in favour of the Statiflical Account of Scotland.,"Edinburgh, i7th May 1793. " W HICH day, in the General Aflembly of the Church of Scotland,,upon a motion made and unanimously agreed to, the Moderator, " from the chair, recommended to such Miniters as have not yet furnihied "Sir John Sinclair, with Statiffical Accounts of their respective parishes, to contribute, with all the expedition in their power, to complete a Work " of such apparent public utility.",No III. Circular Letter, dated the 4th of October 1793. SIR, IS Majesty having been graciously pleased, to place me at the head of the Board of Agriculture, coultituted for the purpose of promoting the internal improvement of the country, (a situation which, I find, will be attended with great labour and fatigue), I am therefore extremely defi- rous, of bringing the Statiltical Account of Scotland, as quickly as poflible, to a conclusion; and I flatter myself, that it can easily be now completed before Christmas. Your exertions for that purpose, I am persuaded, will not be wanting; and I will trouble you to inform me, in course of post, when your return may be expected, as, without such information, the printing of the remaining volumes cannot well be arranged. I remain, with much efcem, Sir, your very obedient humble servant,,JOHN SINCLAIR. EDINBURGHc, O&t. 4. 1793.,No IV. Circular Note, dated the 3d of November 1793. SIR JOHN SINCLAIR presents his compliments, with the inclosed ar-,rangement of the Agricultural Surveys, now going forward, which are to be completed again(t Christmas next, although they extend all over the kingdom. He is perfectly afionifsed at not having beard from you before this time; and he fliould confider it disgraceful to the Church of Scotland,,alnd
and every individual conneated with it, if the Agricultural Survey, be- gun in September 1793, was completed before the Statistical, which com- menced in May 1790. At any rate, he depends on hearing from you in course; and he hopes that your letter, will either be accompanied with your account, or that you will have the goodness to point out the proper person to apply to for infor- mation, as no time can now be loft. If the parilh does not furnilh great materials, any general information, as to the slate of the population, agri- culture,church, flipend, poor, school, boats, filhermen, &c. will be fufli. cient, and your name will be prefixed or not, as may be most agreeable. EDINBURCG, } 3d Nov. 1793.- No V. Circular Letter, written by SIR JOHN SINCLAIR, 25th Au.,gust 1794. SIR, I HAVE at lad the pleasure of fnding, that the remaining deficient paris s are To few in number, that I can now address the Clergy, without ma- ting ufJ of a borrowed band. The last volumes are in the press, and I am in great hopes that it will be in my power to take the charge of them my- self. I beg, therefore, that you would lose no time in fending me the Ac- count of your parilh, as M. S. is much wanted to keep the press a-going. I cannot think of leaving Scotland, without having this great undertaking, if pofllble, completed; and indeed I told the King, who takes a warm interelt in a Work, which would do credit to the reign of any Sovereign, that I flat. tered myself, I fImold be able to prefnt the last volume to his MajeRy when I returned to England. I remain, with great regard, your very faithful, humble fenrant,,JOHN SINCLAIR. ED.INURGc , , 15th Aug. 1794. N. B. If the account is not quite ready, I mult trouble you to inform me, ia course, when it may be expeled, that I may arrange the accounts in the ditferent volumes accordingly.,No V.
No VI. Circular Note, if Novenber )794. IR JOHN SINCLAIR presents his best compliments. He sets out in g fewv days for London; but hopes, before he goes, to have the pleasure of receiving the few Statistical Accounts which are fill deficient. The re- maining volumes, which complete the Work, are to be left under the charge of Sir Henry MIoncrielf, Dr Ilardie, and Mr Walker of the Canon- gate; and Sir John Sinclair will fend the account of your parifi, to be edited by any of those gentlemen you may prefer. It is very fatisfaclory to think, that so great an undertaking is at lal brought so near its conclu, sion.',EDINBURGaH, aft Nov. 1794. N. B. Large parties of the Rothfay and Caithness Fencibles are to be quartered upon all the Clergy, who will not have sent their Statiflical Ac- counts, on or before the term of Martinmas next; so that the Minister have it in their choice, either to write to the Colonel, or to treat his fol. diers.,No VII. Circular Note, urth January I795. SIR JOHN SINCLAIR presents his compliments. He expeeted, before S this time, to have had the pleasure of receiving the Statistical Account of your parish. He begs it may be sent as quicly as poeible, as any delay will be attended with great inconvenience, interrupting the whole progress of the Work. He wihes to have the report tranmiitted to himfell in 'he first place, as he always choofes to peruse the Statistical Accounts previous to their publication.,VInlTErALr., Z isth Jan. 1795.,No VIII. Circular Note, dated 3d April r795. QIR JOHN SINCLAIR's best compliments. He sets out to-morrow for Y Scotland, to attend the infrnecion of his Second Battalion of Fencibles; b.t is obliged to return before the end of April. He is particularly anxi-,cs
ous, when he returns to London, to lie able to inform the King, that a Work, of which his Majesty has exprecfed such particular approbation, has heen completed. He therefore hopes, that it is now in your power to fend the StatiRlical Account of your parilh, addrefled to him at Edinburgh. So few remain niprinted, that if all the deficient Accounts are tranfiritted in course, or within a week from your receiving this, the whole Work may be completed before the 25th of May 1795, or within five years from the com- mencement of the inquiry. Sir John depends upon every possible exertion on the part of his friends in tle Church, to prevent another year from com- umencing, previous to the colclufion of the Work. WnTEnAiALL, 3d April 1795.,No IX. Circular Note, dated 3d August 1795. SIR JOHN SINCLAIR being anxious to complete the Statiflcal Ilifiory,of Scotland, beg. the favour of Mr to fend him the Account of the parilln of as soon as pofslble. Only a few parilhcs are now wanting, to accomplili that great national Work; and the lait volumes are going to the press immediately, so that any delay would be attended with very great inconvenience. He will troubie Mr to write him in rourt, when the Account may be expected, that measures may be taken accold. ingly. The weight of packets being now reduced to one ounce, he re- quelts that circumilance may be attended to, in fending the Account, by putting it in separate parcels. lie las the pleasure of adding, that there are not above a dozen or two of parilbes, to which it will be necerflry to fend StatiJiicat Mllionarics, the Clergy, in every other quarter, undertaking to draw up the Accounts themselves, without such alliltance.,EDINBUP G II, 3d Aug. I769.,No X. Circular Letter, dated the 3d of September 1795. SIR, IHHAE returned from thle camp, at Aberdeen, to complete the Statistical,Account of Scotland. It will be impoflible'for me, confiitently either with my own charancr, or the credit of Scotland in gencral, and of its,f Clergy
Clergy in particular, to return to England, leaving that Work in an unfi- nifled state; and as the press is actually tfopped for want of copy, I beg that you would have the goodness to fend me, in course, the Statifical Ac- count of your parilh, which, 1 am persuaded, must be ready before this time. I remain, with esteem, Sir, your faithful and obedient servant,,JOHN SINCLAIR. 3d Sep. i795.S N. B. I will trouble you to acknowledge the receipt of this letter, in course, even if it were not in your power to fend tile Account for a fort- night or three weeks to come. It is so eflletial to have the Work done without any further delay, that I {hall be under the disagreeable necellity, of fending a Statistical Miflionary, to every parihl, from which I cannot pro- cure a return in the course of this month.,No XI. Circular Letter, sent in January 1796. SIR, OwEVEtR much occupied with other bufnefs, yet my anxiety. conti- nues unabated, for having the Statistical Account of Scotland com- pleted, without delay; and I hope that the Account of your parifl, is in such a slate of forwardners, that you can transmit it to me, in the course, either of this, or the ensuing month of February. It is of real importance to have this Work brought to a conclusion, as it hampers all my other un- dertakings. I remain, with esteem, Sir, your faithfil and obedient ser- vant,,JOHN SINCLAIR. WVHITETIALL, January 1796._ No XII. Circular Letter to tie deficient Clergy, A3d January 176. SIR, A Tr the comrnceneeant of a new year, it is natural for a person, anxious,to fulfil the duties of the Itation in which lie is placed, to revolve in hlis mind, the miltakcs, the errors, and the omiflioni of the former.,Undei
Under the head of orniffons, I am sorry to be under the necefity of ran:- ing, my not having h;tlerto received the Statistical Account of your pa- rill; which, on many accounts, I have been impatiently expecting for some time. I have the palature of adding, however, that the deficient Accounts are now so much reduced in number, (amounting only to about o0), that 1 look for the greater part, and indeed, I trust, the whole of these, in the colrfe of this or the enifuiig month, whlich will enable me to have, not only the Accounts themselves, but also the general result and analylis of the whole, printed before the meeting of the enfling General Afembly. I am persuaded, that you will fee the neceffiry 1 am under, of urging you again upon this fubjecl, as it would be in the higlift degree disgraceful, to susser another year to commence, without having this Work completed, (which would be the cafe were it unfinithed in May next), or to leave even a single blank in so great an undertaking, which I confider to be an eternal monu- ment of the talents, public-fpirit, and indultry of my countrymen, during the present era. I remain, with esteem, Sir, your very faithful and obedi- ent I'crant,,JOHN SINCLAIR. WlITEHALL, Z %jd Jan. 1796' Nc XIII. Circular Letter to the defncient Clergy, to whole Parifles Sta- tifsical Mifionaries had been sent, azth January 795. SIR, IN a letter I have lately received from J. . ndrevs, Efq; who propoles to continue Dodor Hery's Htlilory, applying for sone information as to the state of Scotland, at tile prritd reipeting which he is now writing; he adds, on tile fabjeca of the Statiltical Account of Scotland, " A book which I h.lve pcrufed with equal p!rafurc and afjliani/rint, I may almost fay, envy, since the foutliem part of the island ought to blufli, at never having produced a similar Work." I am persuaded, that it is impolsible for you, not to wifn to have some flare, in so handfonme, and fojult a co-. plinent, to the Clergy of Nolth Britain, and to partake in an undcrtaking, which must be an eternal monument of the iuduftry, talents, and public. spirit, of your countrymen, during the prefelt era; and therefore, though I have already obtained materials for drawing up the Statistical Account of your p.rifli, yet if you will undertake to transmit to me an Account of it yolrfelf, in the course of the month of February next, I certainly ivill give it the preference. It is impo.eible for me to give a stronger testimony,of
of my refped for the Church of Scotland, and of every individual connec. ted with it. I remain, with eficem, Sir, your faithful and obedient ser- vant,,JOHN SINCLAIR, WHITEHALLH, 25th Jan. 1796.,No XIV. Circular Letter, dated ift December 1796. S IR, A CIRCuMSTASNCI has just occurred, which must give a conliderable,degree of uneasiness, to every person interested in the prosperity of that excellent inffitution, the Society for the Benefit of the Sons of the Clergy. It is this: A plan, I underltand, is in contemplation, for publiiling an Ab- ftra&t of the Statistical Accounts, with a view of intercepting a considerable share of the emolument to be expected from that publication. In order to defeat so invidious a project, I propose to draw up the refolt of the whole Inquiry myself, in a separate Work, to accompany the last volume of the Statiffical Publication; but, for that purpole, it is absolutely necclliry, that I flould immediately have all the deficient parinles in my polrfiluon; of wlich, I have the pleasure to inform you, there are only 14 now remain- ing, each of which I am in daily expectation of receiving. You will, I am persuaded, fee the necessity of fending me the Account of your parifi in course for until it arrives, no progress can be made in drawing up the in- tended Abltratl. I hope that this measure will defeat the malicious inten- tion of those people, and will be the means of feclring a considerable fum, for a very Benevolent Inititution, whose success we must all feel a pleaftre in promoting. Expecding to hear from you in eourfe, for not an instant flould now be loft, I remain, with esteem, your faithful and obedient servant,,JOHN SINCLAIR. EDINBURGH, 2 ift Dec. r796. rhe following Note to the above Letter, wartfent tolomt of the Clergy,,whose Accounts bad unfortunately fallen by. N. B. I am lorry to give you the trouble of drawing up another copy of your Account; but after the molt diligent search, I have not been able to find the one you were so obliging as to fend me. From my changing so of-,ten
ten my place of residence, and the numeonus hands I have been obliged to employ, some incidents of that fort were unavoidable.,No XV. Cilcular Letter, sent in April 1797. SIR, Ast very imch disappointed, at not having hitherto received the Statifli- cal Account of your parilh. There are very few nn-' deficient, and you cannot imagine the bad effect which the want of soie mudl have, in the opinion of many who are perpetually inquiring, whether the Statitical Account of Scotland is. or is not, completed ? It is unnecefeary for me, I am perfitaded, to urge you more upon the subject. You may easily judge 'of my impatience and anxiety about it, when I can think about any literary matter at so bury a time in Parliament as this. I remain, with efeem, your faithfil and obedient servant,,LONDON, p JOHN SINCLAIR. April '797. N. B. I received a Statistical Account the other day, which colt nine shillings, in consequence of the Miniller forgetting that the privilege of Parliament does not extend beyond one ounce. I tlought it right to men- tion this circumstance, as you 'will probably be in a hurry infending off * your Account, after tie rce:ipt of this letter; for I am persuaded, you would not winl to be recorded as the very last, who contributed to so use- fil an undertaking. No XVI. Note, written with Red Ink, to the Clergymen who had not,given in their Statistical Accounts, t th July 1797. SIR JOHN SINCLAIR presents his compliments to,He sets out for Scotland next week, and will he much disappointed in- deed, if he has not the pleasure of finding the Statiftica! Account of,ready for him; as, on his arrival, he must bring the Work to an immediate conclusion. There are now only fix deficient parilbes; and from the Draconian colour of hi ink, any Statiflical delin- quent may fee, what the rear rank has to look for. Satfapicnti.,WHITEHALL, .Ith July 1797.,No Y VI,
In addti!on to these geieral Cicurlar Letters, t befolloMing uere set,,at different dines, tofevera! of the Clergy. No XVII. Letter written to fume of the most active Members in the,diferent Preibyteries, 2 ift August 1 79. SIR, I HOPE that yon have received a circular letter, I had the honour of wri- ting to the Clergy of the Church of Scotland, incloling some Statifti- cal Q.eries. I need not attempt to explain to you the importance of such inveftiga:ion, anld the many public advantages which may be derivei fronm them. But a; tht.y may sand some chance of being negleced, ullefs some of the a&ive members in the different Preffyteries, take a charge of them, correspond with their brethren upon the fubjedt, and recommend them, at the different meetings of the Church, to their attention, I take the liberty of requefthig that favour at your hands, which will greatly oblige, Sir, your very obedient, humble servant,,JOIIN SINCLAIR. ED IoauBRCR , Ift Aug. 1790.5 N. B. I beg to add, that however dcfirible it might be, to receive an- fwers to every query, yet, it cannot be expecled, that the Clergy Ihould uni- verfally take that trouble; though the more information that is sent, the better, and the more acceptaLle. No XVIII. Circular Letter to the Clergy, who had not acknow-,ledged the Receipt of any preceding Communication, id Apri! '793. SIR, I Hive infinite pleasure in acquainting you, that the Statiltical returns,fiom the Clergy are now coming in so rapidly, that I have every reason to hope, there will be hardly a deficient parifu against the meeting of the ensuing General Aflembly. I need scarcely remark, tlhat the fooncr luch a Work can be brought to a conclulion, the more creditable for all con- cerned, and the better for the country; for, till it is completed, those plans for the improvement of Scotland. which will be the rcfillt of this inquiry, cannot be set on foot. I hope tli:ceforc, that you will make every exertion in your power, to fend me the return from your parilh, either before, or during, the fitting of the AIT.cnbly; and that if from indisposition or other- ' ile, you are prevented fiom exocuting this Wor!; yo:r'clf, that you will,be
be so obliging, as to request some Clergyman in the neighbourhood, or any person in your parifl who can undertake fitch a Work, to execute it against that time. I truf, that no lean could engage in any labour, that could yield him more satisfaction, or could prove more useful, either to the community in which he lives, or to society in general. It is a pleating cir. cumfance to me, to have been the means ofrefeuing so many important faRs, and useful obfcrvations, from the oblivion which might otherwise have been their lot. I have the honour to be, with great regard, Sir, your very obedient, humble servant,,JOHN SINCLAIR. WVllIEALL, ) ad April 1793. N. B. There are now only about 360 deficient parishes; and as I receire them at the rate of about o1 weekly, and expect about a hundred from the members who attend the Assembly, I flatter myfeli that there will be hard- ly a deficient parilli. on the i5th May 1793, or within three years from the co mmlencement of the inquiry. No XIX. Note tranrmitted to a Number of the deficient Clergy, from,Inverness, in May 1793.,Flafper the ladfl SIR JOHN S1NCLAIR's best compliments. He is thus far in his way k north, to complete his corps of Fencibles; but he fill hopes, that it will be in his power to attend the conclusion of the General Aflembly, though, unfortunately, it meets uncommonly early this year. As the Statiftieal Inquiry commenced during the Assembly 1790, and is now so much advanced, he is purfinaded, that every member of the Church of Scotland will make every pollible exertion, rather than susser another Atiembly to pass over, with a lit of deficients, however fimall. He hopes therefore, that you will have the goodness, either to bring with you the Sta- tiftical Account to the Arfembly, or will fend it by some friend, or will tranfuit it in packets, addrefed to Sii John Siiclair, at Edinburgh.-Dr Ilardy will take particular care of any Accounts. that may be delivered to him, till Sir John returns to Edinburgh.,INVeRNESS, , 2d May: 793.,No XX.
No XX. Copy of a Letter sent from London, by Sir Henry Welwood,Moncrieff, and by Dr Hardy, to the deficient Clergy, urging their to fend their Accounts, 6th April 1793. Reverend Sir, SIR JOHN SINCLAIR has requested -e, to urge you to fend him the,Statistical Account of your parim, as soon as possible. It is of real im- portance, that he lhould be able to complete the volumes in the course of this year, which can only be prevented. by his not receiving the Accounts he Itill wants, from you and a few others. mong our brethren. Allow me to solicit your attention to the subjed, and to request, that, at all events, you will endeavour to have the Account of your parish transmitted to Sir John, by the time of the ensuing General Aflembly. I have the pleasure of adding, that the Work is in high reputation here, and does much credit to all the parties concerned in it. I am, reverend Sir, your faithful and obedient servant.,LONDON, 6th April t793.l N. B. Please communicate the fubflance of this letter to any of the Clergy in your neighbourhood, who have not as yet tranfinitted their Sta- tiftical returns. N. B. Fifty-feven copies of these letters were sent, partly subscribed by Sir Henry Welwood Moncrieff, and partly by Dr Hardie, who were then inLondon on some ecclesiastical business. No XXI. Copy of the Letter written by Dr Kemp, to I9 of the defi-,cient Clergy, in the Highlands of Scotland, 25th November 1793. Dear Sir, I Ar sorry to find, among a lift of deficients of the Statifieal Accounts of pariflies, your name mentioned, in a lift sent to me by Sir John Sin- clair. He is molt anxious, to have that interesting and important Work, brought to a conclusion as loon as poflible, and hopes it may be accomplifli. ed about Christmas next, when he also expects the Agricultural Survey of the whole kingdom may be completed. This Survey commenced only in September las; the Statifical in May 1790; it will have singular afpeet,to
to the public, that the former flould be accompliflied before the latter; and I fliould be extremely sorry to fee your name mentioned among those to whom the delay is ascribed. Let me request of you, and I take the liberty to do it with much arneftnefs, that you will be so good as fend up the Ac- count of your parifl, with as much expedition as pofiible, addrefed to Sir John Sinclair of Ulbfter, Baronet, h. P. Edinburgh. In doing so, you will confer a favour upon the public, confuilt your own reputation, and, if I may be permitted to add, after such weighty considerations, very much oblige, Dear Sir, your affectionate humble feivant,,JOHN KEM P. EDINBURGH, , Nov. 21. 1793. No XII. Printed Note, circulated by the Duke of Argyll, the Earl,'f Fife, the Reverend Principal Robenfun, &c. amongst the Clergy, urging them to transmit their Statilical Accounts. THE DUKE OF ARGYLL prefnts his compliments to,Hopes that the letter and the queries, addrefed to the Clergy of the Church of Scotland, by Sir'John Sinclair, have been received. As fuchl Statistical Inquiries are of great public importance, and may prove, in vari- eus refpe&s, of essential fenrice to the country, it is requested that every polible attention may be paid to them. It is not necedfary that all the qoe- ries should be answered; only such as are the most material, and on the points with which you are the bedt acquainted. At the fame time, the more information that can be given regarding tkepopulation, ad tie poli- Xicdl circtmnjtmtceJ of the country, the more defuiable. The quetlions re- garding the natural hitory, and the antiquities of the parift, are not so es- fential,'and are only intended for such of the Clergy as may have dedicated their attention to such inquiries. It is also requefed, that you would re- commend this invelligation; when any opportunity offers, to the Clergy in your neighbourhood, and to your friends in the Church. N.B. Several of these notes were transmitted by the Duke of Argyll, file Earl ofFife, the Reverend Principal Robertson, &c. to the Clergy of thlir acqulaintance.,% No XXII.
No XXII. Circular Letter to the Principal iand ProfclrIsa of the ni;i-,verfities of Edinburgh, St Andrews, and Aberdeen, dated 3d No. vember 179.. GENTLEMEN, I HAVE the honour of fending herexith, a copy of the very intelligent and fatisfaclory Statillical Account, transmitted to me, of the Univer- fity of Glasgow; and it is my earnest wifn, to be able to print, by way of Appendix to the lahi volume of the Statilical Account of Scotland, irnilar Accounts of all our Scotch Univerities. It must be attended with many good consequences, and will throw great light upon the important luhjed of education in general, to have, not .,fly llort histories of these Univerfi. ties, and a view of their method of proceeding, in carrying on the educa- tion ofyouth; but also observations on the rules and practiccs, wrlich have been found, by experience, mofl beneficial for that effeltial purpose. I am perfiladed, that I may safely rely upon your exertions, for procuring nme such an Account of a seminary, refpeding which, fron the celebrity it bas obtained, the public will naturally be anxious to have authentic informa- tion. The only particular, in addition to those mentioned in the Glafiow Account, which I fiould be glad to have, is a slate of the number of Itu- dents who have attended the University since the commencement of the present century; diftinguilhing, ilt, Each year; Id, The country whence they came, as Scotland, England, Ireland, America, or foreign countries; and, 3d, The number who have attended the different clat'es respectively. This is to be added to the Glasgow Account. I have the honour to be, with great regard and efleem, Geutlemen, your very obedient, and faithfil humble servant,,JOHN SINCLAIR. EDINB u R , Nov. 3. 1794. N. B. It would be extremely desirable, to be favoured with your Ac.- count as soon as it can be drawn up, as the last volumes of the Statistical Account of Scotland are already in the presa. BESIDES there, and the -preceding printed letters, many other applica- tions were occalional!y made to the Clergy, particularly when they attend- Fd the Genetal tJlenibly, which is annually held in the month of May, and,to
to which reprefentatires are sent from all parts of Scotland; nor were any means left untried, that were likely to briig it to a speedy conclusion, as fionl as the pulllbility of completing the Work was ascertained. It is pro. per, at the fame time, to obfernv, that many of the Clergy, who were thus so dilatory, were not indisposed to the cause, or unwilling to oblige me# and far less, incapable of drawing up Accounts of their refprtive parifles; Imut they put it off from year to year, io expectation of additional informa- tion, or thinking they would Jlill be in timne enoughfor te lat aohltme, little confidering, that the delays of only 50, out of about goo individuals, aaually put off the accoinplifillent of this Wtork, for the space of above three years.,APPENDIX, F. Extratfl of various Letters, approving of the STATISTICAL ACCOUNT OF SCOTLAND, and urgitg a Pertfterance in that Under'taling. A it was my intention, in writing the Hiflory of the Origin and Progress,of the Statistical Account of Scotland, and the Appendix ann"ted thereto, to lay before the reader, the various circulmftnces which tended to bring that important Work to a conclusion, I am thence induced, to add tile following Extrafc' of Letters from several refpedlable quarters, whose approbation, undoubtedly, materially contributed to induce me to persevere in the attempt, when othernife my zeal might have flagged, from the de- lays and difficulties which it was neceliry to encounter. It is to be confi- dercd, that this great undertaking, was carried on by a single individual, at his own risk and expence, and that nothing could have supported hirr, in going through so great a labour, but the fullelt conviction of the great im- portance of the measure, and the circumftancc, of its having met with the approbation of many rlpeflablle individuals, both at lhome and abroad. Some of the letters I received on the fubjelt, particularly from the pre- sent Emperor of Russia, from Count Bernftorff, Prime Minilter at the Court of Denmark, and others, having been accidentally left in London, cannot le inserted in this place; but tile reader will cafily perceive, that the Au- thor mult have been a good eral animated inl his pursuit, by those which follow.
In printing the following ferics, it was on tie whole thought preferable, to preserve their order, in point of time, rather than any other mode of ar- rangement. No I. Ertraf of a Letter from the Reverend Dr Robert Henry, the,HiRlorian, dated the i9th July 179o. I HAD the honour to receive your printed letter, with the inclosed paper, a few days ago. A perfec knowledge of the population, and other cir- cumilances of our country, may be of great utility: Greater perhaps tiaan cam be atprfe/uttfore/een. You are much to be commended, Sir, for your efforts to obtain that knowledge, and fbould be afilted by every Scotch- man, who bath it in his power. I am sorry, that my retired situation, and very precarious Itate of health, make it impoflible for me to be of so much use to you as I wifh.-Befides, I am engaged in finishing the sixth volume of my History of Great Britain, a work of which you may, perhaps, have heard. No II. Extraa of a Letter from George Dempiter, Efq; dated 14th,February 1791. T HE reason of my troubling you at present, is, to return you my thanks,for the fpecimcn of the Statiltical oblervations. This is a mort valszi able and useful work. It is a real Dooms-day Book, and promises to be more read and quoted than any book printed since Dooms-day Book. The older it grows, die more valuable it will prove. The object of this letter is, to entreat you to go on with it. Your indultry is fully adequate to the talk. It will also place the intelligence and good sense of our Clergy, in a very advantageous point of view. When the general approbation of the public follows this of mine, which it certainly will do, I pray you to ex- tend your views to England and Ireland, and give us all the three king- doms. The sale will defray the expence, and found an academy at Thurfo. No III. Extrat of a Letter front Sir David Dalrymple, (Lord Hailes),,on receiving the fpe/imen of the four first Parifles of the Statillicta Account, dated ASth Febrary 17g1. As. much obliged to you for your prefcnt. Your State of Scotland pr- mr::,- to be very valuable Work, under the hands of so ardent an in- quirer as you are. There is mnuch to be learnt, even from the specimen.,'I No IV.
No IV. ExtraS of a Letter from the Reverend Dr Blair, dated rSth,April 1791. I AM very happy at there being such a general consent through the coua, try, in seconding your patriotic views, of obtaining a fatisfacory Statif- tical Account of Scotland. The Clergy seem to have exerted themselves more on this occasion than I bad expected from them. No V. Extrat of a Letter from George Dcmpftcr, Efq; dated 3jr,July 1791. I DESPAIR, sith you, of getting the Ministry, to bellow either pains or money on your Statistical Account; for which reason, I think it wife to forbear to apply to any of them; and I hope you will persevere indefatiga- bly, till you perfect a Work yourself, by which your name will be as cer- tainly handed down to poilerity, as William the Conqueror, and with much more credit. I envy you tile idea of this Work, and still more its execu- ion, and thie ife to which you defline the produce and profits of it. All is well conceived. No VI. ErtraC2 of a Ietter from Andrew Stuart, Efq; dated Sth Au.,gull 1791. THANK you for the copies yoln feut me, of the papers now circulat- ing among the Clergy of the Church of Scotland, for the purpole of ob- taining jufi information, on matters connected with the political circum- stances of the country. By the queries sent, their attention must necefarily be led to the proper objecls of attention, and the aifwers of the Clergy will, nolt probably, afford a valuable collection of ufefiul materials to work upon. No VII. £rtr;tl of a Letter fioli the Marquis del Campo, Ambafih.,dor lromn the King of Spain, dated 2d lay 17g2. HAVE read, with great plealfre indeed, the Profpeclus you have been so good :as to fend me, and I admire the manuer in which the general irn quiry, regarding the political fiate, population, indutry, &c. of a kingdom is trtate;. I fnall certainly make the properet use in my power of the other,boot;,
books, for M. Campomnines, and other persons in Spain of the fame dcfcrip- tion, and shall direct one for Count d'Aranda, recommending your wilies to him very earneily. No VIII. Extraft Translation of a Latter from the Count de Stadicn,,the Imperial Minister at the Britifli Court, dated 2ith May 1792. I BEG to return my bet acknowledgments for the Prospectus which you have had the goodness to tend me. Works of such general concern can- not fail to be favourably received, by those who are attached to the uleful sciences. I ahall not neglect to communicate them to several persons in Germany, who have applied themselves to those studies, and who, I am persuaded, will be much flattered in an opportunity of afifiing you. No IX. Extrat of a Letter from Mr Speaker Addington, dated 5th,June 1792. I THAr you for the Profpedlus you have sent me. The exertions of the Clergy ofScotland, in collecting and furnishing materials for fucht Work, are highly to their credit, and mufl be the belt encouragement to yourself, to persevere in your important and public spirited undertaking, to which I wifl all pofible success. No X. Extraa Translation of a Letter from the Comte de Redern,,the Pnrufian Minister at the Court of London, dated 14th June 1792. THE interciting details contained in that Work, (the Statistical Account,of Scotland), cannot fail to make the public impatient for the conclu- sion of so great an undertaking. The plan embraces all those important objects, on which depends the prosperity of political society, and the re- searches foanded thereon, seem to be equally extensive and laborious. No XI. E.tract of a Letter from the Le Chevalier de Pinto, Minister,to the Queen of Portugal, dated Lilbon, 3d July 1792. I Owe you many thanks for so valuable a mark of your remembrance, and more especially for your specimen of the Statistical Account of Scot- land. I fiall not fail to present the fame to our Academy of Sciences, and,will
will employ the greatest zeal, in endeavouring to procure for you the most fatisfacory answers. No XII. ExtraaS ranJlation of a Letter from Profeor Zimmerman,of Brunswick, dated 17th July 792. IT is with peculiar pleasure that I received your obliging letter, and the works which accompanied it. I shall not delay a moment to insert an ample extract in the last number of my Geographical and Statistical Journal, vwich I have publilhed for above two years. There sciences will gain much by your enterprise; and I feel the greatest anxiety, to fee a Work, aof such extent and utility, brought to a conclusion. No XIIL Extrat of a Letter from Profcfor Trefchow, of tile Uni.,verfity of Copenhagen, dated Sth August 17ga. I As much obliged to you for your Profpcatus of the Statistical Account of Scotland; for which the Society and I return you our thanks. It is worthy of being ohferved, that the Account of Edinburgh and its manners, lilay be applied to Copenhagenl; as there are, in many points, a ltriking likeness between them. Many pamphlets, Statistical and political, are in- fertcd in our periodical works, some of them certainly worth your atten- tion; but there are a great many articles that would not be interefling to you. No XIV. Extradl 'ranJflati/n of a Letter from the Comte de Herts-,berg, formerly minister to Frederick the Great, dated Berlin, igth August 1792. I RETURN you many thanks for your analysis of the Statistical Account of Scotland; and wist I could converse with you on a number of objects, which are equally intcrefting to both our countries. I entirely approve of your very excellent idea, that of invcftigating the interior state of every dittric, by reports from the Blinifters of each parifi; and I am of your opi- nion, that, if provided with good models, no class of men could be more proper for so important an undertaking, than the parochial Clergy, who have ufilally the requisite knowledge and capacity, as well as the neceflary leisure for that purpose. I carneftly wilh, that I could imitate here, in my dear country, your very patriotic example.,No.
No XV. Ertiac Trat7alntion of a Letter from Monlieur Plefchhef,,Author of a Geographical View of the Ruffian Empire, datec St Peterfburgh, 25th September 1792. F it flould ever b: in my power, to draw up a complete Statiflical Ac- count of Rufli, on a plan more extcnfive, and more pkilofuphic, than the work I ltve already executed, nothing can be more serviceable, than the vailuable fpeciimen which you'have had the goodness to communicaite to me, which mayjultly be confidered as a sure foundation, and a clalli and ineltimable model, to be followed by those whl:o may choose to occupy themselves in such valuable researches. No XVI. Ertrat? of a Letter from Dr Gutlrie, dated St Peteriburgh,,26th September I;g%. Y OUR Statistical Work is, in my opinion, the most perfe&t which has ever,yet appeared, and will probabiy serve as a model to other countries, although few po:Tefs the fame set of refpeetable Paflors, to collec mate- rials, living with their flock in habits of friendlhip and intimacy, the natu- ral reftlt of the sensible regime of the Scotch Church. No XVII. Ertraa of a Letter from Profeflor Thorkelin, dated Co-,penhagen, 24th November 1792. yOL, Ana!yfis of the political slate of Scotland, is not only admired,here, but 'ollowed. It has given rife to new ideas, in particular, to a new focicty, in Norway, who have united themselves in order to make the prefcat itate of that long forgotten kingdom publicly known. Such exer- tior-, though particularly advantageous to Great Britain, will also be of immense benefit to others who derive information from them. The Sratifti- cal Arcoont of Scotland, translated into German, is announced, as preparing for the press at Leipzic.,o XVIII.. Extra of a printed Letter to the Clergy of Cornwall, refpeCing the eltablilhment of a County Library, dated z3d De- cember 1792. W E may flatter ourselves, that such an institution will excite the emu-,lation and attention of our brethren the Clergy of Cornwall, to life- ·ul and interelting fuljeds, and particularly to what relates to the natural,history,
hiltory, antiquities, and biography of the county. In this way, owing to the exertions of the Clergy, animated and solicited to the pursuit by.a Scottilh -Baronet, a curious and judicious Account is now giving, not of a tingle county, but of a whole sifter kingdom, No XIX. E.xtraa of a Letter from the Reverend Dr Blinlhall, Mini-,ter of Dundee, dated iyth January 1793. AM very happy, but not surprised, at the universal approbation which your Statistical Plan meets with, and I hope that the best success will at. tend your labours. My delaying so long to make any return to the vari- oils and much etleemed letters I received from you, was in consequence of my Colleague having reaiily agreed to idraw up the ai'wcrs to your queries. No XX. ErtraSof a'Letter from his Excellency John Adams, now,President of the United States of America, dated Philadelphia, ad March 1793. I RECEIvED yours, with your plans for a natural hiltory of sheep, and the Statistical Survey of Scotland. You could not have made a wiser choice. The.natural history of that animal, so useful to man, must be extremely important, as well as extremely curious; and a detail of particulars, rel. tive to your native country, must be interesting to all, but especially to the inhabitants of it. We, in thic country, enjoy a delicious tranquillity at pre. sent, and if your European'fermentations should not disturb us, fiall cont- nue to be happy. No.XXI. Extrad Traianlation of a Letter from the Comte de Hertf-,berg, dated Berlin, Sth March 1793. HAVE to return you my belt thanks for your interesting Work, the Sta- tiffical Account of the Pariflics in Scotland. I find the plan particularly well formed, and if I were again at the head of the Prussian Cabinet, would carrylit into execution liere.,.b SNo XIL
No XXIT. EFtrat of a Letter from Mr Kenrick of Bewdley, dated,t3th March I793. I CANrOT dillemble the pleafiue I feel, in having an opportunity of offer- ing you my mite of praise, for planning and calling forth the Statiffiaal Hilory of Scotland, which abounds with such a well digeted fund of use- ful infqrmation, and exhibits to the world at large, fp just a picture of a bq- dy of Clergy, who do the highest honour tp their profellion and to their country. No XXl. E.tralq ps a letter from General Walhingtpn, dated i5th,March 1793. I CAMSOT but express myself highly pleased with the undertaking in which you are engaged, (that of drwing up tile Statifical Account of Scot- land), and give my befl wiihes for its success. I am full perfiladed, that when enlightened men, will take the trouble to examine so minutely into the fiate of society, as your inquiries seem tp go, it mull result in greatly a- meliorating the condition of the people, promoting the interelts of civil so- ciety, and the happiness of mankind at large. These are objecis truly wor: thy. the attention of a great mind, and every friend to the human race, mull readily lend his aid towards their accompliliment. No XXIV. Extral of a Letter from Lord Auckland, dated 5th July,1793. CONSIDER your Statistical Reports, as exhibiting a course of inquiry, of · great importance to mankind, and I admire the courage ani right prin- ciples, which enable you to go forwards, as if the crisis which has lately menaced the overthrow of all civil inltitutions, were completely and favou- rably ended. No XXV. Extrart of a Letter from John Pinkertou, Elf; dated the.,a3d February 1794. IN looking over the Survey of Scotland, accomplithed by your exertions, · it occurred to me, that I could furnish an article worthy to appear in an Appendix to one of the volumtes of the Statistical Account. I need not in.,form
trm you; that in the third volume of Prynn's Records, there is a large, but indigetd lift, of all thole in Scotland, who paid homage to Edward I. in 1191, and z196, forming a kind of Dooms-day Book of the country at that period. Four years ago, I, with some labour, reduced the numerous names and designations into alphabetical order, and the lit being now adapted to general use, and containing the names and designations of the chief Land. holders, Citizens, and Clergy, at the time, it may be regarded as of no small importance to our ancient Statifics, topography, and genealogy. If your opinion coincides, I shall with plealure prerent it to you for the purpose, and correct the psefs. No XXVI. txtrat of a Letter from Dr Gillies the Historian, dated,the ad of June 1794. NOT only the Analyse de l'E Statiftique d'Ecofre, but also the larger,Work, in English, I have perused with the greatest fatisfaaion and delight. There are dark oblivious ages in the hiftary of the world, during which the human mind remained buried in torpid inactivity. There are other pe- riods, when the vivid powers of man awaken from their lethargy, and, as if refreshed, after a long and undisturbed repose, exert themselves with re- doubled energy. The times in which we lire, belong to the latter defcrip- tion; but that they do so, is owing to the generous and well directed exer- :ions of enlightened and patriotic individuals.,Inventar nut tqui itam excoluere per arter, jiique fui mrtrern aliotfecere mtrendo. No XXVII. Exiratf of a Letter from J. P. Andrews, Efq; the Au-,thor of the Continuation of Dr Henry's History, dated ift Dccem- ber 1795. IF any orne can aid my researches, it mull be the Author of the Statifical Account of Scotland, a book which I have perused with equal pleasure and afoonijbnent, I may almot fay, envy, since the southern part of the island ought to blulh, at having never produced a similar work.,So xxvi.M
No YXXVIII. Ertrdc of a Note from Geor# Chalmers, Efq; of the,Board of Trade, dated i7th May 1796. ;- H E congratulates Sir John on the near accomiplillumeni of his great.,Work, and is glad to find, that perseverance is'attended, on this o6ra- sion, with such happy success; No XXIX. Extra, TranJiation of a Letter from the BiLhop de Leon,,dated r7th July 1797. X I READ, with peculiar interelt, your Work concerning the Statistical. State of Scotland, beraufe I had been engaged, foe yeas- ago, in firhilar in- quiries in my own diocese, though not on so grdat a scale. Such inquiries afford the true means of afcertaiing the belt mode of improving tie con- dition of a people. No XXX. Etraat of a Letter from MIr George Stuart, formerly Pro-,fefor of Huntanity in the University of Edinburgh. OF all the letters which I received in the course of this inquiry, there it none which could pollibly liave had' greater influence with me, than the filfolving. Those who have been educated at the Univerlity of din. burgh. muf remember well, Profefior George Stuarr, (father of the well known Dr Gilbert Stuart),.one of the bel feholars, and one of the ablelt men, at that University, when it certainly rivalled, for erudition and talents, the mod celebrated seminaries in Europe. I had attended his class, but had not een him for many years. It was by the merelt accident, frianling a letter to him),'that any intercourse was renewed between us. The refpecable Proferllr, thought lie would embrace that opportunity, of encouraging his old Pupil to persevere in a course, which met with his particular approbation. I think it right to give a larger ctra&t from that letter; as it may be as serviceable to other'young men, as t.the person to whom it was addrefed. HAD the honour of'a letter lat night from Lord Btchan, in which he desires me to fend my answer to Sir John Sinclair, who will transmit it by post. It is with peculiar pleasure that I embrace this opportunity, which has been put in my way by his Lordihip, of troubling younwith this note, in order to revive the ideas of your youth, and to congratulate you on the,many
many and manly efforts you continue to make, for the real interest and ho- nour of your country. While others are failing doirn the iream, in quest of baubles, and are in danger every moment of finking by the way, into me- rited contempt and oblivion,. your perseverance and independent spirit, will transmit your name with honour to posterity, with present admiration, and true fatisfadion to yourself. Oblitipatriet memore.r tantum fui, seems a fit motto for the present lxlurious and degenerate age. If they are to. be roused to any degree of public spirit, which indeed I despair of, the attempt is laudable, even though it Dhould not succeed, rmagnis tamen excidit aulis. I have read all your printed works, which both infrucfted and pleased me. Your lafR attempt will be attended with great advantage, as every wife ad- ministration will attend to several hints of police, which arise out of the Reports of the different parilhes.,APPENDIX, G. An Account of tbe v.arious Atitempts, in Scotland, and in otker Cour:-,trier, to carry on Inquiries cf a StatiJ/ical Nature, previour to the Commencement of tis undertaking. THERE is no circumstance, which tends to place in a stronger point of,view, the difficulty attending the completion of such a Work, than to eonfider how often it has been either in vain undertaken, or imperfectly ac- complilhed, on various other occasions. A ihort account of these attempts, so far as my information reaches*, it may not be improper to lay before those, who are pleased to interest themselves in the fucccfs of this publica- tion. r. Spain.-The first attempt of the fort in modern Europe, (if Doomr- day Book is excepted), teems to have taken place in Spain, as-far back as the year 1575. We are indebted for that important article of information,,to * Some inquiries to the fame effcd, took place in Saxony, in Milan, in Tuscany, and perhaps in other ta:es, the refit of which I have qot cer. able to ascertain.
to the Reverend Joseph Townsend, who has given 1s, in his tra;eis, a iei0 interesting account of this country. At the conclusion of that work, he mentions having had a curious paper put into his hands, before he quitted Barcelona, which made him winl for the one corresponding to it. It was a fcheduie, with inquiries, directed to all the Prelates and Corregidors, by Philip II. but le could not learn what answers had been returned, or what steps had been taken in consequence thereof. The Corrogidors were to make a report on 57 heads, the major part of which related to geography, to natural and civil history; to heraldry, to agriculture, to the producions of each diftrit, to mineralogy, &c.; but there werefevetal alTo, purely Statiitical, as, I. What is the present number of houses and families ? Were they for- merly more numerous ? If so, to what cause mull be attributed the subsequent diminution ? II. Are all the inhabitants employed in useful labour ? III. Are the people prosperous and flourifling? What manufactures do they carry on ? And in what do they excel ? IV. What waste lands and commons have they ? What is the value of these to the community ? V. What is the valud of the bifioprick, and of all the livings in the dio- cele, &c. &c. ? It is evident, as Mr Townsend very juflly remarks, from the general scope of there inquiries, that the design of Philip II. was to gain a perfect knowledge of his kingdom, with a view to political economy; but, in order to dazzle the eyes of his fubjeds, he intermixed queries, which had no re- ference to that objec *' It is not known whether any material progress was made in this under- taking; but it certainly does mnre credit to the memory of the Sovereign under whose auspices it was commenced, than any circumstance, cdnnected with his reign, that is recorded in history. a. S.weden.-The second attempt, in modem Europe, seems to have been made in Sweden, anno 1630. The nature of the plan will appear, from a circular letter, addressed to the Clergy of his diocese, by the Archbifllop,of ' See Townfcnd's Travels through Spnin, ad edition, vol. III. p. 35l. I believe that no notice of this inquiry is taken; in any of the hiltories of this :.lonmach's reign.
of Uplai . Though the inquiries therein mentioned, were principally refricled to matters of antiquity, yet the juilly celebrated Gullavus Adol-,phus, * The following trapnlation of that letter, transmitted to me by Mr Knox of Gottenburgh, may not be unacceptable to the reader. Be it known to you all, by there presents, That his Majesty, our most gracious Lofd and King, out of his royal favour and grace, having, with peculiar care and good affection for his fubjeds, deliberately taken into consideration, a plan, which in a various, extensive, and praise-worthy manner, may tend to the lafling honour and renown of our dear native country, Has been graciously pleased, on the 30th May 6j3o, worthily to confti- tute, and with full powers to appoint, the well learned Dr Martinum As- chaneun, in Himmelby and Freflad, and Johan Hindrickfon, to be antiqua- ries for the kingdom. That his iMajefty has filrnifhed there learned men, with letters of infiruc- tion, ordaining them, narrowly and zealoflly, to search over the whole kingdom, after all remarkable old monuments, tranfadions, writings, and manuicripts, by which the history of our native country can be illultrated. To collect filch, and make their remarks on them; and more especially to attend to the following points, namely, to collect, I. All kinds of Runic writings, both in books, and upon stone, II. Runic computations, or the various diftinctioas and difference of Runic charadcers. III. Old law-books, corporation rights, secret papers, statutes, privileges, and edicts. IV. Old chronicles, hiftories,'tables, Runic and heroic poems. V. Such old letters and writings as can ascertain the value of coins, and elucidate the genealogy and anns of noble families. VI. Old coins and monies. And, inJhort, any thing further, 'which tends to the praife.-uortby in. rovenent ofour native country. All which, the fore-named learned men, are to deposit in the Royal Ca- binet; and the result of their researches, shall, for the benefit and improve-. ment of the kingdom, be afterwards published. Therefore I, in his Majesty's name, earneily and zealously request, that you severally, in your different pariises, do truly examine your parishioners, Each apart, about uffdul old monuments, ;c, which they, out of mifcon.,ceptien,
pnns, was too great a King. and too wife a Statesmen, to confine his atten. tion, on such an occasion, to those objects merely, but farther extended it, to every thing that could promote " the praise-worthy improvement of his '1 native country." What a Sovereign who could thus unite, to the molt splendid military atchievements, such an attention to the arts of peace, and the tprfuits of literature, on which, he knew well, that the happiness and prosperity of his subje&s so materially depended. It is quite uncertain, with what success this attempt was attended, though it is rather improbable, that any great progress was effected, other- wife some notice would have been taken of it in the hiisories of those times. Indeed, as Gustavus commenced his war in Germany, in June 1630, it is rather improbable, that such an undertaking could be carried on in his ab- fence, with sufficient 2eal and energy. In modern times, a very intelligent political account has been publiflied of Sweden, by Monsieur Canzler, a native of Saxony, who had resided at the Court of Stockholm in a diplonatic line, and had collected together a number of curious and interesting public accounts, refpeding the state of the Swedilh monarchy. It was originally published in the German, but was afterwards translated into French *. 3. France.-The next inveltigatiop of the fort, seems to have taken place ainCo 69S, by directions of Luwis XIV. of France, who ordered the Intendants of his different provinces, to draw up a particular account of each province, for tie instruction of the Duke of Burgundy. It is believed,,that ception, are apt to conceal; that you communicate your researches to his Majesty's antiquaries, sent through the kingdom on this laudable errand, in order that they may, at once, have at hand, the useful information above mentioned, for forwarding this important business, so that his Majesty's royal will may be gratified, the work be attended with success, and finally carried into full execution. And that all this may be truly and faithfully accompliflhed on your part, I earncftly and zealously exhort you.,Feliciter Valete. Datum Ubfala, 27. yul ii, V. H. S.,PETRUS KENRICIUS UPSALIENSIS. * See Memoires pour Servir i la Connoiffance des Astaires Politiqucs ct Oeconasmiilles de Suede i Londres, (Dresden), par Canzler, j76.
that none of those provincial accounts have been printed. Voltaire men- tions, with great approbation, tle account of Languedoc, drawn up by Mon- fieur de Lamoignon de Bavillc. In consequence of the obliging attention of Dr Nail,, of Bevere, in Worcefiltereire, I had an opportunity of perusing that work, in manuscript, and was perfectly altoniflied, at the little useful information which it contained. If that was the belt, the others must have been miserable indeed. The obfervatinns made by Voltaire on this under- taking, are perfectly well founded. He remarks," Had what the King di- " recsed, been well executed, the collection would have been one of the most valuable monuments of the age. The design was excellent, "and it would have been of the greatest use, had it been executed with judgment and uniformity *." 4. Germany.-It has already been remarked, that great attention has been paid in Germany to Statilticai Inquiries. Baron Bielfield, in his Elements of Universal Erudition t, gives the bell account of any which I have hither. to met with, of the progress made in that pirt of the Continent. The fci- ence called Statiltics, he observes, " teactes us what is the political ar- rangetent of all the modern flates of the known 'world." Profe(tor Godfrey Achenwal of Gottingen, was the first to reduce that important subject into a true system. He has made it a separate science, whence," he observes, " history borrows great lights, which furmifles the bell materials for the conflitution of a state, wlhich enriches politics, and which prepares · those of the brightest genius among the itudious youth, to become one " day able ministers of the state." The following is a short abitracl of the particulars, which, according to Baron Bielfield, are included in the science of Statistics. I. A general knowledge of the tates, into which Europe, and the other quarters of the globe, are refpedively divided. 2. An examintion of each particular Rtate, and its revolutions. 3. A description of the territory of the state, and its foreign poflellions. 4. An account of its population, 5. Its constitution, and arrangement of its public affairs. 6. The rights and privileges of its Mlagifratcs. 7. The rights of the people, in regard to national allemb'ics, &c. 8. The titles, courts, ceremonials, &c. of the Sovereign. g. The arrangement of the Cabinet, more especially the management of foreign as- fairs. to. The diretion of its interior, or domeltic concerns. ai. The national church. 12. The judicial department. 13. The principal regula- tions with regard to its police. 14. The resources of the itate, whether,i from * See Voltaire's Age of Lewis XIV. vol. ii. .p. 127. 2S. edition 1752. t Trannlated by Dr Hooper, and publifled in three vols. Svo. anno 1770. See vol. iii. cap. . 3 . p . 6.
from agriculture, and all its natural productionl, or r.anufaclures, or rnm. nierce, interior and exterior, or mercantile navigation. . 1. The revrcles of the state, and the manner of collecling and employing them. 16. The ilate of the arts and sciences. of fclhols. univerlities, Etc. 17. It ifiliary forces, and mode of management. iS. Its mnaline. i9. Its internali irntreIs. And, laitly, Its external intercis, or the m;axims it ought to ob.'cise, with regard to its neighbours, allies, &c. Such is the wide fieli, into which the fcienre of Statistic: has been extend. ed in Gerininy, and which the Germans have been cntivatitig for about 5o yea's, with all that p.linful recealh whlich belnngs to the cha;racter of that respeCtable nation. It is iufortuna.te tLat German literature is Io little cultivated in England ; hence the mia's ot StatilCical informn:ion, collected in that p.-. of thc Continentl, would prclbbly have benl little known lrlte, had it not been for the Political Suirvey of tie present State (if Europe, wrinten by Profelbor Zinmm('n-.an *. In t!:a ingenions and interesting swork, we have an abltrad of all the inifornlltion wh.iicli the Germans han' ::ccuiiiu- lated; front which, howevcr, it does not alpper, that any worol: t as known in that part of the worid, wrihlil cr: at lil rival, for extent of nffcful infor- mation, the Statiftlcal Accoluit of Scotland. 5. Derntark.-Tirat refli)ec:il)le riatefinan, tlhe late Corunt Becrnl orfl, sent me a work in thc Gcrman : language. prited rl znn 179o, lIlt never pIblifil. ed, which fz:mcd to contain a great Cdeal of Stat:flical informnation. 7'There were tables in it of t!ie finalices of Denmark, of its debt and expecnditure, of the comninccce of tlle kingdorn, :nd ftatellents of its arnl. naivy, &c. Sonie of the accoiritts te re for the ve.!r 177i, Ant no material alteration l.id tincc takc;r pilacc; and on the whole, it was the lieD accollunt th.at (culd ce obtained of tile political fl:te of that kingdonm. I wilhed il tirl] to have lad it tra;linatel into the Elglii1 language, and recommended it for that porplfe to the attention of the Britilih ;overnlnen:, as a kno-tledge of the fate of one nation, is extrarileli niatrial to another; but tihe idca Iras not hitherto been carried into execution. 6. E't.'vnd.-It appears from Gotlgh's Britiflt Topography, that inqiri. ries into antiquitic, and natural l;iltorn, have lirog occlpicdd the attention of tlhe Engliil. Sllme valuable county histories have been publidled; but of the 40 counties into which LEngland is divided, tine have found 1no antijqary lhar.ly enough to attempt their general illuttration; and the colleclions,:hiiich ' i'lintcd by C. Dilly, in L london, aan ;787, in one volume, $vo.
wliicl have been made for eight others, were witl.held from the public, as late as tihe enar z 17. 'Tile cc-ount given of them by MIr Cough is not very f.;v:ilable ; he sta:r L tihnt incrileclt pedigrees futile etymologies, ', verbuoi'e ii!;'aiiti)it; crowds 5of cpi:.psl, lifts of landl.olders, and fuich far. " i,.!o, tir;lwn together, witlhout meti:o, nn[.:iinliated bh reflecions, and " eiivercrl in the molt unircuthl and horrid Iyle, na:ke the bulk of our "couity hiloiieAs." At the filme time, in isome of thole works, fume use- fil salts may bI obtainfe, aind they filinifil naterials, wilch may be offer- vice, whevl a'Statiliical Suirvey of that kingdom, on a proper Flftem, is un- dertaken.,ilt b filies theric county hiitori(c , various attempts have leen made in England, of a more e.teclfive naturc, i:ore etpecially that general survey, known under thel natine of Do,.t-.Iday oolk, which is thus described by hlnlc the liftorian: In toSi, W\ illiain began an underenakng, which proves hi cxten.five ge:liit, and does hunour to hii memory; it uxas a ge. " neial ftlrvey o, all tile lands il tile ki;lgdthll, Ilheir extent in each di. "' trid, their proprietors, tenires, valtiie, tile quantity of meadow, pasture, , wood, and arable land, which tiley contained ; aid in foume comnties, the n number of tenir.ts, cottagers, and saves of all dellominations, who lived " upon theI.. Ile appointed com:.ifiioners for this purpose, who entered every p:articniar in their regiiter, by the verdlit of juries; and .t cr a la- "hou of fiG years, (for the worki was so long ill firitiirg). brought hint 1 a exact accolult of all the ianded property of his kingdo.n. This monr- " Ilet, caiiled Doute.rcday Book, the molt vs; au.ble piece of antirqity pct- se.ied by any nation, is Qlill prefeived in the Evcl:ethcr, and though only U folme exitrass of it have hitherto been putbli;iecd. it crnes to illatllrate to " u, in mlany particclar.a the actieni; ate of Englald. The gicat Aificd '. Lad fininfid a like lurvrv of the kintgdo:m in hii time, wl:ich was long "k ept at Witnchelier, and whicl pirobr.bly served as a model to William in ° this undertaking. *" It is unp.lrdonable in the Britifil Governlment, tot to have translated this record, and by talt1is or'otherwvile, to ltavc explained the political ilate of Eng!lanl, at the con, lect. The bio.k is properly, indeed, a royal rent.roll, and was intended for the purpiot'e u afr: rtainilig the income of the Crowvn, and the perblts by wholl it w-va p:yabll, But, at the hrne time, it con- tains many curious sacs, *which wo:;ld threw very corlidcrable light oil the ancient Ilte of the coutttry, and lwhich ought not to be kept in a man'ier unintelligible to the public, from the :mcouthllc-fs of its charnaer, and tle.,multitutid * Britilll Topograpliy, vol. i. p. at. t H-timic's Hilt. edit. 1775, in Svo, vol . i. p 75.
multitude of its abbreviations. If Parliament does not take it up, perhaps. it is not beyond the powers of the Society of Antiquaries to accomplisl. Camden's Britannia, in its present improved state, is deservedly held in high efltiation, and many eminent persons, in every branch of literature, have, with infinite labour and research, contributed to illustrate a number of artcles, which, in the original editions of that work, had been either im- perfectly explained, or totally omitted. It is a work, however, better cal- culated for the pursuits of the antiquary, than of the statesman. The Political Survey of Britain, by Dr Campbell, printed in two vo. lumes, 4to, anmo 1774, is a judicious and laborious compilation, of all the information that the author could collect during a period of about zo years. It contains a series ofreflections on the situation, lands, inhabitants, reve- nues, colonies, and commerce, of this island; intended to flew, that we have not as yet approached near the summit of improvement, but that it will as- ford employment to many generations, before they pulh, to their utmost ex- tent, the natural advantages of Great Britain. In his preface, after giving a concise account of his attempt, he expressly fays, " on the plan here pursued, we had no guide, though many helps and " informations, without wiich, whatever it may be, it could never have been performed." He introduces the work with flating, that in the light in which he was about to confider it,. the perfection of policy is, so to improve the natu. " ral advaantages in the polFellion, or in the power of the society to which it is applied, as to make all, without diftinCion, who compote that focie- ty, as happy as it is pofible, and to place this happiness on tie firmerf " basis, lb as that neither the ever mutable tempers of men, or the inevitable * vicifiltudes of time, fllould alfeRt it." The Doctor, unfortunately, had not materials sufficient for completing filch a work, in the manner in which it ought to have been done. Had he lived a few years hence, pollen'ed as he was, of zeal,, industry, and judg- ment, his labours would have appeared to infinitely more advantage. I underfand that some queries, probably at the iflltance of Government, have, at various times, been circulated amongst the English Clergy, by the Bithops of their respeCtive dioceses. The result of these inquiries I have not been able to discover, nor whether any public advantage has been derived from them. It was, in some refpcCts, with a view of ascertaining the state of the population of the kingdom, that a fmail duty was laid on christenings and' burials; but the tax being found inadequate for that purpose, and vexatious in its operation, it was soon afterwards repealed. The institution of the Board of Agriculture, was for Statillical as well'as Agricultural objecs. When I moved for the establishment of that Board,in
Ixie iu Parlament, I prelred much the idea, " that it might be the means of ob- taining a StatiRlical Account of England, and consequently of explaining ",the real ftuation of the country in every point of view, that could pofli- bly be wilhed for by a Patriot or a Statesman. Such an Account of Scotland was already nearly completed, and specimens of it having been "circulated abroad, it had received the most flattering marks of approba- tion. If, in England therefore, the fame plan were executed, it would "hardly be doubted, that it would soon be universally adopted in every other country, and thus the principles of political society, and the sources , of national improvement, would be more completely ascertained, than in any former period of history *". Various circumRtances have hitherto prevented that idea from being.ta- ken up, though undoubtedly of eficntial importance; but if ever the Board flould be placed on that refpecable footing, to which such an institution is so peculiarly well entitled, its attention will necefirily be directed to Sta- titical Inquiries, on an extensive scale. In the iterrim, the Agricultural Surveys, contain a great deal of interesting intonnation of a similar nature. It may be proper here to add, that Messrs Williams, booklellers, Strand, London, have begun a StatilRical Survey of the principality of Wales, and would probably have made considerable progress in it before this time, had not the itate of the times been extremely unfavourable for such inveftiga- tions. 7. Ireland.-In Ireland, they do not seem to have been very fortunate, in their attempts to elucidate the Itate of that country. A society founded by Petty and Molyneux, for pllilofoplhical inquiries, hardly subsisted for five years. Another society was formed about the year 1760, by whom a plan was drawn up for writing the descriptions of counties; but it is believed without much success. In the year I773, the Dublin Society formed a Committee, by whom a number of queries were printed; but in four years time, they only obtained 40 answers, to 40:0 copies they had circulated, many of which were perfectly trifling. The Committee was therefore dropped, and the fcbeme abandoned, even by Major Valiancy, who had prevailed upon the Society to engage in it. Indeed a zealous and public spirited member of the Irifll Parliament, (the Right Honourable William Burton Conyngham), tranfinitted to me an account of the parihl of Kilro. nan, in the county of Roscommon and the adjoining dilrict, written by,Mr * See Speech in Parliament, r5th May 1793, in the preliminary Obfer- vations to the printed communications to the Board of Agriculture, p. 23. See also the original plan for efablilhing the Board, p. ao.,
Mr Charles O'Connor, and dated Ballytra, near Carrick, -sth ttlguft 1r,, which, he informed me, was the only one worth preserving in the whuol collection. S. Scotland.-The attempts which have been made in Scotland, have bhen numerous, but their progress did not jullify any very sanguine expectatiolns of success. The first of which we have any account, was an inquiry begun by Sir R-o bert Gordon of Straloch, at Bleau'. requrlt, for his Atlas Scotia, printed anno 1662. From the anfwes hle received, the description of everal of the counties were drawn up, both by Sir Robert, and by David Buchanan, on whom he devolved it; but the troubles during the reign of Charles I. and the ufirpation of Cromwell, prevented them from completing it. The next attempt vas made by Sir Robert Sibbald, who also circulated queries, answers to which he reqnefted flould either be addreced to himself, or transmitted to his bookseller. They principally relate to natural hiffo- ry, to the ilhlltraton of which, his chief attention was diretedl. His Atl/tl Scotictr, the result of those inquiries, according to Gough, still exists in manuscript, in which state it will probably remain *. The late Walter Macfarlane, of Macfarlane, left behind him in manu- script, the Geographical deferiptions of many pariflihs in Scotland, begun about the year 1721, and continued for several years after t. Who was the author of this attempt does not appear; but from a letter, beginnihg 'Reve- " rend Sir," signed Lud. Grant, dated Fortrofe, r4th July I73, it feemsto have been undertaken by some clergyman t. The following extract from Mr Grant's letter, (who was probably minister of Fortrolc), it may not be improper to insert in this place. " I would have sent you what account of the parilBes I was acquainted with here, some time igo, had I not ex- "pe&ed, that tome would have lent their helping hand, in describing such " parinies as occurred to their knowledge; but finding them either fly to undertake, or unwilling to put theml'lves to any such trouble, prctend- ing their little or no skill in topography; I thought it proper not to de- ' lay any longer, what I intended to fay upon the head; I have lent a de- "scription of four parishes; since I have now frequent occalion to traverse them, and thougb I did not kep clo/c to the printed direaioen, yet I "think the specimen I have given, will furnili you with materials to " range the bounds and distances, in what order you think fit. The de. sign, in my judgment, is laudable; and would be both diverting and in-,Itrueling, * See Gough's Topography, Vol. ii. p. 557, & 5,8. t See Vol. i. p. 15x. Ditto, also p. 307. where there is a letter to the collec/or of those accounts, beginning " Rcircnd and Dear Sir."
" irnaing, to have a clear and diftincl account of all thepari)es in our "kingdlom; and none flould bc averse to contribute their endeavours, in " promoting and furthcring lilch all excellent undertaking, which has not as yet been done by any pen that I know of; and I cordially wirh it may "ftcceed," &c. From the little attention that had been paid to those inquiries, so cvident from this lclter, much filcccfs could not be expected. Short mcmoran- dunms rcfpedling a nunlber of parifles were received ; but hardly any of them entitled to be printed. It is singular, that some of the belt accounts are from the county of Caithness; and indeed it is proper, on all fach cc- cafion, that the remote districts, which are the least known, llould, if possible. be described with the greatest minuteness and accuracy. The next attempt was by Mr William Maitl;nd, an author well knorw by his history of London, and other works. Ie circulated also a namber of printed queries; but I underfland, that the anwvers he received were very few, and that he soon found it necelFary to relinquiiil the design. It may be proper, in this place. to mention, the ficecefsfol attempt made by the late Dr Webster, which he begun in 1743, and completed in the year 1755. Thoigh reltriaed merely to the ltate of the Church, and the pope- lation of the kingdom, yet this refpedable clergyman, found the utmoil dif- ficulty, in completing Iis undertaking, in the space even of 1r years. It is fortunate, however, that he was able to acconmplilh it; as it furniltes data, for making a comparison between the population of that periol, axnd of the prelcnt timc; ; withotst which, it would be hardly polible to have fa- tilficd the public, that the inhabitants in Scotland had materially increased within the lalf 40 years. Mr Pennant, to whom the world owes so much entertaining, and so muach useful information, was led to imagine, fi'om the high idea he enter- tained of the Clergy of the Chur.l o0 Scotlland, that he could prevail upon them, to favour the public, wi;h exaci description:s of their respeCtive parilies; and his wiflies were in some instances complied with, but not to any grcat extent. Scotland, however, niult al\ways remember with grati- tude, the spirit 'ith which he pervaded every part of that country, and the favourable accounts lie publilerd both of it, a:d of its inhabitants, which contributed to remove many of the prejudices entertained againit thesn. The lall attempt, previous to tile commencement of the Statiftizal Ac- count of Scotlaoll, was by a r.rpcpe.~lac bao3. the Scotch Society of Anti- quaries, of which David Steuart Er:line, Earl of Buclan, was the founder. A printed plan, for that pilrpofe, was drawn up and circulated. The account of cach parili, it was propoicd liould be divided into seven fecionn. Tlie first Wsn to contain a geographical and topogralphical dvfcription of the pariils:,The
The second, the nature of the foil, number ofinhabitants, &c.: The third, the fate of the roads, &c.: The fourth, an account of its mines, minerals, and fofils: The fifth, its police, trade and manufactures: The sixth, its antiqui- ties: And the lati fedion, miscellaneous observations. In consequence of the circulation of this paper, the accounts of five parilhes were obtained, which are printed in the iftvolume of the Tranfacdions of the Society; and are certainly amongst the molt valuable papers of the fort any where to be met with. It was after so many attempts had been made, either fruitlessly, or on a narrow scale, that the Author of the Statistical Account of Scotland, be- gan his extensive, laborious, and what was almof universally deemed, his impracticable undertaking. Perhaps an ambition to accomplish what others had failed to execute, might contribute to those exertions, which could alone carry through so great a Work. And if its publication Ihould ever materially promote the improvement of this country, and ameliorate the Situation of mankind in general, (which can hardly fail to be the cafe), it must in a great measure be attributed, to those who entered early with zeal into the cause, and encouraged the Author to persevere, by their approba- tion, and afrifance.,APPENDIX,
APPENDIX,.. H.. .General View of the Progress made in completing.tbe StatiJitcal Account,of Sotland. T HE commencement of this undertaking, may be itated from the a2th - May 1790,'the date of the lirit Circular Letter to tie Clergy; and the following Tale will give a general view of the progress made in col- lecting the different Accounts since that period:,Received Total re- Total want- during ceived at ing at each each pe. each pe- period. riod. riod Parochial returns received between the 25th bMay and rsth Novem. ber x79o, - - 5 85 S5 Ditto betweeln 5th Nov. 1790, and the ft June 179, - 440 515 413 Ditto from lft June 1792, to 13th March 1793, - - 47 571 366 Ditto from a13h March 1793, to 2Sth March 1794, - 226 798 140 Ditto from 2Sti March 1794, to -x3th July 1796, -.g g9 97 31 Ditto from 13th July 1796, to lit January 1798, - 17 934 4 Wrantig on ift January 1798, but , received on or before the 29th January 1798, on which day the lalf parilli was given in, and the materials for the publication com- pleted, . - 4,938 On this Table the following observations naturally occur: In the firJf place, It appears, that on the aft June 1792, about two jears from the commencement of the Inquiry, 525 Accounts had been re. VoL.. XX. k ceived,
ceived, above one half of the number of pariflie in Scotland. There wat every reason, therefore, to hope, that the whole Work would latve been completed within the space of a year or two more, and every exertion was made for that purpose, by employing a number of different printers, &c.; but the press was often ltopped for want of manuscript. In theferond place, It is evident, that on the zStl March 1794, only 140 Accounts were wanting, and that it has taken very near four years to make up that deficiency. I am persuaded, that the Clergy, had no conception of the Inconvenience with which this circunmfanc was attended, to the Author of the Statistical Account, and how much it retarded the measures he had in virw, for promoting the improvement of the country, otherwise they would have made almofl any exertion, sooner than have kept back, for so long a space of time, the completion of such a Work.-It is now over, But, I hope, if ever they should have it in their power to promote a ti- milar undertaking, that they will fliew, from the commencement, every pof. fible degree of alacrity and zeal in filch a cause; and will recollee the words of a respectable Clergyman, who well remarked on the occasion: It has often been a matter of aftonilhment to me, that I have gone so much into the spirit of procraflination, in a cafe like this, when an im- " portant object was held forth, and the individual exertion neceflary was "so triling." In the lnt place, It is certainly to be regretted, after the Work had made f::ch extraordinary progrfeS, that greater exertions were not made by the deficient Clergy, to complete it more speedily than has been the cafe. At the fame time, that cannot detra& from the great merit of the body at large; and, on the whole, it is certainly more to be wondered at, that the W'ork was completed at all, than that it should have been so long in hand. For a long time, indeed, many of tie Clergy imagined, that tie plan would be dropped, ns io many others had been; and consequently, that it was un. nccpflary for them to take tie trouble of making any inquiry. Indeed, on the Sth November 179i, above two years and a half from the commence- ment oftthe undertaking, no lets a number than 210, had not even acknow. ledged the receipt, or taken the finalleft notice, of my repeated applica- tions. With regard to the progress made in printing the Work, the following 'able will satisfy the curiosity of the Reader.
To. bs the Year when No. of Diftriits No. of Minilers in Volume. Printed, contained in the Djiricts.,each Volume. t - 1 531 .791 54 i 1791 °0 5O . 3 I792. So So 4 179 , " 7 5 1793 40 53 6- 1793 6x* o 7 1793 ..; 55 63,'1793 ; 40 45 . 9 '- 793 39 41 0o 1794 40 42 si £794 . 50 . 5 12 1794 4' 43 13 1794, 4 45 14 . 795 37 37.s 15 1795 29. 29 i6 7 95 3 3 17 1796 44t 45 s1 1796 '54t 25 19 1797 32 37 20 179s 2 21,Total diftric1s, 8Si Total minilers, 940 But as two Accounts of the parifl of Largs have been publifled, one in Voll. II. and the other in Vol. XVIL; and two of the parith of Botriph. nic, one in Vol. X. and the other in Vol. XVIII. The real numbers, in the Statistical Account, ought to be stated at 879 dilfrics, and 938 Mi- niters. At present, indeed, there are in Scotland only 877 diftrics,. and 936 Ministers, in consequence of the annexation of the parifli of Cufl. nie to that of Leochel, and the parish of Mains to that of Strathmartin, since the StatiRical Accounts of them were publifled.,It * Reckoning Edinburgh, Canongate, St Cuthberts, South Leith, and North Leith, as separate ditrits. t Including a second Account of the parifl of Largs. 4 Including a second Account of the parinli of Botriphnie. Z Reckoning Old and New Aberdeen as fcparate diRrias.
It is well known, that the number of diltries, and of Minifers, differ, in confequenicc'of some diftris 'having more than One Minilfer, a hatement of which may not be unacceptable..,blinifters. AMinifters. Edinburgh, exclusive of the Ca- Brought over, 56 nongate; St Cuthberts, South Dumfries, - 2 and North Leith, - 16 Dunfermline, 2 Glasgow, exclusive of the Gor-.., Dyfart, , bals, and Barony parifl, 8 Elgin, - - Dundee, - - 5 Grecnock, a2 New Aberdeen, - - 4 Haddington, - Inverness, - ,3 Hamilton, - -. Paisley, - - 3 Inveraray, St Andrews, inrluding St Leo- Kilmarnock - nards, - 3 Kirkwall,: - 2 Old Aberdeen, - - South Leith, Ayr, - 2 Lefmahago - Brechin, - -' - Montrose, ' - - Campbelltown, - --2 Abbey of Paifcy, - Canongate, , Perth, - - 'Culrofs, - '2 St Cuthberts, - - - Cupar Fife, - *2 Stirling, -,Carryover, 56 9c The following, then, is an abltraed of the Ecclefiafical state of Scot. land, in this point of view, at the commencement of the Statistical un- dertaking: No. of Diltrids. No. of M.inisters in each. Total Minifers.,r 56 i5 * S. S 3 3 9 24 2 43 549 0 S43 979 ... \938 In consequence, however, of the annexations already mentioned, the number of diftritis is reduced to 877, and of Minilters to 936.,The
The following is a view of the Ecclefiafibcal eftabliflment of Scot~and, as divided into Synods and Prefcyteries, and the number of Miniite in each Synod.,No. of Pref- No. of Miniftets in byteries. each Synod. Synod of Lothian and Tweeddale, 7 zx6,Merse and Teviotdale, 6 66 Dumfrics, - 5 54 Galloway, - 3 37 5 Glasgow and Air, - 7 130 Perth and Stirlin, - 5 So Fife, - - 4 Angus'and Mearns, 6 2 Aberdeen, -S o0 zo Moray, 5,Ross, . 3 23 Sutherland and CaithnefsT 3 23 Argyle, - 41 Glenelg, - - 5 29 Orkney, 4 30 Total xS Total Prefbyteries 78 Total Minifers 936,CONCLUSION. Hints explaining the Nature and Objer of a Work, to be entlitle,,, Analysis of the Political State of Scotland, wvith a View of tie Pritcipler of Stat/flical Philofopby," the result of t.t Statilticat Accont of Scotland. T was my intention, to have printed, with the lall volume of the Statifti- cal Account of Scotland, a general View or Analysis of the Political Stale of that part of the Kingeomn. together with some explanation of the Prirciples of what may be called Statiftlcal Philo.'oiny. But I find, that such an uudertaking, will require more leisure than it is pofible for me at,>prefeat
present to bestow upon it, and perhaps it may be as well, to give fucll an account of a kingdom, at so marked a period, as the conclutfon, or the commencement of a century; and if health will permit, and no accident intervenes to prevent it, I hope that it will be in my power, in the course of.the year iSoC, or tSoi, to publilh such a Work, as cannot be rivalled, in regard to the state of apy other country. In the interim, I think it proper to lay before the public, some informa- tion refpeAing the plan of that Work, as it may induce public-fpirited ih- dividuaLs, to favour me with their remarks upon it; and in cafe any cir- cumftance Ihould prevent me, from executing such a Work myself, it may furnilh hints to any other pcrfon by whom it maylbe undertaken. With that view, 1 have drawn up the following general observations, applicable to an Account of Aberdeenfliire, as a specimen of the manner, in which the mass of information contained in the Statistical Account, ought partly to be arranged by parithes and counties, before any important result can be drawn from it. Gentral Oblervatiom, refpcRing tie Refilts to be drawn from the,StatiJlical Account of Scotluid, and the mannea r in awhich thelfame ought to be made. A CONSIDERABLE proportion of the vail mass of important information,,contained in the Statifical Account of Scotland, may be condensed, into a small compass, in three different ways: I. There are a variety of ar- ticles, as the General State of the Population, &c. where the information may be given, in the ilape of Parochial Tabler: 2. There are other parti. culars, as the State of Property, &c, where calculations by Counties, may be preferred: And, 3. There are many other points, where general comtiptr tations for the AKingdom at large, will be found more eligible. In regard to each of there, the attention of the reader is requeited, to the following Preliminary Oblervations.,I. PAROCHIAL TABLES. Though it could not be expecled, that complete information could be procured, refpeding all the particulars contained in the following Tables, from every individual Clergyman, yet a fumticient number of fads has been obtained, to form calculations, the average result of which, will be fuffi- .cicntly accurate for every useful purpofc. There is indeed every rcafon to,believe,
believe, that computations, though, perhaps inaccurate in regard to pari. cular diRrics, may on the whole be right. Where they are drawn upon a great scale, and on proper data, they may approach very near the truth, even where, in many of the minute particulars, there are conflderable er- rors *. In the following Statistical Tables there are 14 Columns. Column i. This will merely contain the names of the different Parishes in each Country, arranged in alphabetical order, to which, if thought necef- fary, might be added, the volume of the Statilical Account of Scotland, where the description of each parilh is to be found. In several intances,. parilbes are situated in different counties. Where that is the cafe, the whole district is included in that county, where either the Church or the greater part of the parifli is situated.,Col. a. * The following example will explain the meaning of this observation. Let us suppose that there are 4 parishes, the valued rent of which is known, but only two of which have their real rent returned; for inlance,,Valued Rent, Scotch money. Real Rent, Sterling money. No. i L.53oo0 L.3oo - 2 3500 1300,L.SSoo L.44oo It is evident, that the average of the two pariflies, is at the rate of L. 2 of valued, to L. I of real rent. Let us suppose, that the other two parishes, have their valued rent return. ed as follows.,Valued rent No. 3 L. 4co -4 7550,L. r7o5 According to the data above mentioned, the real rent of No. 3..ought to be L. toco, and of No. 4. L. 3775, both of which may be wrong; the one may be too much, and the other too little, yet the one error may cor. reet the other, and the total result may be perfeslly right. So accurate, however, was the above mode of computation found, that the real rent of one parils, computed at L. 2450, was found, by the Mini- ster's return, to be L. 2460.
CoL '. The second column will give a flatement of the population of Scotland, as drawn up for the information of Government, by the late Rev. Ir Alexander WVebler, one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, and completed by him in the year 1755. The Doetor's account was never printed, but there are some copies of it, in manuscript, in private-hands. In his intro- duaion to the report, lie Rfates, " That he ha'l eftablilhed, in the year 1743, t a general correspondence both with clergy and laity, for preparing a i scheme, which -was afterwards ratified by Parliament, for a provision for Ministers widows': That he had improved that correspondence, for " the purpose of procuring lifts, either of individuals, or of persons above x " certain age, in the different parilhes of Scotland: That, when the lifts , contained only thofs'above a certain age, he calculated the amount of " the whole inhabitants, by the proportion which they might be supposed ' to hear to the number of fouls, according to the most approved Tables, , compared with the fadb in many parts of Scotland, where the Ministers, "at his desire, not only numbered their parilhioners, but diftinguilled their ' refpeeive ages. So that, it is humbly apprehended, the account he has "given of the number of the people, is sufficiently exact to anfwver every "valuable purpose." Dr Weblter's original inquiries, it would appear, were merely for the purpose of fixing data, to calculate the principles, on which the Society for thle benefit of the Widows of the Scotch Clergy, might be eltabliflied: But afterwaids, at the desire of that refpedlable chara'ter, the late Prcfident Dundas, then Lord Advocate for Scotland, to whom the work is dedicated, he drew up a General Report, with a view of ascertaining: I: The popula- tion of Scotland. a. The income of the Clergy, an augmentation of which was then a subjet of difcuiion. 3. The Patrons of tile different livings, and, 4. The number of fighting men, an inquiry confidered to be of pecu. liar importance at that period, in consequence of the warlike spirit which the Highlanders had then recently displayed, a finall body of whom had boldly marched from their native mountains, till they hadl reacled within a few miles of the metropolis of the empire. The number of fighting men in 6cotland, were then cemputed at 253,o76 - It is extremely fortunate, in many points of view, that this inquiry was begun and completed. Iln the first place, it enabled Dr Webster, (wlhofe exertions on this occalion, and llill in political arithmetic, cannot be too much praised), to draw tip the calculations for the Widows fund, on such just principles, that the refiit. has turned nut hardly in any refpedl different from his computations ; and thus a molt v:luab!e inltitution was eft:blifl- ed, on foundations creditable to the author of it, and advantageous to a nolt refpcClalt!e body of men.-In the second place, it furniihes a useful source of coimparifon, with the present population of the country, which otherwitfi,could
*could not have been attained. It is certain, that the fame pains were not 'then taken by the Clergy, as at the present period. A much longer space of time was also employed in carrying on the inquiry, for it was begun in 1743, and not ended till 1755, a period of about twelve years; whereas the present inquiry has been completed in less than eight years. At the fame time, had it not been for Dr Webiter's report, it would have been impof- fible to have convinced many, that the population had not materially de- treafed. Indeed, so prevalent is the inclination to praise the times past, and undervalue the present, that in the course of these Statiltical Inquiries, I have found the Clergy, in guefing the population in 1755, have in every initance exceeded the number stated by Dr Webitr, and have almolt uni- formly gone below the truth, if they made a rough guess of the number of their parifiioners at this time, which evidently appeared, when afterwards they were prevailed upon, to take the trouble of making a special enumera- tion. Dr Webster, however, and the Clergy at that time, had every pof- fible inducement, to make the population of Scotland as considerable as they could. The Dotor was drawing up a paper for the conlideration of Government, in whose eyes he would naturally be inclined to place his na- tive country, in as favourable and refpeaable a light as poflible; and the Clergy were to make a return of faas, on the accuracy of which, the future comfort of their wives and families, and the augmentation of their own li- vings, a point at that time in difcuflion, depended. It is impoflible, there- fore, to suppose, that the population of Scotland, could, in such circumftao- ces, be undervalued. Col. 3d. This column contains the Population as returned to the Au- thor of this Work, in the course of his Inquiry, wvlich has occupied the space of about eight years. There is reason to believe, that the population of such an extent of country, was never before so accurately taken. Not only the number of the inhabitants, but also very fatisfadory information respecting their ages, the place of their birth, their religious perfaafions, their occupations and situations in life, their residence, whether in towns, in villages, or in the country, together with Tables of the number of Births, Deaths, and Marriages, in each Difirict, have been given. These are parti- culars, however, the consideration of which it is proposed to reserve, for those general computations which will be drawn up, to explain the in- ternal htruclure of society in Scotland, and the general slate of the king- dom. 'Jhis column, therefore, will only contain the present state of our population. Col. 4th and 5th. The Population in 175;, and its present iate, being thus ascertained, it is next proposed, to give a general view of the increale or decrease in each parilh, for the purpose of grounding an Inquiry, the re- silt of which must be extremely important, as in confeqeinc of it, thole,I measures
measures will be recommended to the attention of the public, which have been found to occasion an increase of population, whillt those which have been unfortunately diftinguilhed by a contrary tendency, will be diftincdly enumerated, and unless counterbalanced by some striking advantages, will be justly reprobated. Col. 6th. This column gives a view of the Valued Rent, which is al- ways stated in Scotch money, L. rz of which is only equal to L. I Sterling. This is the rate according to which the Land Tax is now alfefned. It was originally introduced during the Usurpation of Cromwell. but was after. wards more fully eflablilied by an ad of the Scotch Convention, in 1667. In some cafes, the valuation taken during the government of the Proteclor, continues the rule; but in general, new valuations have since been taken, which have been occalionally altered from time to time. The rents, how- ever, being estimated at a remote period, are certainly in general low. At the fame time, the proportional increased value, compared to that of Eng- land, would not have been considerable, had not the Agricultural system, and legal policy of Scotland, been infinitely more favourable to improve- ment than those of her fifler kingdom. Col. 7th. In the next column, the Real Rent is fiated in Sterling money. I know that some doubts are entertained, how far it is prudent to lay this information before the public, as if it were pofiible to alter that solemn compa& between the two nations, by which their refpedtive proportions of the Land Tax were for ever ascertained *. The fad, however, is, that on,this * Nothing can be tronger or more explicit than this Article. It is con. ceived in the following terms: Art. 9th. " That whenever the film of one million, nine hundred, nine- ty-feven thousand, seven hundred and fixty-three pounds, eight Ihillings and fourpence halfpenny, ilfall be enacted by the Parliament of Great " Britain, to be raised in that part of tle United Kingdom called England, "on land and other things usually charged in Ads of Parliament there, for granting an aid to the Crown by a Land Tax: That part of the United Kingdom now called Scotland, shall be charged by the fame Ad, with a fum of forty-eight thousand pounds, free of all charges, as the quota of "Scotland to such tax, and so proportionably for any greater or leser fum railed in England by any tax on land, and other things ufially charged "together with the land; and that filch quota for Scotland, in the cafes " aforesaid, be raised and colleded it: the fame manner as the Cess now "is in Scotland; but subjea to such regulations, in the manner of collec. ' ting, :s Ihall be made by the Parliament of Great Britain.
this head there is no ground for complaint on the part of England, or for applrehelnion on the part of Scotland. Let the E;iililh pass a general bill of inclofure; let them modify tithes, so as to prevent their being a bar to improvement; let them rcftrain the poors rat.s within moderate bounds; let them abolih' any obnoxious remnants of the feudal system; let them grant proper le;fr-s to their tenants, and let them demand an adequate in. come from their estates, and the land of England will soon be as cheaply taxed as that of Scotland. It is owing to the circumatances above alluded to, that the rentrof Scotland have proportionably increased more, under all the disadvantages of an inferior foil, of an inferior climate, of an inferior ca- pital, and of inferior markets. Give England the fame legal advantages which Scotland at present happily possesses, and its Agricultural prosperity would increase, in such a ratio, that the Land Tax it is now subjea to would not be felt. It is proper here to observe, that in many instances the Clergy were re- strained from giving any return of the Real Rent, from an apprchenfion of giving offence to their parishioners. Where .that is the cafe, the real rent is computed, according to the proportion of.the real to the valued rent, in those parishes where a return of both has been made, and consequently on data, that cannot, on the whole, be materially erroneous . Col. 'th. The next column relates to the Stipends of the Clergy. Their income consists, 1. Of Money stipend--. Of Grain, comprehending various articles, as wheat, barley, bigg, or 'inferior barley, oats, and oat- meal-And, 3. The value of a glebe, which is not, in all cafes, of much use to the incumbent; but instead of entering into all those articles separately, it was thought more advisable to convert the whole into one fum, and to tiate the Income of each Minister in cumeslo. To these ecelefiaftical ex. pences, there is to be added a fum for communion-elements, i. e. for pur- chafing wine and bread when the Sacrament is celebrated, which fum, how-,ever, * The real rents of Scotlapd might be very nearly known, by exa- mining the late procefles for augmenting the livings of the Clergy, where the rent of the parish is always mentioned, and from which few parifies have been exempted. About 40 years ago, the whole land rent of Scot- land was only computed to amount to L. 6o,0ooo per annum. The increase is greatly owing to the higher price of grain, of cattle, and other agricultu- ral productions. It remains to be ascertained, by computing the value of money, in purchaling the necessaries of life, and the labour of man, at va. rious periods, what the difference really is.
ever, does not, in every inllance, pay the expence attending the celebration. The amount vill be separately fiated, when information sufficiently accurate can be obtained, The price of the grain will vary, in the different counties, according to the quality commonly raised in each. Col. 9th. Scotland has long been celebrated for the attention paid to the education of its inhabitants, and it is believed to be the only kingdom in Europe, where a fdlooLis eftablified by law in every pariflb, and where, for a very inconliderable fum, the children of the poorest cottager may be taught to read and write, and even some of the higher branches of educa- tion.-The effects of this on society will be an important subject of inqui- ry.-It was judged extremely desirable, therefore, to ascertain the number of Scholars in each diftrict.-Where no returns were made, an afterilk is prefixed, and the number was computed, according to the population of the district, in proportion to that of other parilhes, where the returns were com- plete. Col. Ioth. In the nest column, there is an estimate of the legal Salaries paid to the Parochial Schoolmalts.-Where no return has been made, an aftcritk is placed, and the blank is filled up, according. to the average of the other parishes. In addition to the legal salaries, the schoolmasters have certain emoluments of a casual nature, which will be separately eitima. ted; but altogether, they form an inadequate compcnfation, for so useful a body of men. Col. Inth. The Number of the Poor in each parifl is ftnted in this co- lumn. Where no return was made, an alterilk is also prefixed, and a com- putation is made, according to the average number of the poor, and of the population, in other parishes, whence returns have been tranfinitted. This column includes the oecafional, as well as the inrolled permanent poor, as the Clergy have rarely made a diftinAtion between them. Col. x th. The management of the poor in Scotland, is one of the most curious and important particulars, counecled with the Statiltical Hiftory.of that country.-Tlhy are not only, in general, maintained by the voluntary contributions of the more opulent part of the inlabitants, but, from the care and frugality with which thilr finds have been managed, considerable fums, compared tD the money received, have been accumulated.-It was tbought advisable to give a general view of the fund thus created, which does so much credit, both to the charitable disposition of the people, and to the pru- dent management of those who have had the conduct of it. Col. r3th. This column contains the annual voluntary Collections, at the church doors of the different parishes, for the maintenance of the Poor. -In some diftrias in the south of Scotland, the baneful fyltem of aiRelf ments has been introduced.-Where that is the cafe, that circumstance will,be
he dated in a npte.-The number of thole dilricts have hitherto been very few, and it is hoped they will not be suffered to increase. Col. 14. In this column will be flated the Total Annual Income of the Poor, resulting from the interest of their capital flock, the annual voluntary collections, the profit derived from the use of the pall or mort-cloth, which goes to the poor's fund, and the legal afllefoents, where any have taken place. In all the parilhes there are voluntary colleRions, but in many in- stances, the returns made by the Clergy, date merely the total income, with. out discriminating the particulars. Tils concludes the great mass of information, which it is thought necefli; ry to put into the fliape of Parochial Tables.,U. COUNTY COMPUTATIONS. There are several particulars which it is thought ocrter to endeavour tn ascertain, by County, inso.d of Parochial Computations-Thefe relate, i. To the Rate of the landed property in the county.-a. To the manner in which it is employed.-3. To the number and value of the live-stock which it maintains.-4. To the amount of its agricultural productions, including timber.-5. To the productions of its manufactures and commerce.-6. To the value of its mines, filherics, and kelp.-And, laflly, To the general (tate of the difrit. I. State of Property.-It is of the utmost importance in every county, to ascertain the manner in which its territories is polefied, whether by great or by small proprietors, in what proportion by each, what is the total num- ber of proprietors of land, what portion of the kingdom is held by cor- porations, and other points of a similar nature. With that view, it is pro- . pored to give some account of the State of Property in each county, in re- gard to these particulars. a. Mode of Occupation.-In many of the parochial returns, an account is given of the manner in which the territory of the diRtrict is employed,- But without accurate furvcys of each, the information could not he com- plete, and it is impoflible to attempt this parochially. There arc sufficient data, however, for making calculations, regarding the state of each county, in this important refpert. 3. Live S'tork.-The number and value of the dormeRic animals main- tained in a country, is another object which it is deirable to ascertain. It could not be expected, that an account of live Iock would be made from,every
every paribh, but, in general, the returns are sufficiently numerous, to justify calculations on safe data, (such as the rent of each), for the parilles from which no return of flock has been made. The value of the stock per head, it is evident, mull vary, according to the price of the different forts in diffe- rent counties. 4. 4griqzlttral Produce.--This is another most important object of in. quiry, returns of which could not be expected from every individual parifl. -There are three modes of citimating it.-l. By calculating the produce, according to the quantity of land supposed to be occupied for different pur- poses, whether arable, palture, &c.-2. By multiplying the real rent in any diftric, according to the known proportions between the real rent and the produce, in any particular parish whence a return has been made.-Or, 3. By computing it according to the supposed consumption of the inhabi- tants, deduRing any articles imported.-Calculations of Agricultural pro- duce are particularly eflential, because they will prove how infinitely fupe- rior, in point of importance and extent, our Agricultural resources arc to our commercial a point hitherto little attended to, either in this country or on the continent.-Hence the absurd attempt of France to ruin this king- dom, by excluding its fiips from the ports of Europe.-That our foreign commerce is of great importance, cannot be queltioned; but, at the fame time, it is proper to observe, that we draw as much real profit from agricul- ture in one year, as from commerce in five. 5. Produaions of Mfantfacnures and Comnewrce.-On this important head it will be difficult to give any fatisfacrory information.-In many re- speCs, the accounts mult necessarily be defective, and it is not easy to di- flinguifh those branches of commercial or manufacturing indultry, which are properly speaking dependent upon agriculture, from fich as are purely commercial. The latter indeed, ought, firiscly speaking, to be confined to articles, the raw materials of which are imported from other countries, or which, when they are either manufactured here, or imported in a manu- factured state, are again exported.-In this point of view, the productions of manufactures and commerce are not at all to be compared, in point of value and importance, to those of agriculture. 6. Miner, Fijberies, and Kelp.-Thefe sources of public wealth, being more of a local than of a general nature, are on that account joined toge- ther, and indeed will principally be taken notice of, when the general tfate of the kingdom, ia regard to these two important particulars, comes to be confidered.,7. General
7, General County Statementr.-It is proposed, in the last place, to lay before the reader a general view of the itate of each County, exhibiting at one glance, a fumnmary of those articles, with regard to'which, ;anative and public.fpirited Statcfman, would be most anxious to procure informa- tion. It is impoflible to expect, that all there particulars, whether regarding parieis or counties, can be given in so very exat a state, as to efrape the remarks of little critics; though it is believed that they' will be sufficiently correct, to answer every useful psirpofe of inquiry; and the foundation being once laid, there can be no doubt, that by perseverance, and farther in- veltigation, they may ultinhtely be brought to such a state of minute per- fecion, as may he judged necefiary by the public.,111. GENERAL COMPUTATIONS. The great object of the Statistical Inquiry, was to accomplih, whahat d hitherto never been even attempted, namely, to ascertain the internal firuc- ture of Satiety. Various ingenious authors have perplexed themselves and their readers, by puzzling themselves about what they termed the productive and unproduitive classes, without having ever analysed the real F(ate ofa po- litical community. By the affifance of the Clergy of Scotland, I have been enabled to resolve a problem hitherto involved in mystery. The various clafles into which a society, containing about x,553,oo0 fouls, is divided, the modes by which they respectively obtain their subsistence, and the means by which their condition may be improved, will be explained with a degree of precision hardly to be expeted in a first attempt.-Information of that fort, however, only becomes interesting, in proportion to the scale on which it is given, and hence it seems more desirable, to reserve all discus- sions concerning the classes of society, or the distribution of a political com- munity, for those general computations, which will be drawn up, when the general iRate of the kingdom is explained. At the fame time, as this WVork may fall into the hands of numbers, who-maynot have an oppor. tunity of perusing the general Statistical Account of Scotland, the curiosity of many readers will be gratified, by perifing the following Table, tranf. mitted by the Reverend Mr Morrice, the intelligent Minister of Kincardine O'Niel. The nature of the various particulars will there appear, refpecling which, returns from every diRrict cannot be looked for, and consequently, where general computations are greatly to be prefrrred.,STATISTICAL
STATISTICAL TABLE oF tnE PARISH or KINCARDINE O'NEIL*, COUNTY or ABERDEEN. LENGTH in Englilh miles, 7 Breadth, - . Number of Acres, calculated to be about - 30,0oo Population, anno 1755, - 1706,, anno 1791, . 2075 Increase, - - 369 Average of Births 39,ofDeaths 3for fix year preceding 1791, 35 of Marriages J '5 Inhabitant in towns, - - - - none.,in villages, - - I n in the country, 1975 Number of Males, - - 93,Females, - - - x Persons under to years of age, -417 - between lo and 20, - - 297,---- - 20 and 50, - - 7 -,-- - -- 50 and 70, 465 ------ 70 and So, 76,.- - o and go, - - 34 - -- . 9go and 1Jo, - none.,- above o, - - - none. Families, - - - - 00 Houses inhabited, - - - co Ditto uninhabited, - - none. New Houses built within these to years, 76 Old ditto pulled down, - - 63 Married persons, - - - S Children, at an average, from eacl marriage, 5 Twins, &c. born in the parilh for the last ten year<, 20 Batchelors, or unmarried men above fifty, - 12 Unmarried women above forty-five, - - 60,Number * It is believed, that properly, it should be written, Kincardine on tle Neal, or Nule, a small burn or rivulet which runs near the church.
Number of Widowers, * -,Widows, Members of the Etabliihed Church, - 204 Seceders, - - - Roman Catholics, - - 4 Episcopalians, 4 Males born out of the parish, uncertain. Females ditto, - uncertain. Persons born abroad, none,,in England, - . 3 in Ireland, - . none. -- - in the Colonies, none. Proprietors residing, 5 - non-refiding, - - 7 Clergymen, . I Merchants, - none. Physicians, none. Surgeons, -none. Writers or Attornies, none. SchoolmaRlers, (parochial) - Farmers above L. 5o per annum, - . -ae. Ditto under L. 50, - - Shopkeepers, - . . 1o Innkeepers, - 3 Smiths, - 6 .Marons, - - a Carpenters, - -i Weavers, 5 - Shoemakers, - - 4 Tailors, - - -20 Butchers, - -none. Millk-s, - - Bakers, none. Gardeners, . 3 Male domefRic servants, 3 Female ditto, - none. Male farm fenrants, - 75 Female ditto, 5 Dyers and other occupations by which persons gain} a livelihood in the pariib, - Poor, - 33 Capital of their funds, L. 4o Annual income, - L. o,m 'Number
Number ofYoung persons tanght Eng!inl, Writing, &c. at ',the parochial school.*, Latin, - Greek. - - - cease. Greck. . , none. At the Uiverfity, - Silips, Small veCels, Boats, -,none. Seamen, Fishermen, - - - Persons serving in the Navy, during the laGt war, Ditto in the Army, - So Average of Perfors, who have Settled in the parish, during the},laRs 5 or to years, - - Ditto who have emigrated from it, - - 6 Gentlemei's Carriages, - - none, C. r;s, - - - 72 Ploughs, - - - - o,L. s. d. VT'led rent, in Scotll money, · 3675 13 4,r:n:, o 17'30, .nSterling, { 225 o o,anno 1?91 , - 1'74 o o * :i'-:t in the parinl, . 2- 3 4 0o :;:e of article; exported, - - - 6o o,Ditto imported, - -- 4 o o,VALUE OF STOCK. Number of Draught hiores 130, valued at L. 5 o o each Total 65 o o,Saddle & carliage horses, none, o o o - o 0 o lBef' cattle, 6zo, - 5o - 3on0 o o Inferior ditto, 00oo, 300 - 36co o 0 Befl sheep, one - - o o - o oo Inferior ditto, 30o0, - 5 6 - 750 o o Swine, 30, - 400 - 10 0 Goats, Deer, &c. none, - ooo - o oo,Total value offlock, - L. S1Io o o The above was the value in g79r; it has since greatly increased.,ANNUAL 'Tllere are ab7oe Ice more taught in privale.
ANIUAL PRODUCE. Number of 'roduce Il'ce per rIutl Price Total. ilotalvale.l CROPS. Acrcs un. per Acre. Boll. per Acre. produce.,der each. notLS. L. s. D. L. S. D. BOLLS L. S. D. Oats, - 4503 3 o 10 o 110 o 13,280 6,9co 0 o Bear, - 800oo 4 o 12 o 8 0. 3,200 1,910 o 0 Barley, - none. Wheat, - none. Beans, - none. Peas, - o0 3 1o 0 I 10 6o 30 0 o Potatoes, - 5 I o o 4 16 o 633 29D 0 o Flax, - no return. urnips, - 60 S o o 480 o o,STONES. per STONE. STONES Meadow hay, s or natural none. grass, . Sown rs, 50 3,03 o o 6 7 I0 o I50,000 375 0 Patur, at L. per horse; xS s. per cow; and 3s. per seep. r,930 o o,Annual produce of Gardens - - 0 o,- Orchards, none, Woods and Plantations - - So 0 o Fiflieries, none, - Mines, none, Toal Value of Annual Produce, - L. 2,01o 0 A number of returns in detail, equally curious and important as that of Kincardine O'Niel, are difpcrfed through the Statistical Volumes.-Thlefe will furnilh sufficient data, on which the general fate and Itrlucure of so- ciety, in the northern part of the illand, may be ascertained. But they con. tain fich a number of particulars, that few readers would have patience to go through them, were they multiplied over a thonfand dittries. i have thus laid before tl.e reader, a general view, of some, among many other important articles of information, which the Statillical Account of Scotland affords, and which it would be in vain to search for in any former publication.-Pofefled of such a ba5s, on which to ground their reasoning, or their conduct, with what advantage will not future political authors ex- plain the principles of policy, and future ftatefmcn direct the adminiRration of public aflairs! May there labours have the efltec of rendering the rulers of nations wife, and those whom they govern happy! Maly they be the means of promoting the interests, not only of this, or of that community, but of the specie' at large ! And may the dotrines thence to be inculca- ted, be from time to time inproved, until the principles on which political society ought to be founded, will ultimately reach their utnoft ftanlard of perfecion. I (hall now proceed to give some Tables of Aberdeerlhire, by way of ' fpcrimen haw such a work ought to be drawn up.,STATISTICAL
STATISTICAL TABLE W- of the I|_. _ 2. 3- 4. 5 . 6.,Popu. Rea Popu- lation R De- Vlued r ent, Parifli. Vol. Page. latior, 79 0. Ian. De.- Vacied rent Steri.,1755. -_ cease. crea'e. Scotch money. mo' . 1797. ey.,L. s. di L. Aberdeen, Old, orOlldMachar,MXIX. 4c 4945 So; 3162 5747 7 O1 tocc 2 mninifters Aberdeen New, includingFoot- ( 533 - dee, or IFit tie, X 14c o78 62c 5335 4 miniRers r Aberdour . XII. 57 1397 1306 - 91 1963 6 S 6oo Aboyne . XIX 296 1695 oc - 645 2005 8 io 1 20o 5. Alsord - XV. 447 99c 663 - 327 3126 12 8 15,Auchindore XII. 49c0 39 59 - 249 1322 1 4 72C Auchterlefs - XII. 306 264 1264 - 3153 6 8 15 Belellvie V- . 2iS 471 1318 - 4463 6 8 34 Birse LYX. 103 iI26 130o 174 - 3I39 8 4 116c o. Bourty - IX. 434 55 45 - 6 2501 o o ICO,Cabrach VII. 361 96 70o - 260 454 2 0 * 24 Caimy - XII. 12 2690 2600 - 9 3610 17 o Iloc Chapel of Garioch XI. 5°1 351 1035 - 36 4733 3 4 246 Clat V-il. 535 55 i5 - 134 1275 4 4 cc 5;. Clunie - X.'35 99 8 - l . 2333 6 8 II,Colditone,Logie 1X. 51 i243 1,32 - 61 2783 o o 16 Coull 111. 19 751 766 - 15 1532 I S2boo Crathie&BraemarrXtV.334 2671 251 - 42 3547 6 8 z6 Crimond XI. 4 765 7 - 2ˆ7 13 4 13 20. Cmden - V.43z 2549 :02s 511 5314 16 4 31i,Culfalmond 111.24 Sr2 745 - 6 2100 o o o 12 Cflnmie, (which is now annex- ed to Leo- chel) IV. I73- - - 923 5 0 456 Daiot - V .S5 975 95 -- 25 2210 9o o 8 Deer, New IX. 14 2313 2SCC 47 -- 559 6 8 3 25. Deer, Old - XV. 69 32 4 61271 4200,Drumblade - IV. 52 1125 86 239 3066 13 4 Drumoak - II1.315 760 692 68 oco o o 5 Dyee - III. 1 3 S 38 352 31 1706 4 Echt XI. 61 ' 1277 963 - 3142364 5 o 996 30. Ellon II. 98 2523 1S3 693 Sg93 6 470o,Fintray - III. 236 905 S5s 5 3007 8 4 Sorbes XI. 189 456 37 6 166 3 4 62 Forgue X- I. 279 1o, 1771 - 4 3936 6 8 200 Foveran - VI. 62 19S 123 - 751 4926 6 26 3. Fraferburglh VI. 1 1682 2 o6c' 378 3000 0 70 5,Fyvie IX. 459 2525 2194 334 6145 6 S 3o Gartley - Xl.3S 1 132- ISo- 472 - 1040 15 0 8 Glfs . VII.399 1093 776 - 317 oo o 8o Gienbuck:et 1/ 3I 71300 , sot| Gienbuck:et XIX 6;7 43C 449 1, 755 0 400 40. Glenmniick, &c. XI. 21 227C 211 15 33S4 16 ,37 * For the labour of drawiz:g up th;s interesting Table, and mlich valhtble ailit- ance of the fame nature, I s:et myˆelf infinitely indobtcd to MIr John MWood of tie Ercs Office, Edinburgh.
COUNTY of ABERDEEN, by PARISHES. ó. 9. _ 0I0. IT. 12. 13. 14.,Total annual Minister's No. iTotal income . Capial ofthe Stipend, &c. -.of of the School Poor, includ. he grain con- Scho. me Poor's lePCons clld. verted. lan. Funds. ing collc-,Itins. L. s. . L. s. d . L ..d. s. d.L. s. d. L. s. d. 75 oj1 S 24c5 0 0o 10z2 o 0 65 37 'o (l026 oc 0---------- 4s! - 829 0 0 126 0 O 026 0 0| ooó 00. 62 1 o 57 #04 c 0 3150 o 10 0 o o 0 *3 0 0 *35 *4 0. 0 *3 *210 0 . 49794 17 10o 6 o o 8 l 9 15 13s,657 27 2 9i6 o 1 4000 S o 0 o0 0oS 0 o0 4 24 112 241200 o o29 0 34 80 t o o 16 o 3500 o o 30 5 6(ó 4 2 6 10o 1 IIC 100 0o 65o 00 0 óI 0 0 50 0 0 10. 8 o. 2 6a0 8lic 00 9 O 1229 o,54 15 6 30 i 7 16 50 0 0 200 4 I 0 118 13 4 *90 *04 0 *6 40 0 0 119 04 4 iS 6 35 0 0 1iS o0 c 3 00 75 15 o lI 109 4 ic 6 6 656 . 100 7 75 b6 *14 0 0 070 o o 10 o o0 13 o 0,133 12 c 13 : 24 0o o o. 0 o o o IO o o 97 94 *'z4 97 ' 83 o 4I00 6oo 98 3 0 7] 'o10 I IT loS o o 0 150 0 21 5 o 1, 9 4 s '3 2o 9 0 20 5 I2. 126 3 1j 36 95 0 6-,13 0o 0 30 o 45 00 7112 0 36 10 4 0 12 20 o0 o 13 : 6 :I 3 6 9o Io 9. 3C io 0 0 I; So 0 o 9 0 0 12 26 o 1266 S 4 10 300o 00 0 o 0 50 o 3. 031 o0 3 32 I8 o Sc 355 0 56 0 0 1c0 0 0,100 I1 3 *lc 12 12 0 5 30 o o o 0 I o 107 6 8 36 15 2 o 25060 o o 6 o 3 32. 13000 0 *6o 0h I1 I 4c01000o 0---- 43 o o,87 5 0 3' 16 14 1 i6 2 i 10 1oo 6 0 60 1 o 3C 'z:4 .0 ,,, s 5 o00 2 0 350,n6 171 5 86 ; 2ó153Y 7 2-i 23 '9 3 4, o 136 i, o0 o 21 II 1 423 0 6 o 3 z6 o' 4 0 o 35. 129 I i4 4° 2612 71 S Too5 l 36 o 0 63 o0,12911 1i 30 10o 4- c 43 --40 0 0 4D C 0° 94 0 0 100 3 5 o0 30 50 o o '7 o o 5 9 57 6 8 302 14 0 41 o 0o710 0 0 0 *70, 0] W 90 0 7 20- o 0 o3 0 4 0 49. 017 120 o.i 0 904469 o 0 o ( 34 iS 0
STATISTICAL TABLE of the T 7. 4. 5 . .-2. 5. 4. 7.,-l'o - ' Keal 1'OPU- aItiofi I0- De- Valued rent, [°t Parish. Vol. Page. lation 1790. crafe. crease. Scotch money. tmrL,i l55. - r mo-,1797. ncy.,· 1~L. s. d. L Huntly - XI. 467 190c 3600 1700 - 3070 o0 170o Infch - XVII. 452 995 90. - 95 2z6 13 4 12o Inverury - VII. 331 73c 731 2 - 1634 o0 80: Keig - - . 455 499 475 24 1575 11 4 a 8:1 45. Krithliall - 1. 7 I111 S - 273 2907 1 8 1:4S,Kemnay XII. 199 64 63 i - 32 1604 0 0 70o Kildnnimmie XVIll. 411 562 4 6 - 136 1051 13 4 * 55c Kincardine O'Niel VI. 55 1706 207 369 3675 13 4 174 King Edward XI. 398 1352 157; 225 - 4099 6S 22S3 52. Kinnellar - III. 496 395 34 -- 56 920 156 j,Kinnctlmont XIII. 66 791 S3 3 -- 117 13 4 10o Kintore - X"Ii. 61 973 S12 - 1 61 1637 17 2 *56: ˆLeocels inch. } VI. 1: S1296 642 - 644 1598 13 4 t S30 d;ing Cufi~nic Lcnic - VIII. 511 319 415 99 -- 1566 6 S 70c s5. Logic Buclian 1V. 421 575 509 66 3751 13 4 I5oc,Loigfide - XV. 2S2 1979 I;92 - 187 4592 1I 0 2alc LoInm; y XVI. 631 1674 1650 - 4 3367 Ir 6 220o Lumphanan VI. 3S2 682 621 - 6i 2082 68. oco Macilar, New V. 465 1191 103C - 61 2454 0 O 1500 60. Meldruni, Old XIII. ;3 16o3 1490 _ 113 1 50 0 o * 97,lMehlick - IV. 320 135S 1035 - 350 27CO 0 o *42C Mlidmarr II. 516 979 9:5 - 34 23S7 0 0 I1e 1Moloqubittcr VI. 1:1 997 150 503 2275 10 10 140G i\olyinuflk 111. 66 io,5 1130 125 - 2543 0 0 131 65. Newhill - VI. 34 959 xIISI Z2 - 1313 6 S 3o,Oyne - XV. 1 643 630 - 13 2300 13 4 1O0c Peterculter XVI. 35S 755 1c02 247- 2613 13 4 1200 Peterhead - XVI. 541 2487 4100 1613 - 4525 11 3002 Pitfligo V. 96 1224 130c 76 - 2400 0 1240 70. Prenn:ly XVI. 637 448 450 2 -- 17 0 0 e100,Rathen VI. 15 1527 173C 203 - 3520 0 0 2ooc Rayne - XV. 11 1131 1173 4 -- 2543 134 130c Rhynie and Ellcy X1X. 259 836 61S - I5 1702 19 9 700 Skenc IV. 5 1251 1233 1-- 2500 x6 1320 75 Slais - . V. 275 12S6 117 - 69 234 0 0 16c,Stratlidon - XIII. 171 17;5 152 - 226 339 1 6 16oo Sirichen VlI. 1 16 15 1 A40 242 - 175 0o 0 99 Ta:riaud - VI. 222 130cI I05 -- 25 3035 10 2 130I Trvas - V. 309 2346 690 - 66 4SSo 0 0 Coo So. Tiliiynel le - V. 27 335 412 77 - 10'0 3 4 430,Tolgh VIII. 61 57c 560 - c 1670 14 o 6oo 'lovic - IV. 547 65t 550 - 106 1475 7 10oo Tnrreff XVII. 394 Sy 20:9 132 - 5x59 2 0 2Eoc Tyric - VI. 136 596 949 353 - 1530 0 0 IcO S. Udny IV. 156 1,:12 1137 - IS ~ 931 0 '0 200,16 3(112:l2I L1i69041 10o19,11i6361 io891 Increase, 60oS! 6051 Ncv Aberdeen Salinon-fifings, 433 6 5 940 XKirk.nds, - 22116 1i 4 : 'l6c
COUNTY of ABERDEEN, by PARISHES. 5. 9. 10o. II. I2. 13. t. MAiniftier' No. income Cpital o annual Stipe oi, con. S o- of the School. her flock of thi Annual C 1lrc 222 of the rhe. . r. Poor, in cud-,astn e poor. . Foor's l ond ir.g collcc. verned. { la. Funds. ' ns,tions. L. s.d(1 L. s. d. L . d.L. . d.L. s. d. 77 S o 40 o o 50238o 1 6 20 o o 30 14 2 211 5 2' 5 715 o 612o0 o o o r9 5 0 S5 4 S 4 1 268 660 8o 0 4oo 14 0 o 8 10o 8 3 *14 0 0 70 6 o0 o 100 o 45. 127 2 53 *2s S *4 0 0 30 50 0 o iS 5 o,68 5 8 2c 8 0 8 216 oo0 o o o l 0 o 8 o o 7 5 l8 2 2 IC o 04 0 4 o o400 40 0 126 13 8 62 o o o 33 40 0 o10 12.0 0 130 o o 3c2 2 00 o 37 3s0 0 IS o 42 15 o 130 5 I 1 2 1I 7 ' 450 0 o o ..20 o 24 o 4 10 6 1012 o0 17140 0 0o 1 15 0 20 5 0 *90 0 0 2 ( 11 2 1 22 95 II 1 0 14 2 0 x2ó 13 $ xo o o1 i 4 ,o2 o5 | o o o 2 o S: S 6 -cIC 14 00 5 140 0o 6oo0 11160 55. --S 0 8 2 14 100 io - -- u 10 3 0o 0,241 I9 4 25 l 6 8 2 2 o 20 0 2 o o S 0 o o ic6 3 o 3' "'24 00 1' 25 no 41O0 4 Io o 107.4 0 4 1'415 7 ' 1575 0 17 0 o 2 7 6 ós. 121 12 i 40 o 0 0 03---- 40 0 400 0,67 23 72. *4 00 36 6 386 o 0 360 o i41i 4$ 25 oIo o0 020217 0 0 24 o 0 2427 ioS 3o 0 Q 2 0 i. 3 I co 0 37 iS I5 o 900 30 200 4 778 1 4 19 . 140 4 £- 30 o568 8 21 8 o 0 0 18 0 0 25 0,73 I o *2: 1i 6 520 00 6oo 6 o 7 21i 16 o 6; 12 C 310 3140° 0 0 4 0.0 32 0o 122 6 S 87 35 0 0 8c 90 66 o o 70 o o 123 2 4 30 2 00 o0 3 100 o o 22 00 27o 7p- 1o0 o0 0 c *14 0 0*l---- -- *8 o,93 5 1o 12 0 0 51 50 0 0 24 0 o 33 21 0 73 4 o0 * *' 4 0 0 o o 0 0 6 o o 200 0 9i ; 1 *2c '4 o * 1 o 500 0 o 115 7 0 30 '5 6 8 023 15 0 1 5 27 5 5 75. 214 20 840 c 12 0 6-ó---- iS 40 20o 0,lo3 o 0. c I .9 o0 4°C0 o 0 10 o0 20 0 70 16 o0 o* 4 o o00 3 140 0 24 o 30 o 127 i' 0 3 4 0 0 ° 22o o 8 o o 9 0 0 i22 4 3 o 522 Io00 44o o 303 1 45 5 o. 96 i 8 5 12 i6 8 40 0 4 0 0 6 o 0,93 9 I 2 18 '5 54 00600o S14 o0 75 o 0 3 * o I00 17 0 0 o 7,0 130 6 o10 o 0 i r o 0 0 0 0 33 S 58 6 0 57 io 8 14 i 0 30 57'0 0 14 10 2 1 5 5 3 1. 1o oi 5' o 3 20 22 50 0024 o34 0,93 5 1°~i 34-' z ~ 43 t
Observations on tbe preceding Table. The total of the firt column is S5 pariflies or diftrirs, having 89 Mini.. iens: The parilh of'Cufhnie having been lately annexed to that of Leochel, the number is now reduced to 84 diRfrits, and S8 Ministers. The total of the second column,or population in 1755, 116,836 The total of the third column, or population in 1790-7, 12z,911,Increase, - - . 6,o85 The increase on the whole, column fourth, - 6,904 The decrease on the whole, column fifth, - o,189,Increase, 6,o0. It is here to be observed, that though part of the parishes of Cairny and Cabracli, lies in Blanff-fhire, and part of the parish of Drumoak, in the county of Kincardine, the whole population of each of there parilhes is set down in the Table, from the difficulty of apportioning the number of inhabitants to each refpeclive county, therefore the real population of the county of Aberdeen is somewhat less than above flated. The increase has almost exclusively taken place in Aberdeen, Peterhead, Huntly, Fraferburgh, and the other towns, whilst it would appear, that the population of molt of the country parilbes has diminished. The number of inhabitants of the towns is about 17,833, viz. Aberdeen, New Town, 16120; Old Town, 1713; 20,067 Gilcomftone, 2234; - Total, . Peterhead, - -550 Huntly, about - - 1700 Fraferburgh, ooo Old Meldrum, - - 3 Turreff, - or CumineRtown, 404 Inverry, (a royal borough), about . 400 Sintore, (ditto), a22,Total in towns, , - - 33 The valuation or valued rent of the county of Aberdeen, column sixth, asentered in the records of the Court of Exchequer, is L. 235,665 :8 ir Scotch, or L. x9,638: r5: 8- Sterling.,Column
.Column 7th. The real rent of the parilfhes that have sent returns being in the proportion of L. 51, io s. Sterling to each L. coo Scotch of va- lued rent; t'e real rent of the-other parilhes is therefore computed in the fame proportion, and marked with an alferilk. The rent of the parithes of Old Machar and Newhills, diftries particularly circumnanced, is re. turned at L. r3,500 Sterling. Proceeding on these principles, it appears, that the total land rent of the county, including that of the faimon-fifiings on Dee, elimated at L. 940, amounts to L. I33,631 Add Don fifings, - Ijo,Foveran, Peterhead, and Ellon fifningc, 400 Granite quarries at Grandholm, - - lillftone quarries in Aberdcur parish, 40 Houses in Abeideen, 15,500 Houses in the other towns and villages, - 4co,L. .55,'52 'Ihis ret, considerable as it is, compared with the old valuction, it is ho- pud will fall far Ihort of the film which this extensive and industrious cour.- ty will reach in a short period: rnd it is to be observed, that in tome pa. riflhe, the g:ain or vietual-rent, has been flated at the rate of only o s. tle boll, a fum below the actual conversion. Column 8th. The total income of the Clergy in this county, converting the bear and harley, at 15s.; the oats and oatmeal, at I2 s.; and the maLt, at 7s. 6 d. the boll; and computing moderately the lipends of three pa- riafes that made no returns, amounts to L. 5173: S: 5; which divided by E9, the number of Miniters, gives an average of L. 104, 5 s. to each Cler- gyman. In this is included the rsalie of tle glebes, amounting, on an ave- rage, to L. 6, ro s. each; and the allowance for communionoclemen:., which varies from L. I: 6: S to L. 1i, and averages L. 4, at5. The ecclefiaflical benefice of the parih of Newhilis, in this county, is of a singular description: George Davildon of Pettane, a burgess of Aber- deen, having, in i 63, mortified the land; of Capelhiljs, for the maiintenane of the Minister of that parilli. These lands, confifing of s;3 acres, oi' arable, pasture, and moor groind, having a privilege of moss and paflurage, worth altogether at present L. 140 per riranm, is potlefned by the Minister rs Newhills for the time being, and contiititres the whole of his living, ex- cept an allowance of about L. for communion.elements. Column 9th. The proportion of lclolslrs to tile whole inihabitans of the i,atifhes tlhat have made rctrr;:s, bri:g nearly as i to 3o, the number i; cpmnputed after that proportion in tlhe other pirilile!; anld tht total number
of scholars in Abltrdeenfhire, excsufiv of Old and New Aberdeen parishes, will be found to amount to 2941. Column roth. The total income of the parochial schoolmasters of A. lIerdeenthire, (Old and New Aberdeen slot included), computing each of the deficient pariflics at L. r4, amounts to L. 124::g9, or nearly L. 15 each. The emoluments of the parochial schoolmasters arise from, Ift, Tlhe legal flary, varying fiom L. 2, ios. to L. x, average L. 6, 14. id, An allowance for aCting as fetlion-clrk and precentor, with fees for ma. iLing entries in, and extracts from, the parifit regiflers and felion records. And, 3dly, The fees for teaching, which alc extremely moderate, being on- .y fiom i s. 6 d. to - s. a quarter, for each scholar, taught Englilb anl wri- ting; the avermge of the two lail is L. 8, 15 s. It cannot fail of being observed, that their whole emoluments amoqnt to a fTmr too small to enable the fchoolnafti.n to live with any degree f .atisfaCtion or comfort. Column nrth. The number of poor in the country parishes in Aber- decnillii-e, is 3xS ; in New Aberdeen, 481; and in Old Aberdeen, 40o; in all, o303: bring in the proportion of about r in every 40 of the inbabi- /ants. The total of column.r2Lh, being the capital of the poor's funds, amounts, :n the country parifies, to L. 966 : 5: 6; and in Old Aberdeen, to L. r265; making in all L. 1x,r3: 5: 6. Column irth. 'ITe colletions in 76 country parifles, amounts to L. iSS, 3 s.; and in Old Aberdeen, to L. o10, : s.: in all L. 1391, 5 .; .nd this filr. does not include the collections in New Aberdeen, and in the ether country parishes, which must be in proportion. Column i4th. The total income of the poor in this county, is L. 3062, 6s: 7- d.; m.king an average of about L. z for each pauper, which is cer- tainly maintaining the poor at a very small expence. The profits of the pall or mort-cloth are included in this column. 'Ihee additional remarks will fiffice oa the prochial Tables.,COUNTY COMPUTATIONS. WVe flia!i nou proceed to the articles which it is proposed to confider, not by pari.ics, but by countiec.,I. State ofProperty. A particular account was obtained of the state of the property in this nllnty, the num!ber of proprietor, anil the extent of property held by each; ' ::' *.'vS t*it t!:'!jbht n'-e.cdry to enter into the detail of thqfc partiru-,larr,
lars, many proprietors not wiShing to have infolmation of that nature dif- closed to the public. It is therefore propuoed to conine the following statement to general particulars, The following is a general view of the ftete of property in Abhrdecn- fhite.,No. of,opri- Total of their va- Total in Clafes. Nature of each lass. etors i luation in Scotch Sterling,each money. money. class. ____ _ __ Idars . ____ _,L. s. d. L. Clas x. Above L. 000oo Scotch of,valued rent, which in this countyisequal to L. z3, 6 s. 8 d. Sterling. (Tlhe larget estate is rated at L.2i,566:15: i Scotch, or L. 12,210 Sterling; and has lately been aug- mented by new purcha- fes,) - - 27 'Il,39 3 23 ,6 ;. From L. 2o0o to L. ioo0,Sco:ch, or from L. 1133, 6s. 8d toL. 566:13:4 Sterling, - - 30 40,575 9 3 e3,C33 3. Fromn L. 1ooo to L. 403,Scotch, or from L. 566, i' as. 4d. to L.2 6, 13S. 4d. Sterling, - 72 43,&S' 9 se i',7co 4. From L. 4oo to L. 2o0,Scotch, or from L 216, 3 s. 4 d. to L.il3 :6:E Sterling, - - 42 12,z23 o 6,950 5. From L. 200 to L. ico,Scotch, or from L.Ia3, 6s. 8d. to L. 56: s3:4 Sterling, - - 31 4,1Z8 74 1x-t 2.3o 6. Under L. o00 Scotch, or,L. 56: 3:4 Sterling, 45 3,535 17 Io.e ,0oco 7. Ioflpial and kirk lands, or,lands belonging to cor- porations, )- - 5o4 S o 5,a~5,_Tota!, 247 235,665 S , 133,630 It i proper toremark,that the above filr of L. r33,630 is gross rent, fro:; wbich there are a tricty of heavy deducdions; as, i. The cxpenc of colli i.on ; 2. The rilk of loss from the infolvcncy of tenants; 3. lhe expcr.cc c; s':pirting the tenant? in bad fecanjn, when, inltra'! of receiv.mg rent, it i:,n 'fit.,
often neceflary to maintain the small farmers and their families; 4. Ecc!ti- alical expences, not only the Minilfes f'lpend, and the fum allowed for communion-elements, but also the eapence of building. and keeping in re- pair the church and manse, and the offices conne&ted therewith, which, like all other public buildings, are twice as expensive as any other; 5. The fa- lary of the fcboolmafter, and the expence of repairing his house; lallly, The land-tax, house, and window tax, and other impositions of a public na- ture, as that for railing men, &c. All these charges being deduted, it is probable that the real free rent to the proprietors, would not much exceed two-thirds of the gross rent above mentioned, or L. Sg,oSo; and the other one.tlird, or L. 44,550, may be the amount of the deducions. Both toge- ther make 35. S d. of average rent, perEnglil acre, over the whole county: The particulars of the seventh class, or lands belonging to corporations, it may be proper to detail more fully. Scotch money. Townof Aberdeen, I . . I. 20 I Binfloprick of Aberdeen, - - 666 13 4 Merchant Maiden Hospital, Edinburgh, - - x 5 o King's College, Aberdeen, 944 19 4 Gbrdon's Hospital, Aberdeen - - 613 3 4 Town of Old Aberdeen, - - 469 S ac Parsonage of Turreff, - 300 o Shipmasters of Aberdeen, - - 6 13 4 Dyers of Aberdeen, Sz - 6 S Archbifhoprick of St Andrews, - - o o 0 I'arfonage of Auchterlfs, - o o o Felers of Turreff, - - oo o Tailors of Aberdeen, - 8 r4 o,L. 0So4 15 o Above L. 66,oco Scotch of valued rent, or property equal to L. 36,850 in Sterling money of real rent, is subjed& to the ftri& fetters of a Scotch entail. It is fuppored, that about one half of the rents of the county be- long to persons who du not irlide in it, and. are spent in other pats of th: kingdoni.,' II. lode of Occupation. Without an actual forvey, it is evident that this can only be the sieb- ',c: of rather loose aid general computation, the returns from the pariflih :r general having been extremely imperfect. It is probable, howevcr, frona,til.
the belt calculations that it is poflible to make, on filch data as could bh procured, that the following is pretty near the truth.,Scotch Englifll Acres. Acres. t. In-field, or land in complete cultivation, and al- ways under crops of grain, green crops, or artifi- cial grass, - - - 90o,oo t2,500S z. Out-field, or land only occasionally tilled, and then left ley; land of this description in tillage, sup. pose o100,0o acres, lcy roo,ooo also. Total, ana,o:3 :;z,oc. 3. Pailure land never tilled, but capable of improve. ment, . - 74,co 92g,50 4. Waite lands, commonly called moor and moss, . tr3,s; ; 9x1,3;C 5. Natural woods, and forests, o,oc 37,5cz 6. Plantations, ,- - - ,0 35;000,IToital; 57;.oo0 7.x.So5 From this general view of the manner in which the lands in Aberdeen- flhirc is employed, it will appear, what immcnfe scope there is for improve- umet. Perhaps, of the whole, the land that is planted, or under natural wood, together with, perhaps, one half of the il-field land, amounting to about ico,coo Scotch acrc., or ISo,ooo Englilh, is 1l that -has nlearly reached its proper value or height of produce. When the lind is thoroughly cultivated, in the manner which it is hoped will take place, what additional wealth, of the belt and mtolt permalcut natire, may no be cxpcled ?,I. Lie -Stck. The iuraination relpCeling this important particular is more m.inue ;ban cc:ld have well been expected. There are returns fron 40 parilhcs in lhe county, of the number of lhrfcs, cattle, and lieep in each. Of these, there are four parishes, namely, Birfc, Crathie, Glenrnuick, and Strathdon, rwhich areparticularly circumltanced, having more than the ufualproportion oflive- flock; it is proposed therefore, il the following account, to keep thiem di- ftind, and afterwards to slate the stock in the 36 other plriflies which have !-nt returns; and then to eitimate the parifles wvience thele are ni return, in the fami proportion with those returned, accordung to tIieir refpesive vatliation;. The live.ltock of the county of -AberdcTc, on th'c; :)riicinle; ir:t be rhen stated in *l:c !lo.inog mlapnr:,£-tee
State ofithc Live-Stock of the County of Aberdeen. Dillrils. Valuation. llorfes. Cattle. Sheep.,L. s. d. I. Parilhes ofBirfe, Crathie, Glen. muick, and Strathdon, - r3,rxt 3 ; 2,585 7,254 42,527 a. The stock in 36 other parifhe. wrhich have sent returns, 87,041t I I 73So 32,010 47,464 3. Stock in the remaining paritle. when no returns have been made, in the fame proportion as No. a. r13,5 ria 4 81,40o 49,30 73,860,Total. z35.665 8 ir r,144S 9,c74 164,t7 That is, at the rate of 33 Englifl acresper horse; 8 dittoper head of cattle; 4 ditto per sheep.,The value of the flock may be thus fiated: 1.445 Horses, of all ages, at L. 6, - . 1 nS,659 o o S9,074 Cattle, young and old, at L. 3, los. - 31,759 o 0 164,17t Sheep, at 5 s. . . 41,041 15 o Hogs, (whicb arc pretty numerous), deer, goats, rabbits, poultry, pgeons, &c. - 40,co o o,Total, . L. 521,4g9 15 o Of their, it is fuppo ed, that o0,00o head of cattle, and a6,00o flicep, are an-ually fold out of the county, and it is well known, confilerable quall ities of salted pork are exported. Tisb tab'l mnii satisfy every one of the great advantage that might be derived from the improvement of live-flock. Though there are conliderable numbers of valuable animals of tie different forts above mentioned, yet the average price, young and old included, calnot with justice be fated at mnore than the small tums above mentioned. Whereas, by attending to the improv-ment of tle different breeds, tie fame pailute might feed animals of mr-:h fcerior value.,IV. Ag ricultural Prodtce. WVe fill.' next proceed to givr a generai view of tie profit derived from the cui:ivation of the foil, in the manner above specified, and fir; tlhe stock abivi. eaium. lraite.,Table
Table of Agricultural Produce. o. ofiSc. i oduce Pncc per otal l'nce Total Total vaue CROPS. Acres un- per Acre, Boll. per Acre. produce.,der each. EOLL L. S. D. L. s. D. OLLS. L. D. Oats, - 144,000 4 0o l o 2 8 o 576,C00 345,600 o Barley and bar, or big,} 34,9C 5 0 5 o 3 15 o 174,500 [30,575 WVheat, - o 7 o 2 o 7 0 14 700 770 o Beans,' 50 6 o o 0 o o 3,0oo 1,50o o c Potatoes, 4,co0 1i 0 8 0 4 16 0 48,0oC 19,2CO 0 Flax, - 500 - --- 1i6 o o -- S,ooo o Turnips, - oo - --- 6 0 o --2-,c:o oc lenadow hay, STONES. per STONE. STOSES or natural 6 3 grass, S ,Co 5 o o Sown grass, Pasture for 1,448 horses, at L. a each, - L. 41,596,- 89,o74 lcad of cattle, at 20o. each, 9,074 ( -s 1- 64,171 filcep at s. each, - 16,41, ( --- for fwinle, goats, deer, 8&c. - - . 10,ooo Annual value of natural woods and plantations, - - 3,co o,Total. 5o4.3. ; o c This produce is in proportion to the land rert as free to one. Five rents is certainly a larger proportion than is usually expeted by the tenant; but it is to be con:idered, that a larger profit is eifcntial for a very small farmer, than for a large one; and that a less proportion of the produce of arable land, can be paid from poor land, than from rich. Where farms are very finall, as is too nmch the cafe in the n .them parts of Scotland, namely, from L. 5 to L. toper annum, in common years, the farmer requires almost the whole p reduce to maintain his family, and to defray the expences of cultivation. Even on a farm of L. .o per atnum, five rents will do little more. But when, in addition to the smallness of the farm, the produce per acre is in- rcnfiderable, which, from the preceding flatemcnt, there is every reason to believe, it is not to be wondered at, that so large a portion of the produce fllould be necefEcry for the occupier. These calculations, however, fornifh, on the whole, no unpromiing pro- fl)peC, both to the propuietors of this county, and to tie public. It would appear, tblt tlhe produce of Aberdcenlhire, ispnly at the rate of about 24 s. prr Scotch acre, or g s. ser Englifli acre; v.::b, however considerable,,compared
rompareal to what it y)icided formerly, -yet miglt soon be doublec, if noc tripled, by promoting useful improvements, and by converting the farms, to fach a reasonable size, as would enable the farmers to live more comfort- ably themfieves. to pay better rents to their landlords, and to raise a gre.ter pFroece for the public.,V. PlodlEions c f Mlanrtfgurcs and Cormnerce. It does not seem neccfliry, in the prcfent fietch, to enter with minutencrs into the commercial and maiiufailtring slate of this county, as those are fuhljects wltich will be more fully confidered, when the general slate of the kingdom at large, in regard to those two important particulars, is discussed; and, owing to various circunflances, I have not been able to collec2 the nececfary siss, for forming any exact cefimate. I calculate, hlovcverron very general grounds, that both may produce about L. 2co,coo per annum. The flocking manufdaure alone, in the neighbouriood of Aberdeen, is fiip- posed to extend to L. o03,coo annually, for hose or floc:ings exported; 2 part of which, cowever, is manufactured in the hlire of Kincardine.,VI. dMines, F.fjcriert, and Kelp. Thl'e source, of wealth, lic;ng principally of a local nature, ate on that account joined together, under one head. With regard tp mines, little wealth of that description has hitherto been found in Aherkertflire. The most valuable article arises from the granite qularries in the vicinity of Aberdeen; raooO tons of that durable flone are annually exported to London; valued at 145. ite ton, or L. 8400. Thre are millll.one quarries in Aberdour parifl, rented at L. 4C; the produce may be fabled at L 4c-. Limestone is found in fume parts of this county; Glenbucket pariil contains inexsaullibe flores of that valuable mineral. About 55,co0 holls of lime ace annually burnt in Old Maclar and Old Deer pariles, and may le valued at L. 275o. A quarry of blue fate is wrought in Culfalmond p1rifil, though not to any extent: and a vein of manganese in Old Machar. The total produce of mines and minerals may be flated at L. 11,600. The Dee and the Don, and tie other rivers of Aber:lernliirc, have long been celeirated for the excd4cllec of the salmon they produce. 'he rea.t of thlof siltings amount'to about L. 40So per tniumn, and the produce to L,.io,oo. Considerable fineries are also carried on, on the sea.coast of Aberdeen- flire, and Iy ;ilfling veffes from the poris of that county, in particular frorp,Pcterhead,
Pcterhead and Fraferburgh; Some kelp is also made ol the coaR; the va- lue of these two las articles may be fated at L. 50ooo; there being about 60 boats, &c. employed, the produce of whose induflry muit be confider. able *. Consequently. the whole produce of mines, fifileries, and kelp, will, on a moderate computation, be found to amount to L. 30,600. We lhall now proceed to give a general view of this interesting di. trict. GENERAL VIEW OF THE STATE OF THE COUNTY OF,ABERDEEN, in I79g. :Extent in square miles, - - 1170,In Scotch acres, - - 575,0io In Englifl acres, flatute measure, 71t,Sco In ditto arable, - - 36:,5Sco,Palure, - - co Moor antd moss, - 391,o00o 718,500 Natural woods, - 37,500 Plantations, - - 35,o0o llorfes, number of, - - 2,448 Cattle, ditto, - - - 9,07 Sheep, ditto, - - 164,17 Value of live-flock, - L. 1,S49g o o Value of agricultural plcdce, - 69.1,332 o o Value of manufaLuring and commercial produce, supposed, - - - 200,000 o o Value of produce of mines, fifleries, and kelp, 30,600 o o Number of proprietors, - - - 247 V;lued rent, Scotch money, L. 235,665 8 ir Ditto in Sterling money, - 9,638 S Real land rent in Sterling money, 133,63a. 0 o Whereof belonging to individuals, - - 1,632 o o,. To corporations or the Crown, 5,00 o0 o Real rent of entailed estates, 36,5o 0 o,Of unentailed ditto, - 1,78z o o Real rents spent in the county, - 73,632 0 o Ditto spent out of it, - 60,00ooo o,o Number 5 In the river Ythan, is a remarkable pearl-iffling. In 1762 and 1763 single pearls fold for 8 s. and to s.; one at L, 2, and another at L. 3.
Number of inhabitants in 1755, - - 6,36 Ditto in 1790-1797, - - - :Z,92 Increase in the space of 40 years, - - 6, Number of fighting men, 4,5S4 Population in towns, - - 27,533,In the country, - - c,oSS Number of inhabitants to each frqare mile, - 15,Englilh acres to each inhabitant, - Alinilters flipends, with the value of their glebes, and the amount of communion-tlenents, L. 9,173 o C Value of their glebes, - - - 550 o Allowance for communion elements, - 30 0 0 Average income of each minister, including their glebes, and allowance for conmlmunion-elements, 104 5 o Average income, exclusive theres, - 93 3 o Number of ficholars at the parochial schools, - - 294 Schoolmalers salaries, - - L. 56 o o Their caiual emoluments, as precentors, & .;. - 664 o o Total income of fchoolmailers, - 1224 o o Ave age income of each fchoolmafler, - i o o Number of poor, - - -3 Capital ftnck of poor's funds, - L. 1,13 o o Annual voluntary contributions for the poor, about, 2,o00 o 0 Total annual income of the poor, - 3,o6 0 o average for cscli pauper, - I oo,CONCLUSION. There is nothing which can give an intelligent and contemplative mind, snore real satisfaction, than to fee the state of an intelcrfing diltrict thls analysed. It is only by means of fucl statements, that any idea can be formed, of the real circumstances of a country, anl consequently of the means of improving it. It ccitainly would be desirable, to have the infor. mation above Iketched out, ascertained with minuteecfs and accuracy. but that could not be expected, at the firi attempt of a private individual, car. led on by his own personal exertions, and who principally relied on the zeal of those to whom he addrcied himifel for intormation. It will scarcely be credited, in future times, that such an undertaking could be completed un- der fich a disadvantage ; and those fortunate individuals, by whose in- lltry and public l'pirit thie Work was accomplitlted, in addition to the satis. taslhion wl.ich they uftl derive from their own minds, will have their me. r.o:ic; jualy celebrated by their grateful posterity.
It may be proper also to inform the reader, that the preceding Tables re- specting the Rate of Aberdeelfiiire, were rendered more perfecf than could have hee expected, from the deficiency in several of the original returns, in co:requence of some special queries having been circulated for that pur. pose, amongst the clergy of that county, in December 1796, to which 67 answers were received; and from them tile Tables of population, rent, &c. were correcedc. Sonic differences which will appear between the numbers in thole Tables and in the Statistical volumes, may be attributed to the dif- ferent periods at which the calculations were made. Since the above was written, it appears, from " A General View of the State of Portugal," by James IMurphy, printed in London, in one volume quarto, taao 1795, that inquiries, both of a Statistical and Agricultural na- ture, have been carried on in that kingdom, in confequencc of an infRitution entitled, The Rcyal Academy of Lisbon. In particular, it would seem, that a number of premiums were offered and adjudged by that Academy, as far back as the year 17S3, for physical and economical defcriptionsof any difiric or confider.ble territory, either in Portugal or its tranfmai inc dominions ; and that a number of queries srere circulated amongfi the farmers, in 1757, on this judicious principle, that no system for the improvement of the coun- try could with safety be adopted, without a previous examination into the ac- tual fate of tile nation, in regard to population, industry, natural produc- tions, commerce, public revenue, and national expenditure t. It is not flated how far this plan has ficceeded, though it has been carried on for fevcral years; but it would appear, that no expence was spared to accomplili it, and that it received the full fipport and protection of Government. It is the more creditable therefore for this country, that such inquiries have been carried on so fuccefifully, by the exertions of indi- viduals. v Sce Mlurphy, p. 66. t Ibid, . 7.,F I N I S.