Disclaimer: This file is generated using OCR (optical character recognition) and/or HTR (handwritten text recognition), which are technologies that convert images of text into text. While the technologies are good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Alfred: a masque. As it is now revived at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane, by His Majesty's servants
A L FR ED:,A M ASQUE.,AS IT IS NOW REVIVED AT THE THEATRE-ROY AL,,I N D R U R Y-L A N E,. BY HIS MAJESTY'S SERVANTS.,D U B L IN: tRINTED BY BYRN AND SON, SYCADIORE-ALLEY. FOR THE COMPANY OF BOOKSELLERS.,M.DCC.LXXVDII.
A L F R E D, a Masque, was written by Mr. Thomfifn, in conjun&icn with Mr. Mfllet, at the re- quett of his Royal Highness Frederick Prince of Wales, and was performed at Cliffden-Houfe, before their Royal Highnesses, on the first of Auguf, 1740. Ten years after it was adapted for the stage by Mr. Mallet, and was received with great applause. Mr. Mallet, in his advertisement (after giving an account of his joining with Mr. Thorntfin in the performance) goes on-" But to fit " it for the stage, I found it would be necessary to " new plan the whole, as well as write the parti- " cular scenes over again; to enlarge the design, " and make Alfred what he fliould have been at "first, the principal figure in his own MlJue. "This I have done; but, according to the present "arrangement of the fable, I was obliged to rejec "a great deal of what I had written in the other,,A z "r..;irer
( iv ) neither could I retain of my friend's part, more "than three or four tingle speeches, and a part of "one song; I mention this exprefly, that whatever "faults are fo'nd in the present performance, they " may be charged, as they ought to be, entirely to : my account.",D. Mallet. It is now revived with some few alterations, and with some New Music; the favourite airs of Dr. Arne, as they food in the Masque altered by Mallet, are reserved ; there are some few alterations, which are now publiffed.,ARGU-
ARGUMENT. After the Danes had made themfies hiJlcs of,Chippenham, tle flrongef city in the kingdom of Wessex, Alfred 'was at once abandoned by alt his Jubjeas; in this Itniserfal defeion, thdt monarch found himself obliged to retire int the little iJle of Athelney in Somerfe'tflire-^hi iin the habit of a penfant, he liv'd unknoti in a Jhep erd's cottage;-he is fuppoJed t1 Ae found in this retreat by the Edri of Devon, wAbofi caslle upon the river Tau was thn befteged by. Me Danes.,A $ PROLOGUE,
PROLOGUE ,,BY A FRIEND. SPOKEN BY MR. GARRICK,,When it was first Aated. IN arms renown'd, for arts of peace ador'd, ALFRED, the nation's father, more than lord, A Britifli author has prefum'd to draw, Struck deep, even now, with reverential awe; And fits the Godlikefigure fair in view- 0 may difcernmentfind the likenetf true.,When Daniih futy, ,with zvide-.vafting hand, Had spread pale fear, and ravage o'er the land, This prince arising bade confusion cease, Bade order Jhine, and bless his iJle with peace; Taught liberal arts to hunanize the mind, And heaven-born science to sweet freedom join'd. United thus, the friendly fifers Jine, And one fecur'd, while one adorn'd his throne, Amidfi these honours of his happy reign, Each Grace and every MAtfe composd his train: As grateful servants, all exulting firove, At obne tofpread his fame, and hare his Irte.,To night, if ought of filionyou behold, Think not in Virtue's cause, the bard too bold. If ever angels from the Jkies descend, It must be-truth and freedom to defend.,Thus would our author pleaft-be ityour part, If not his labors, to approve his heart. True to his country's, and to honour's cause, Hefixes, there, his fame, and your applause; Wijhes no failing from your fight to hide, But, by free BRITONS, vwill be freely try'd.
P E R S N S.,ENGLI S H. ALFRED, MR. REDDISH. EARL of DEVON, MR. STANTON. EDWIN, MR. KANE. HERMIT, MR. SMITH. CORIN, | MR. DU-BELLAMY.,EnglJh Officers, Soldiers, Sc.,DANES. DANISH KING, j MR. GLENVILI.E. FIRST DANE, M. MAHAR. SECOND DANE, MR. HAMILTON,,Danib Officers, Soldiers, &c.,W OMEN. ELTRUDA, " MRS. REDDISH. EMMA, MRS. SPARKS. EDITH, MRS. JOHNSON.,The VOCAL PARTS by Mr. Du-Bellamy, Mr. fYhnfon, Mr. Wilder, Mr. Owen/on, Mrs. Sparks, Mrs. yohnfon,,Mrs. Dawion, Mrs. G. Daw/on, &c. Shepherds. Soldiers. Attendants. Spirits.,&c. &c. &c.
A L F R E D:,A M A S QU . A NEW OVERTURE.,ACT. I. SCENE I. A'rural Profpel, gwith the Cottage of Co R IN anTdEMd MA.,EMMA Sings.,I. IF th?}fe jwvho live inv/hepheirs'bower,,Pref, not the rich and lately bed: qThe ietw-tIown hay and breathir!gfiower;,Afofter couch beiieatz thehA spread;.,II. If th;fe thb fit'at 'Jhepherd s board,,Sooth not their tafle by 'wanion art They take awhat nature's giftsafford,,And take it with a cheavful heart.,A 5' EMMA * There are some fcenen, and some pffsages, that were always omitted in the representation, as may be seen in page 53, 54, 55, and 57; but are here painted, that the rea- der may have it as it was originally written,
EMMA, coming forward. CORIN ! CORFN ! 'tis he. Against yon aged oak, Pensive and loft in thought, he leans his head.,CORIN. Soft: let us not disturb him. Gentle EMMA, Poor tho' he be, unfriended and unknown, - My pity waits with reverence on his fortune. Modest of carriage, and of speech most gracious, As if rome faint or angel in disguise Had grac'd our lowly cottage with his pretence, lie steals, I know not how, into the heart, And makes it pant to serve him. Trust me, EMMA, He is no common man.,EMMA. Some lord, perhaps, Or valiant chief, that from our deadly foe, The haughty, cruel, unbelieving Dane, Seeks shelter here.,CORIN. And ihelter he shall find: Who loves his country, is my friend and brother. Behold him well. Fair manhood in its prime, Even thro the homely ruffet that conceals him, Shines forth and proves him noble.,EMMA.,'Tis most like, He is not what his present fortunes speak him. But, ah ! th' inhuman foe is all around us; We dare not keep him here.,CORI N. Thou haft not weigh'd This island's force; the deep defence of woods, Nature's own hand hath planted strong around; The rough encumbrance of perplexing thorns,,Of * B1
Of intertwining brakes that rife between, And choak up every inlet from abroad. Yet more; thou know's, beyond this woody,verge Two rivers broad and rapid hem us in ; Along whose border spreads the gulphy pool, And trembling quagmire to betray the foot Its treacherous greensward tempts. One path alone Winds to this plain, so difficult and so firait, My single arm, against a band of foes, Could long, perhaps, defend it.,EMMA.,Yet, my CoaR I , Revolve the fern decree of that fierce tyrant, The Dani/l king: " Who harbours, or relieves "An Engliji captain, dies the death of.traitors: " But who their haunts discovers, shall be safe, " And high rewarded.",CORIN. Now, just heaven forbid, An EngliAman fliould ever count for gain What villainy muf earn. No: are we poor? Be honefly our riches. Are we mean, And humbly born ? The true heart makes us noble. These hands can toil; can sow the ground and reap For thee and thy sweet babes. Our daily labour Is daily wealth: it finds us bread and raiment. Could DaniJi gold give more ?,I. Though to a defart ijle confin'd,,In humble poverty we liie, The honest. heart, the ,virtuouts mind,,Are riches, fplfndor cannot g.ve.,11. These
II. T'hese hands inur'd to daily toil,,Can sow the ground, can plough and reap, Andhall improve the gen'rous foil,,TIIee. and thy.lovely babes to keep.,EMMA.,Alas, the while ! That loyal faith is fled from hall and bower, To dwell with village swains.,CORIN.,Ah look! behold, Where EDITH, all-abandon'd to despair, Hangs weeping o'er the brook.,EDITH approaches Jlowly tofoft music.,She sings.,I. Ayouth adorn'd with every art, To Warm and win the coldejf heart,,Infecret mine poffit ; The morning bud that fairefi blows, The vernal oak that Jlraitefi grows,,His face andJape expreJt.,II. In moving founds he told his tale; Soft as thefighings of the gale,,That wakes the flowery year - What wonder he cou'd charm with ease ! Whom happy nature form'd to please,,lFhom love hadmadefincere.,III. At
III. At mnorn he left ae ;-fought andjfell; The fatal evening heard his knell,,And saw the tears I Jsed; Teah's that 'mu f ever, ever fall; For ai ! nofighs the pafl recall,,No cries awake the dead.,CoRIN. Unhappy maid! yet not alone in woe; For look, where our fad guest, like Come fair tree Torn from the root by winter's cruel blast, Lies on the ground o'erthrown.,EMMA.,I weep, to fee it ! COR'Ix. Thou haft a heart sweet pity loves to dwell in: But, dry thy tears, and lean on this just hope- If yet to do away his country's shame,. To serve her bravely on some blest occasion; If for these ends this stranger fought our cottage, The heavenly hosts are hovering here unseen, To watch'and to protet him.-But oh! when (My heart burns for it) lhall I fee the hour Of vengeance on these Dani/h infidels, That war with heaven and us ?,EMMA.,Alas, my love! These pairons ate- not for the poor man's state, To heaven and to the-rulers of the land Leave such ambitious thoughts; be warned, my,CORIN, And think our little all depends on thee.,0 Peace!
O Peace ! the faireJt child of heaven, Tf ,whom the ylfvan reign 'was given ; The ,vale, the fountain and the grsove, With everyfofter scene of loe: Return, sweet Peace ! to chear the weeping Jwain, Return, with Ease and Pleasure in thy train.,CoU IN. Hush ! cease thy fong-for fee our mournful guest Has railed his head, and lo! who comes to greet,him; His friend, the woodman of the neighbouring dale, Whom late, as yefter-evening star arose, At his request I found, and hither brought: Let us retire and leave them to confer.,[Exeunt. S C E N E II. ALFRED, Earl of DE GN.,ALFRED. How long, just heaven! how long Shall war's fell ravage defolr.a this land ? All, all.is loft--and ALFRED lives to tell it!' Are these things so ? and h vwithout the means Of great revenge ? cat down below the hope Of succouring those he woeeps for ?,DEVJ N.,Gracious AL FRED, England's last hope, whole fe-elhig goodness ihews What angels are ; to bear, vith such a prince, The worit of ill;, t: rile, or chains, or death, Is happiness, is glory.,ALFRED.
ALFRED.,Ah ! look round thee- That mud built cottage is thy sovereign's palace. Yon hind, whole daily toil is all his-wealth, Lodges and feeds him. Are these times for flattery ? Or call it praise: such gawdy attributes Would misbecome our best and proudest fortunes. But what are mine? What is this high-priz'd,ALFRED? Among ten thousand wretches mofl undone! That prince who fees his country laid in ruins, His subje&s periihing beneath the sword Of foreign war; who fees and cannot save them, Is but supreme in misery !-13ut on, Proceed, my lord; compleat the mournful tale, My griefs broke offi,DEVON. From yonder heath-clad hill, Far as my firaining eye could flioot it's beam I look'd, and saw the progress of the foe, As of some tempest, some devouring tide, That ruins, without mercy, where it spreads. The riches of the year, the bread of thousands That liberal crown'd our plains from vale to hill, With intermingledforeffs, temples, towers, Now fmoak to heaven, one broad-afeending cloud. But oh for pity r on each mountain's height, Shivering and fad the pale inhabitants, Gray-headed age and youth, all flood and mark'd This boundless ravage: motionless and mute, With hands to heaven up-rais'd, they flood and,wept- My tears attended theirs-,ALFrED.,If this fad fight Could pain thee to such anguifi, what must I Their king and parent feel ?,DVON.
DEvoN.,Sir, be of comfort. Who has not known ill fortune, never knew Hiinfelf, or his own virtue.,ALFRED. /,Well,-no more- Complaint is for the vulgar: kings muff at; Restore a ruin'd state, or perifli with it. Despair flall be our ffrength-,DEVON.,Behold, my lord, From yonder hazle copse, who issues forth, And moves this way-a ftranger-but his look Speaks haste and apprehension-,ALFRED:,Ha !- beyond My utmost hope!-'Tis EDWIN-,SCE N E IIUL ALFRED, DEVON, EDWIN.,AtFRED.,Hail thou ought Of joyful to impart ? or is the foul Of England dead indeed ?,EDwIN. My gracious master, This jouriney has been fruitful to our wiSh. Awak'd, as from the last and inbrtal trance,,That
That foul, which feem'd extinguifh'd, lives again. By me affur'd, their sovereign still survives, Survives to take due vengeance on those robbers, Who violate the fanaity of leagues, The reverend feal of oaths; who basely broke, Like midnight ruffians, on the hour of peace, And fRole a vitory from meni unarm'd; Of this affur'd, your people breath once more. The Spirit of our tnceftors is up ! The spirit of the free! and, with one voic' Of happy omen, all demand their king.,ALFRXD. Then, heaven who knows ou'r' wrbngs will deign to,guide The virtue it infpires-My lord, how found These tidings in your ears ?,DEVON.,A4 the sure omen Of better fate, miy heart receives and hails them. For know, my liege, the fury of those Damtse This last dire scene of total desolation, Will kindle up the flame to seven-fold fiercenes ; New-wing each flraft, edge every liftedfword, And drive-',A~L^SED.' - .A moment-EDWIN, yet' inform' me What numbers have you gathei'd ? how difpo's'd, Where potted theff- ?,Ebwix¢'. In these surrounding woods,! Soon as tlie'liade of night descends to veil them, A generous'few; the veteran hardy gleanings Of ma'iiy a weli-fough't field, all at'one hour, Behind the ruflhy brook from hence due eatR, By different paths, and in small parties meet,,Accoutred
Accoutred at all points: and, as I judge, Their numbers count twelve hundred.,ALFRED.,Ha! twelve hundred- Incredible-foft-let me duly weigh What I, unhoping, scarce believing, hear. Something must, now, be done-Ay, that attempt Is great-but greatly hazardous-wly then, Necessity, our just plea, must excuse The desperate daring her hard law imposes. Hear, my brave friends. One castle f ill is ours, Tho close begirt and shaken by the Danes. DEvo N, speed thither: find out that close path, By EDWI N'S eye and aid, which from the midst, The central point of Kwinwith-forejf winds In deep descent ; and, under ground prolong'd, Safe in the fortress ends.,DEVON. Suppose me there: What follows this, my lord ?,ALFRED.,Be it your part To animate our brothers of the war, Thofe'Englihmen, who yet deserve that name. The foe-dwell much on this-by our known,weakness Made daringand secure, will now the rein Of dicipline relax, and to loose revel Indulge the midnight hour. Therefore, at three- 0 count the clock with more than lover's vigilance- At three, that chosen band lhall from behind, Rifingat once, with ALFRED at their head, Aflail the hofile camp: while your warm sally, That very moment, pours upon it's front. Hence: and success be thine,,DEVON.
DEvoN.,On this our purpose, The sacred cause of liberty and vengeance, Smile, righteous heaven I,ALFRED.,0 urge it home, my friend, That each man's sword now wears upon it's point The present age, and last posterity ! Farewell. EDWIN, within the hour return, And find me here.,S C ENE IV.,ALSR£D. Ha! day declines apace. What anxious thoughts, in this wild solitude, My darker hours must know ? And now, the veil Of evening, o'er these murmuring woods around, A lonely horror fpreads-But soft: the breeze Is dumb ! and more than midnight silence reigns ! Why beats my bosom ?--Music! Shield me, heaven! Whence should it come ?-Hark !-now the meafur'd,strains, In awful sweetness warbling, strike my sense, As if some wing'd musician of the Iky Touch'd his ethereal harp.,SCENE
S C E E V. Solemn muflJc is Ahepd dt a dlfance. it comes nearer in,afullfymphony : after which afingle trumpet founds a high and awakening air. Then the following flanza are Jung by two asireal Spirits.,Sirs SPIRIT. Heaf, ALPRF.FD.,father of the iate, Thy genius heaten's high 'will declare! What proves the hero t#ily great, Is never, never to despair.,Both SPIRITS'. Is never to despair.,Second SPIRIT, 'hy hope awake, thy heart e xpand With all its vigour, all itsfire:: Arise, andfave afinking tand! Chy country calls and heavuoinfpirer;,Both SPIRITS. Earth calls and heaven inspires.,SCENE
SCENE VI.,ALFRED. Am I awake ! and is it no illusion That heaven thus deigns to look with mercy on me? Thus, by his ministers, to chear my heart, And warm it into hope ? But lo ! he comies, Whom angels deign to visit and inspire, The holy sage, descending from his cell In yon hill's cavern'd fide: sweet sylvan scene Where slade and silence dwell i,SCENE VII.,ALFRED, HERMIT.,ALFRED. Thrice happy HERMIT! Whom thus the heavenly habitants attend, Blelling thy calm retreat; while ruthless war Fills the polluted land with blood and crimes In this extremity of England's fate Led by thy sacred charater, I come For comfort and advice. Say what remains, What yet remains to save our prostrate country ?,Nor
Nor scorn this anxious question even from me, A namclefs stranger.,HERMIT. ALFRED, EnglanPds king, All hail, and welcome to this humble cell.,ALFRED. Amazement !-by these humble weeds obfcur'd, I deem'd my state beyond discovery's reach: How is it then to thee alone reveal'd ?,HERMIT. Last night, when with a draught from that cool,fountain I had my wholesome fober supper crown'd; As is my stated custom, forth I walk'd Beneath the solemn gloom and glittering fkv, To feed my foul with prayer and meditation. And thus to inward harmony compos'd, That sweetest music of the grateful heart, Whose each emotion is a silent hymn, I to my couch retir'd. Strait on mine eyes A pleasing slumber fell, whose mystic power Seal'd up my senses, but enlarg'd my foul. Led by those spirits, who disclose futurity, I liv'd thro dit'ant ages; felt the virtue, The great, the glorious pafilons that will fire Remote posterity ; when Guardian laws Are by the patriot, in the glowing senate, Won from corruption ; when th' impatient arm Of liberty, invincible, fllall scourge The tyrants of mankind-and when the deep, Thro all her swelling waves, from pole to pole Shall spread the boundless empire of thy sons. I saw thee, AFRED, too-But o'er thy fortunes Lay clouds impenetrable.,ALFR ED
ALFRED.,To heaven's will, In either fortune, mine fliall ever bend With humbled refignation-Yet, 0 fay, Does that unerring Providence, whose juflice Has bow'd me to the dust; whose ministers, Sword, fire and famine, scourge this sinful land, This tomb of it's inhabitants-does he Reserve me in his hand, the glorious instrument From fierce oppreflion to redeem my country ?,HERMIT. What mortal eye, by his immediate beam Not yet enlighten'd, dare prefunae to look Thro time's abyss ? But should the flatterer hope, Anticipating fee that happy time, Those whiter moments-Prince, remember, then, The noble lessons by afflicion taught: Preserve the quick humanity it gives, The pitying social sense of human weakness; Yet keep thy generous fortitude entire, The manly heart, that to another's woe Is tender, -as superior to it's own. Learn to submit: yet learn toconquer fortune. Attach thee firmly to the virtuous deeds And offices of life: to life itself, With all its vain and transient joys, fit loose. Chief, let devotion to the fovereignMind, A steady, chearful, absolute dependance On his best wisest government, possess thee.,ALFRED. I thank thee, father: and 0 witness, heaven, Whose eye the heart's profoundest depth explores! That if not to perform my regal talk; To be the common father of my people,,Patron
Patron of honor, virtue and religion; If not to flelter useful worth, to guard His well-earn'd portion from the sons of rapine, And deal out jultice with impartial hand If not to spread, on all good men, thy bounty, The treasures trusted to me, not my own; If not to raise anew our EngliJh name, By peaceful arts that grace the land they bless, And generous war to humble proud oppressors: Yet more; if not to build the public weal, On that firm bale which can alone resist Both time and chance, on liberty and law: If I for these great ends am not ordain'd- May I ne'er poorly fill the throne of England !,HE RM IT. Still may thy breadi these sentiments retain, In prosperous life.,ALFRED. Could it destroy or change Such thoughts as these, prosperity were ruin.,t',wo
Two SPIRI rs sing the following hymn.,FIRST. o joy of joys, to lighten 'woe Befi pleasure, pleafiure to beflow ! What raptures then his heart expand, Wnho lives to bless a grateful land.,Secondl SPIRIT. For him, ten thousand bosoms beat His name consenting crouds repeat: From foul to foul the pa/ion runs, Andfubjets kindle into sons.,HERMIT. ALFRED, once more-fince favour'd thus of hea-,ven, Since thus to cheer thee and confirm thy virtue He fends his angels forth-remember well, Should better days restore thy prosperous fortunes, The vows these awful beings hear thee make: Remember and fulfil them.,ALS RED.,0 no more- When those whom heaven diftinguifles o'er mil-,lions, And Ihowers profusely power and splendor on them,,B Whate'er
Whate'er th'expanded heart canwiflh; when they, Accepting the reward, neglect the duty, Or worse, pervert those gifts to deeds of ruin, Is there a wretch they rule so base as they ? Guilty, at once, of sacrilege to heaven! And of perfidious robbery to man !,HERMIT. Such thoughts become a monarch-but behold, The glimmering dusk, involving air and iky, Creeps flow and solemn on. Devotion now, With eye enraptur'd, as the kindling stars Light, one by one, all heaven into a glow Of living fire, adores the hand divine, Who form'd their orbs and pour'd forth glory on,them.,ALFRED. - Then, this good moment, fnatch'd from earth's,- affairs, Let us employ aright: and, in yon cell, To Him, with heart sincere, our homage pay, Who glorious spreads and gracious sluts the day.,End of the First A7.,ACT
W : p- r , , . % ;' .3' '. (. ; , i , , .,ACT II. S C E N E I.,E MM A, and other Peafria!ts. WISH'D evening now is come: but her soft hour, Close of our daily toil, that wont to found Sweet with the fAepherd's pipe and virgin's voice, Is chearlefs all and mute.,Second SHEPHERDESS.,Heaven's will be ours, And since no grief can yesterday recall, Nor change tomorrow's face; now let us soothe The present as we may with dance and song, To lighten fad remembrance.,Firfl SEPHE RDESS j..,I. The jepherd's plain life, Writhout guilt, without flrife, Can only true bleffngs impart.,As nature diretfs, That bliss he expeffs From health and from quiet of heart.,Bz II.
II. Vain grandeur and power; Those toys of an hour, Tho' mortals are toiling to find;,Can titles or hlow Contentment bejiow P All happsnefs dwells in the mind.,III. Behold the gay rose, How lovely it grows, Secure in the depth of the vale,,ron oak, that on high Aspires to the fly, Both lightning and tenpejf aftail.,IV. Then let us the snare Of Ambition bevare, that Jource of vexation and finart:,And sport on the glade, Or repose in the Jhade, With health and with quiet of Heart.,Here a pafloral dance.,SCENE
S C E N E I. CORIN, EMMA, PEASANTS.,CORIN. 0 happy hour t wife, neighbours-fuch, such news I shall run wild with joy!,EMMA.,Speak, Shepherd; fay, What moves thee thus ?,CORIN.,The king is in our ife I EMMA. Can it be pofible ?,PEASANT.,What do I hear ? CoRIN. As now I pass'd beneath the hermit's cell, I heard that wonderous man pronounce his name. 0 EMMA, the poor itranger whom we serv'd And honour'd, all unknowing of his Itate, Is he ! our great and gracious ALFRED,ALL.,Heaven! Then are we blest indeed !,B 3 CoRIN.
CoRIN'.,My humble cottagc, Long ages hence, when wee Se dust, niy friends In holy pilgrimage olt visited Will draw true EtgfliA knees to worflllp gtere, As at the flirine of rome propitious faint, Or angel friendly to mankind-The thought Brings tears into mine cye,.-,EMMA,,Does joy deceive My sense ? or did I hear a distant voice Sigh thro the vale and wake the mournfu1 echo ?,T/e folloui,;g song is sung by a perfin unfren.,I. Stv.urc valley ! fly, wherle penfijve lyirg, For me, our children, England, sighing,,i the bi of mortals leans his head: Ye fountains ! dimpled by my sorrow ; re brooks ! that my complaining borrov,,0 lead me to his lonely bed!,Or if my lo.ver, Deep vwoodsye cover, Ah ! qvhifpe)r uwhere your hfiadol s o'er hir spread.,II. * 'Tis
11. "* "'7, no the loj of PomP and pleafi:re,j Of esvp/ed oro lilftl /fy;lr, That drop th the aJ, taitfwtl:f r/e gWR'o,: No, from a nobler cause proceeding, . heart 'with lve andfondnef bleeding, 1 breathe myfadly pleating moan,Wirth ot/er angul/i, Jforn to latnguia , For love willfeel noforrow but his own, * This Stanza is omitted in the representation.,CaRIN. yWhgt think ye, friends ? Such moving melting,softness Breathes in there sweet complainings, as till now Mine ear was never blest with. Let us go And find out this new wonder.,Second SHE P HE DESS.,Look, the king! EMMA. Now, by my holidame, a goodly person, And of most noble mein.,CORIN.,Diflurb him not B 4 SCENE
S C E EIII.,ALrRED, HERMIT.,HERMIT. Your enterprise is bold-and may be fatal: Yet I condemnit not. All is not rashness, That valour of more common size might think, And caution term so. Souls of nobler scope, Whose comprehensive fight beholds at once And weighs the fum of things, are their own rule, And to be judg'd but by themselves alone,ALFRED. Then in the name of that inspiring Power, Whose deputy I am, who fends me forth His minister of vengeance, on I go To victory, or death.,[As he is going out, he Jlops hort.,What do I feel ? Save me ! a holy horror stirs my frame, And Ihivers thro each vein-What shapes are these, Athwart the gloom, that strike my dazzled sense? Betwixt and where yon mist along the marfli Rowls blue it's vapoury wvave, some unseen hand Pourtrays in air the visionary scene Difina and full, in brighter colors drawn Than summer funs reflet on evening cloud,,When
When all it's fluid bosom glows with gold- And now, it reddens into blood !,HERMIT, 'who had tbf.rv'd him fixedly, half-afide.,Ere night Withdraws her shade, new accidents and strange Will shake this island's peace.,[To him.,Now, A.FRED, now, Be all the hero flewn.,ALP RE)D.,What may this mean ? SC ENE IV.,ALFRED,, CORIN. Co R IN,. kneeling. My honor'd sovereign-,ALFRED.,Hoii.,is this! ha ! what! Difcover'd by this peafant-Be id so: The plain man is-moft loyal.,CORIN. '.,England's wealth, The pearly stores her circling seas contain, Should never fliake your Co RIN'S faith-,B 5 ALFRED.
ALS &ED,,But what Alarms thee thus ?,CORIN. My fears are for my king. Some strangers, Sir-their habits speak them,Danes- Have found our Isle. Look this way.,ALS RED.,Be of courage. Now, I perceive them. Thro the evening shade Their armour gleams a faint and moving light. Westward they turn, and strike into the path That opens on this plain. Retire we, fiepherd, Behind yon du(ky elm; from whence, unseen, We may discern their numbers and their purpose.,S C E N E V.,DANES passi/ng along.,Firfl DANE. No more. 'Twas hte:: I-could not be deceiv'd. A lover's eye is as the eagle's Aarp, And kens his prey from far-But lift a while, If .found of human voice, or bleat of flocks May guide.our loft enquiry thro this wild.,Second
Second D A E. No: all is lonclinefs around, and husi'd As our dead northern waftes at midnight hour Our gods protect us ! Prince, it was most raih, So few our numbers, at this close of day Headlong to plunge amid these horrid slades, Where danger lurks unseen.,- Ifi DANE.,How ! know'rf thou not That England is no more ! Her sons of war, To dens and caverns fled, like fearful hares Sit trembling at cach blast the chill wind blows. H-Ier king himself or sleeps in dufft, or roams Wild on the patllefs mountain. As for me; Our country gods; those spirits that pollres The boundless wilderness, that love to dwell With dreary solitude and night profound, Will guard the son of IVAR, to whose house Their vassalage is bound by magic spell. Come on. She muf be found, this unknown fair Who sir'd me at first view; and rages flill A fever in my youthful blood. Away.,S C E N E VI. ALFRED, CORIN, advancing.,CORIN. They are but three.,ALFRED.
ALFRED. And were that number trebled, This island is their grave; this sacred spot, Fair freedom's last retreat. We must, we will Preserve it, all-inviolate and holy, From impious infidels : or, with our blood, If now we perish, fanatify it's earth For after-times to visit and revere.,CORIN. Lift, lift, my lord-,ALFRED. What noise was that ?-By heaven, The lhrieks of women! Now, stern vengeance,guide The sword we draw.,S C E N E VII.,EM MA, and other peasants.,EMMA. Ah, whither flall we fly? Immortal virgin ! queen of mercy ! save us- See, fee, my friends, they seize the lovely ftran-,ger- They bear her off-Behold the king appears- My hulband too-Now, heaven, defend alike The mighty and the mean, the prince and peasant! Two of them fall beneath our monarch's arm- The third, my Co RIN--O I dare no more Look that way-Yet 1 muft-The third is slain ! O gallant shepherd ! O mos happy hour!,SCENE
S C ENE VIII. ALFRED, CORIN, fSpporting the lady.,ALFRED. This way, brave shepherd, from thefe.clofer liades-- Here the free air and breezy glade will rouse Herfainting fpirits-So-Who may flie be ? Perhaps, some worthy heart at this fad moment Akes for her safety.,ELTRUDA.,Save me, save me, heaven! ALFRED. Ye powers ! what do I hear ?-Yes-yes-'tis fhc My wife, my queen! the treasure of my foul!,ELTRUDA. My ALFRED!,ALFRED. My ELTRUDA !,ELTRUDA.,Can it be ? Or is it all th' illusion of my fear ? O no: 'tis he-my lord I my life ! my husband! My guardian angel ALFRED.,ALFRED,My ELTRUDA! Black horror chills me while I view the brink, The dreadful precipice, on which we stood- And was it thee I refcu'd from these ruffians- O Providence amazing!-thee, ELTRUDA !,ELTRUI A.
ELTRUDA. I tremble still !-from worse than death deliver'd! And am I then secure in ALP RED'S arms ?,ALFRED. There let me hold thee ; lull thy fears to reft: There hush thy foul with everlasting fondness. The panting bird so flutters, just efcap'd The fowler's snare.,ELTRUDA. My heart, my heart is full- And must overflow in tears. A thousand thoughts Are busy here-That ever we should meet In such a dire extremity !-Ah me ! That ever ALS RE D'S family and children Should need the flelter of his single arm !,ALFRED. My children !-where, where are they ?,ELTR UDA.,Turn thine eyes To yonder cottage: there conceal'd-,ALS RED.,My CO RIN, Fly, bring them to my arms. But fay, my love, Why didft thou leave the convent, where I plac'd,thee ? Why, unprotected, trust thee to a land, A barbarous land, where violence inhabits ? Our hospitable England is no more.,ELTRUDA. Alas ! my ALFRED, even the peaceful cells, Where safe beneath religion's holy veil Her cloifter'd votaries dwelt, from impious Danes No reverence claim. The villages around, Difpers'd and flying wild before their'arms, Inform'd us, a near party, on whose course,Deftrution
Deftrudion waits, were marching full to us. Instant I fled. Two faithful servants bore Our children off: and heaven has fav'd us all!,ALFRED. O welcome to my foul !-0 happy ALFRED ! Thus to have refcu'd what the feeling heart Most dear and precious holds,' from men who war With earth and heaven.,ELT RUDA.,Tho' terrible at first, Blefl be the tempest that has driven me hither, Ilto this safe, this sacred harbour !,ALFRED.,Come, O come, and here repose thee from the form, Within these fleltering arms.,EL T R DA, holding him of.,Yet-let me view thee- My king and hufband-do I find thee thus ?,[falling into his arms. Unknown! unferv'd ! unhonour'd ! none to tend,thee ! To soothe thy woes, to watch thy broken slumbers, With every fonder service piouslove Best knows to pay -There is in love a power, There is a soft divinity that draws, Even from distress, those transports that delight The breast they pain, and it's best powers exalt Above all taste of joys from vulgar life !,ALFRED. O 'tis too much-thou all that makes life glorious! Nay look not on me with.this sweet dejecion;,Thro'
Thro tears that pierce the foul-,My children too! My little ones! Come to your fire's embrace: 'Tis all he can beftow-In them behold What human grandeur is-The peasant's offspring Have some retreat, some safe, tho lowly home: But you, my babes, you have no habitation! With pain and peril wandering thro a land, A ruin'd country you were born to rule ! The thought unmans my reason.,S C ENE IX. ALFRED, ELTRUDA, HERMIT.,HERMIT.,I have heard Thy fond complainings, ALS RED.,ALS RED.,You have then, Good father, heard the cause that wrings them,from me.,HE RMIT. The human race are sons of sorrow born: And each must have his portion. Vulgar minds Refuse, or crouch beneath their load: the brave Bear theirs without repining.,ALFRED.
ALFRED.,Who can bear The ihaft that wounds him thro an infant's fide ? When whom we love, to whom we owe protetion, Implore the hand we cannot reach to save them.,HERMIT. Weep not, ELrT IUDA.-Yet, thou art a kings All private paflions fall before that name. Thy fubje6ts claim thee whole.,ALS RED.,Can public trust, 0 reverend sage 1 destroy the softer ties That twine around the parents yearning heart ? This holy passion heavenitfelf infus'd, And blended with the stream that feeds our life All nature feels it intimate and deep, And all her sons of inftin& and of reason.,HE MIT. Then flew that pallion in it's noblest form. Think what a talk it is, to rear those minds, On whom the fate of millions, general bliss, Or universal misery, depends.,ALFRED, That talk then, difficult alike and noble, Be thine, O sacred sage. to whose try'd wisdom I, henceforth, solely trust their tender years. Let trut h and virtue be their earliest teachers. Keep from their ear the fyren-voice of flattery; Keep'from their eye the harlot-form of vice, Who spread, in every court, their silken snares, And charm but to betray. Betimes inftruat them, Superior rank demands superior worth; Pre-eminence of valour, Justice mercy: But chief, that tho exalted o'er mankind,,They
They are themselves but men--frail fuflfring duit A From no one injury of human lot Exempt: but fever'd by the fame heat, chill'd By the fame cold, torn by the fame disease, 'That scorches, freezes, racks, aid kills the beggar. Should fairer days, r.turning, fil augtin On England and on me-,Ha I EDWIN here ? This way, my friend-fpeak softly-,EDWIN whispers the king asid.,How l-'tis well I- Back to thy post: I follow on the instant- Yet ftay-Behold my queen, and infant sons ! EDWIN-thy king's whole wealth is there fumm'd,up Nay, wipe thine eyes: and tell my gallant friends What thou haft seen. The tale. will lend new force To each man's arm, and with redoubled weight Urge every well-aim'd blow. Hence I speed thee,.well. ELTRUDA-r-We must part-,ELT RUDA.,What do I hear ? My life, my love-,ALFRED. Part for a few fad moments, That our next meeting may be long and happy.,ELTRUDA. What, leave me now ? 0 my presaging heart! Already leave me I 'Tis the dreadful call Of glory, somewhat perilously great, And big with; urgent haste, that tears thee from me. Oh ALFRED-,ALFRED. No fond weakness now be liewn,,ELTRUDA.
ELT RUDA, no diftrult of virtue's fate. Thou and thy children are, at present, rase In this wife Hermit's care. For what remains) Mhy catife is just, my fortune in His hand Who'teigiil fuprenliie all-liighty, nltd allg6ood,,* That Power who ftillm the raging of the main, The rsgv of all our soeo can render vain, To his un-erring will refign'd sincere, I fear that God, and know no other fear.,END OF THE SECOND ACT.,Translated from RaciiN's ATIpLtl,. Celui, qui met un frein a la fureur des slots, Sait Sufi des mechans arreter les complots. Sodmis avec refpea i fa volontf fainte, Jc crains Dieu, cher Abner, & n'ay point d'autre crainte,,ACT
ACT III, SCENE I.,EMMA, andlothJherepledees.,EMMA. YES, EDITH, we will watch, till morning ihines, Around this cottage, now made rich and glorious- Who durst have thought such wonders ?-by a,queen, And her bright offspring I Thou, mean while, in-,voke, With founds of soothing strain, the gentle sleep To pour his timely vapours on their eye-lids.,EDITH sing.,I. In cooling fream, Ofweet repose,,Those balmy dews di/fill, T*hatfleal the mourner from his soes,,And bid despair be fill.,II. Prolong the smiling infant's refi,,Who yet no frrow knows: But 0 the mother's bleeding breast Tofoftefl-peace compri !,- III. For
III. For her thefairefl dreans adorn,,That wave on fancy's wing; The purple of ascending morn,,The bloom of opening spring.,IV. Let all thatfoothes the foul, or charms,,Her midnight hour employ; Till blef again in AL F RED'S arms,,She wakes to real joy.,EMMA. Alas! file comes. Let us withdraw, my friends. Her sorrows claim all reverence: and tis meet We leave her to herself.,S'C E N E II.,ELTRUDA. Amid the depth of this surrounding gloom, While nature all is hufll'd, ELTRUDA wakes To think-and to be wretched. O my love! My heart's sole reft and refuge ! Where is he Vitor or vanquifll'd-what is now his fate ? Moments of terror-Ha ! what noise was that ? Each found appals me, and each thought is death! 'Twas more than fancy sure: it feem'd the groan,Of
Of bleeding men-O every guardian wing Of faints and angels flhield him ! from his breai Turn wide the flying fiaft, the lifted steel, And, flieltring him, a ruin'd nation save. Who comes ? Speak, quickly speak.,SCEN E IIr. ELTRUDA, an ATTENDANT.,ATTENDANT.,My gracious mistress, Why to the breath of this untimely iky Expose your health ?,ELTRUDA. Away-the health, the life Of England is at flake: my ALS RED fights- Perhaps he bleeds : and I am loft for ever ! But is there none, no meflenger return'd From that dark scene of death ?,ATTENDANT.,No, madam, none. Enter- E M A. ELTRUDA. My kind hostess, thou haft an angel's voice. Come, raise my drooping spirits, charm my mind,With
With music's animating voice, and give Some respite to my woes.,EMMA fiPgS. ReJfore, gsod heav'n, our virtuous king,To chafe this gloom that round us low'rs, As winter flies before the fpri'ig,,.Who spreads the finiling earth with flou'r-s.,He comes ! before his rising ray, Despair .,nd danAnefisfly away.,ELTRUDA, Thy song, sweet flatterer of hope, suspended My affli&ion for a moment-but it returns.,Trumpets found. Ha ! hear'it thou not-the trumpets distant voice- It speaks aloud and shakes the echoing woods. See, fee, my EMMA, what tidings it proclaims.,[Exit E MMA. ELTRUDA. 0 my torn, tortur'd heart ! What is the hour?,ATTENDANT. By yon faint light, that glimmering steals along From east to north, I guess the morning near.,ELTRUDA. Then all my hopes and fears suspended hang On this dread moment's wing.,* S' CSCENE
SCENE IV. ELTRUDA, ATTENDANT, EMMA.,EMMA.,O mighty queen, They come, the murderers come. Protec us hea-,ven, [kneeling. Our husbands, and our infants, from their rage Without thine aid we perill.,ELT RUDA.,O my foul! Why what a fight is this ? A tyrant's eye Might melt with pity o'er it. Thou supreme,,[kneeling. All-ruling arbiter of human fate ! Whose universal family is nature, On ALP RED, on his children, on his people, Look down with mercy-for their cause is thine, And now, even now, deciding !,HERMIT.
SCENE V. HERMIT, ELTRUDA, and others.,HERMIT.,Glorious Princess! This is indeed to reign. Comfort great queen. It comes, it comes! the promis'd scene discloses ! I fee the DaniJh raven droop his wing; See England's genius soar again to heaven, And better days in white fucceflion roll, Without a cloud between! The clouds break away; and on the edge of a rock, in full view, a pirit is seen amid/J a blaze of light, who sings the following,O D E: From those eternal regions bright, Where funs that never set in night,,Disuse the golden day; Wherefpring, unfading, pours around, O'er all the de'w impearled gronud,,Her thousand colours gay; The meienger of heaven's high King,. I come; and happy tidings bring,,To chear this drooping ijle: Behold her cruel foes are fled Beholdfair freedom lifts t head, \,And all his chila.en fjinile!,C : The
The dawun, that now utrveils her /ies, Sees England's futtre glory rife:,A better age is born ! Then, let each voice of sprightly lirain, Around from warbling hill ntd plain,,Hail this triumphant morn !,Grand CHORUS. 'Then, let each.woice of sprightly frain, Aroundfrom lwarbling hill and plain,,Hail this triumphant morn I S C E N E VI. ELTRUDA, HE RMIT, Eaml of /DEVOM.,DEVON, kneeling. Success is ours-,ELT RUDA. The king, my lord-,Devo'N.,,' .. 'Returns, Vitorious and unhurt.,ELTRRUDA. , Then, first, to heaven, For this bes newv I humbly bend eth 'nee In grateful adoration.-Now,proqeed, My lord; and leave no circumtUaneuntIold Of this amazing night. ,,DEVO. N. Her mify Ihade Had now enclos'd us round; when, led secure,By
By EDWIN'S eye, the darkest depth I reach'd Of Kinwith-wood.. We parted.-He, in haste, Back to his charge. I thro' the cavern'd path, Whose inlet there is.found, descending dark, 'Long, under ground, it's. solitary maze Purfu'd asbelt I could, and rose at length Safe in the fort our foes had close begirt. 'Twas joy, 'twas rapture there, among the few Who wiih'd, not hop'd, my unforeseen return.,ELBTRUDA. What follow'd this, my lord ?,DEVON.,Prepare, I cry'd, To live or die like men. Our king survives And, now in arms, expeAs your instant aid. To him then let us cut our glorious way Thro' yonder camp: or, if we nobly fall, There offer to the genius of our country Whole hecatombs of Danes.-As if one foul Had mov'd them all, around their heads they whirl'd Their founding faulchions-" Lead us to those,Danes: . Revenge and England'-was the general cry.,ELT RUDA. I feel it here: my heart applauds their virtue. How was this follow'd on ?,DEVO.N.,To fouls refolv'd Small preparation needs-The clock itruck three- At once our gates flew wide: at once we rufh'd Prone on the Danish trenches-While behind, Just to the fatal infant, ALFRED rose In all his terrors; o'er the mounded camp,C 2 Tempestuous
TempefRuous drove; from space to space along Spread laughter and dismay. Nor ret, nor pause: Back'd by his ardent band, right on he bore Even to the tent, where funk in sleep profound The DaniJ/ monarch lay. His guards, a few Whom honor prompted to defend their prince, Fell round him. He yet lives: but, 0 dire chance Of cruel war !-a prisoner and in chains.,ELT RUDA, A fall how terrible ! My breast is thrill'd, And in the fierce barbarian mourns the captive.,HeRMIT. Such fortune ever wait on wild ambition! On war unjust that desolates whole nations, And leaves a world in tears for one man's guilt ! But yet-fallen as he is-he knows not yet What new diftrels, what keener pangs attend To wound his inmolt heart-That trumpet speaks The king's approach-Ye ministers unseen!,Spirits, whom the King of kings Gives to watch o'er human things, Hither, from each blest abode: From the. morning's purple road; From the solar world of light; From the planet of the night; From the rainbow's evening-round From the blue horrizon's bound; Hither, borne thro' sea of air, Sons of life and love repair ! And now, with all that charms the ey, This minarch's triumph dignify.,SCENE
SCENE VII. To a grand flouriJh of inflrumerts, the scene gradually,opening, discovers fruerat triumphal arches, adorned 'with trophies and garlands, and firom space tofpace beautifully illuminated. The procession is led byfiep- herdeets, firewing flowers.,Sir/s SHEPHERDESS, Ari/e, sweet mefenger of morn, With thy mild beam our skies adorn: For long as Ahepherds pipe and play, Ths, thisJall be a holy-day.,Second SHEPHERDESS. See, morn appears; a rosy hue Stealsofi o'er yonder orient blue . Soon let us meet in trim array, Andfrolic out this holy-day ! These are followed by soldiers with palm branches in,their hands. An officer behind bears the Daniih flandard. louri/h of iniiruments.,Firfi VOICE. Swell the trumpet's boldest note !,Second VoI E. Let the drum it's thunders roll!,C 3 BOTlH.
BOTH. And, as on airy wings they float, Spread ALS RED's name from pole to pole,CHORU., - Our sons unborn, Still on this morn, With annaljoyJlall tell;,How by his might, In daringfight, The foe of England flt.,Ari. Prince, of every fIme pofejl Prince and patriot both confelt f Thy grateful Albion fIl to litefl day, Roll down thy glories in a tide of praise,CHORUS. Tsy grateful Albion Jall to latejl days Roll down tly glories in a tide of praise !,ELT RUDA.
ELTRUDA. Yon pi&ur'd raven-tell me, is it not Their wonderous magic standard !,DEVON.,'Tis the fame: Wrought by the sifters. of the Dan/i king, At midnight's blackest hour; when the sick Imoon, Wrapt in. eclipse by their enchanting song, Dowvn thro' the turbid clouds her influence fled Of baleful power. The sifters ever lung- " Shake, standard, flake defxuction on our foes.",S C. E N E · VIi. .i1 ELTRUDA, HERMIT, andi the others. ALFRED pasing under the triumphal arches: Thefun,.,at the fame time, rising above the horizon.,ELTRUDA. He comes! the conqueror comes-,ALFRED.,In these lov'd arms To lose all sorrow, and all bliss to find !,ELTRUDA. O from what fears deliver'd for thy life, And. inthat life for a whole people's being, I thus receive thee back ! thus fold thee safe ! Love only, love likemine, can feel, not utter!,C 4 ArFRED.
ALFRED. To Him ascend all praise ! whose will infpir'd, Whose arm fuftain'd this aftion, that rcftores My better name-and, 0 more glorious ffill, Of nobler, dearer confequence!-reftores Loft England to her vigor, fame and freedom.,HERMIT. For her, 0 ALS RED, your more arduous talk But now begins: this conquest to secure; To spread it's influence wide, and well improv'd By unremitting vigilance and valor, Make this one blow decisive of her fate. But now behold, to animate thy hope, In myfticfihew exprefs'd what late thy fortune Seem'd to portend; and what the brightening scene With fairer promise opens.,Four
Four Furies arise, to thefound of instruments in,discord, atfour different openings from unde ground, with torches in their left hands, and bloody jwords in their right. They form a .confus'd Pyrrhic dance, jhaking andpointing threirfwords and torches round the king in their centre: till, upon a change of the music int$ regular harmony, descends the Cenius of Eng- land, 'vith a crowned sword in one hand, and a laurel 'wreath in the other. On fight of 'whom the four Furiesfink thro the openings they arose from. He presents the crowned sword and laurel-branch at the feet of the king, and reafcends, 'while the following song is sung.,Atluat, at laj? Our night is past, the gloomy night of fear:,And o'r our o kies Fair beams arie Of peace and joy sincere. Then let triumph abound !,Let ecflacy reign Till these hills all around,-around Improving'each lfrain, Our transports resound ;-reound The heart-felt transport that succeeds to pain !,C 5 ALFRPD.
ALFRED. I hail th' auspicious omen-but, ah me ! ELTRUDA, fee, where comes th' unhappy king!,ELTRUDA. 0 fight of woe!,ALFRED. Retire, my gentle love: An interview like this were too severe For thy soft nature.,ELT RUDA. 0 my king, my. ALFRE D ! Now I fee andhold thee thus, tho' my bliss Spring from his misery, my heart muit bleed,. For him; the king, the father, and the husband ! Whose queen perhaps now feels those pangs I felt, When my diftrafed mind piaur'd my ALFRED Loft to his people, children, and myself.,[Exit ELTRUDA. S C E N E -IX. ALFRED), HERMIT, DA~NISH KINt.,ALPFRED,. after a pause.,See, at lat, '0 king, In thy fad fate; which even a foe laments, See and acknowledge heaven's impartial hand. For violated.oaths and plunder'd realms, For the heap'd guilt of base perfidious war, This retribution is most just.,DANE,
DANE.,Away- 1 own no guilt: orkings of every age Are criminal, thy ancefors and mine. What is all war, but more diffufve robbery Made facred'by success ? What obje& swells A monarch's highest aim ?-increase of power And universal sway. This glorious end All means muf fan&ify, that can secure.,For what remains-Of bondage, or of death, The lesser ill, I reck not. But, by THOR, The gloomy thiinderer ! one ditraEcing thought Bends my foul's 'trongeft temper; finks me down Beneath. ny own contempt.,ALFRED.,Such fears difniifs As muff diAionor both. The truly brave His foe in equal arms will dare to meet: Vanquifh'd, he dares not injure, nor insult him.,DANE. Nor that, nor ought without myself could thus Unman.me. No :.my hell is here, within- How ! like a wretch, a nameless save whofights. But for vile hire-in my own tent-furpris'd ! Asleep! unarm'd !-these fliameful chains thrown,o'er me, And not one blowexchang'd! O baser far Than that low herd, who fled'without a wound Before thy fwyrd-AThey but deserted him, Who first himself abandon'd-But thyr gods' ' Were vigilant for thee: while mine all slept.,ALFRED
ALFPRED. Your gods are idols: that sole Power I serve, Supreme and one, is universal Lord Oer earth and heaven. Be it my daily talk, As/tis my noblest theme, to own, by Him Alone I conquerd : as for him alone I wish to reign-by making mankind blet !,DANE. No more-Convey me to your basest dungeon. Let me explore it's darkest depth; shut out The light of heaven; forget there is a fun Who shines on my diihonor. Would I might Exclude too my own thoughts-But yet, my son Lives-and is free ! lives to revenge my fall! To wash my Rains in blood-Ha ! where was he This fatal night, when every god forsook me ! Where, where was IVAR then ?,HERMIT.,Unhappy prince! That Con, alas !-,DANE. Ha! what! why, who art thou ? What of my son ?,HERMIT. Thy truRf in him is vain. To his ownraihnefs and intemperate lust, This very night, a vitimn, here, he fell- Lo! where he lies.,DANE,
DANE. My fon-my fon-Ha! dead- My only child !-But no: I will not weep. Is he not safe, beyond misfortune's hand ? Beyond all feeling of his father's ahame ? False hope, farewell !-Let madness, let despair Surround me, seize me whole; till life's loath'd,flame, For ever quench'd in death, resigns me o'er To darkness and oblivion;,ALFPED.,Dire reverse ! Dreadful impatience !-But thece roving Danes A ftriter watch demand. Means more effectual Must now be try'd, from our insulted lores To keep aloof this till descending war. 'Tis naval itrength, that mufd our peace aflure. Be this the first high obje& of my care, To wall us round with well appointed fleets . In them our sole dominion of the sea, Ourwealth and grandeur, can alone be found, The one great bulwark of our separate world.,HERMIT. ALFRED, goon; the noble task pursue, Thy safety urges, and thy fame demands. Yes, in her fleets, let England ever seek Her sure defence: by them, thro every age, At home secure, renown'd and sear'd abroad, Great arbitress of nations-Ha ! the scene, The radiant profpet opens full before me ! Thro distant depths of time transported down,,I fee
I fee whole moving forests, from her hills Up-rooted, bound triumphant o'er the main! White tracts of glory, brighten Albion's Ikies, As navies grow, as commerce fwellk her fail With every breeze thatunder heaven can blow, From either pole; thro worlds yet unexplor'd,, In east and weft, that to thy sons disclose- Their golden stores, their wealth. of various.name,. And laviih pour it on BRtTANIA'S lap!',ALFRErl. Thy words new fun-fline thro my breast diffuse, And smiling calm. But let ii, HERMIT, try, By jufice,- riercy, arits and arts improv'd, By freedom fenc'd around- with sacred laws,: Our promis'd blilfs to. merit and. adorn. Now, to.m.myglorious tal-- l,; ,: . ; . H&eMira. ... One motnteis '!ALrIa, bakwatid! aftt'yit[eye;' On this unfoldidg feedie; where, pitiuri':ttue, As in i.aitrror; rifes fairto fight. Our England's genuine fireigth. aid future fame.,Here is seen the ocean in profpte,' and jhips failing along. two boat's land their crev's, One sailor sings the folloiing Ode: after wihic, tie re/i jois in a lively djac¢i.,I. When
I. Ihen BR I T IN first at heaven's commn d, Arolefrom out.the azure main; Thi ws as the charter of the uld, And guardian angels sung this firain:,Rule B ITA N IA, rule the nwave : BRITONS never will be slaves.,II. The nations, not Jo blefj as thee, MuJf ini their turns to tyrantsfall: While thoaidt flouriJh great indfree, the dread and envy of them all.,Rule, BRrTANIA, rule the waves: BRITONs never will beh aves.,IIl. Should war, Afouldfaiona iake thy isle, And fink to poverty andJame ; Heaven iilljhAaloh BRIT A N IA mie, Rcelore her 'wealth, and raie her name.,Rule BRITANIA, rule the .waves: BRITONS newer 'will befaves.,IV. A,
IV. As the loud blast, that tears thy Jlkes, Serves but to root thy native oak; Still more majeflic Jali thou riJe, Fromforeign, from domeflic froke.,Rule, BRAIANIA, rule the wvtes: BRITONs never will beJflaves.,V. 'How blef the prince, preser'd by fate, In adverse days to mount thy throne! Renew thy. once triumphant state, And on thy grandeur build his own t,.Rule, BTITANIA. rule the waves: BRITONS never will be laves.,VI. His raceJhall long, in times to come, So Jeawen ordains, thyfcepter wield, Rever'd abroad, belov'd at home, And be, at once, thy word and hield.,Rule, BRITANIA, rule the waves: BRiTONS never will beleaves.,The End of the Mafyue.,he
The followirg SO N G was altered by the author,,and is now printed as it isfung.,I. When Britain firRft at heav'n's command,,Arose from out the azure main, This was the charter of the land,,And guardian angels sung this strain.,C H O R U S. Rule, Britania, rule the waves: Britons never will be slaves I,II. The nations, (not so bled as thee,),Mut in their turns to tyrants fall; While thou flalt flouribh great and free,,The dread and envy of them all.,CHORUS. Rule, Britania, &c.,III. * Still more majetic lhalt thou rife,,More dreadful from each foreign stroke; As the loud blasts that tear the Skies,,Serves but to root thy native oak.,CHORUS. Rule, Britania, &c- * TAih wrfJ is omntted in the reprefinntatin.,Thee,
IV. Thee, haughty tyrants ne'er fliall tame,,All their attempts to bend thee down, W\ill bt ,rouze thy gen'rous flamc,,But work their woe and thy renown.,C H O R U S. Rule, Britanria, &;.,V. To thee belonggs ,t r'url reign,,Thy cities lia!i with commerce shine, All thine shall be the fubjeti main,,And ev'ry shore it circles thine.,.C H O R U S. Rule, Britania, &C.,VI. The Muses still; with freedom found,,Shall to thy happy coasts repair; Blest isle ! wih matchless beauty crown'd,,And manly hearts to guard the fair 1,C H' R U S ulk, Britania, rule.the wave : Britons aever will be flares,EPILOGUE.
[ 59 J E P I L O G U E.,SPOKEN BY MRS s. CLIVE. J HIILEP our grave Hermit, bufiy alwno flairs Emfnpys hiJ feriows head on late affairs, Gallants, look /hre-faith I have play'dthe rogue, Andflole his wand--by way of epilogue. You critics, there below, had best be civil: J For I, with this fane rod,. can.play the deti t , Tie allyour ufyi tongues. up, one by one,. , And turn what are of brains yu hat-rto fia .:. The beau's sos fctll convert to solid rock . What then ? the 'wig will always hi~e it'r blck.. But for the men of fad andfolemn face, The deep dark fages in or out of place, Who much in port andpolitics delight, Small change, God knows, will sake them Jiatue,quite. The ladies too-but now these witlingsfneer- No, fair oner, you jall meet no insult here: I ony hint my power-that, if I lif, Iyet can charmyou two long hours from whif. But, cards are ready, you are all bespoke- To spoil a dozen drums, would be no joke. Bejides, 'twould be mere arbitrary sway Such as, -of old, was us'dat Nero's lay,,Who
[ 60 J Whe, when hefung andfiddled to the town, Still, as his subjes yawn'd, iwould knock them down. No, firs; to gain a heart, 'we must not teize Wiho would engage it, firfj hould aim to please. This part be mine: anl, if I nowfucceed To my own wifi, you will be pleas'd indeed. Then-for a trial: thus, I wave my hand, To prove the power of this inchanting 'wand.,On waving her wand, he scene opens, and discovers a beautiful valley, bor- dered on each hand by foretI trees, rising irregularly, ndforwing from/ pace tofpacc variour groves. The profea behind i a landscape of woodtands, and of mountains that afeend above one another, till the laif fem to lose them/felv in the Jky. From thefummit of the nearest hill a river pours down, byfeveralfalls, in a natural cascade. The ,warbling of birds is hard.,FIRST
f 61 ] FIRST ENTRY. Ahubmdman, hiswife, irdfamil.,SHE. owfioft isthefcene! The woodlands how green Wht charms in the nightingale's lay,HE. Fair Peace, that now reigns On our hills and our plain, 'Tri Peace hid, all natur be gay,CHORUS. 'Tis eace bids all nature begay.,SHE; The dijaf,,HE.,Tre plow, BOTH. S/tall employ our hands no, For ourflves and our children alo.,HE. Securefrom the foe, We/Jiall reap what wefow: And the year, the whole year is our own !,CHOR US. And theyear, the wvholyear i erw ewon.,She
6z -3 She wawes her wand. SECOND ENTRY.,Aflepherd andjhepherdefs. They run,into each other's arms.,SHE. If to meet is all this pleasure, Sure, to part was killing pain !,BOTH. res, to part was killing pain!,HE. If 'twas grief to loft our treasure How transporting to regain !,BOTH. 0 'ti transport to regain'!,HE. Thus poeffing-,SHE.,emvety bleflng Crotvns the nmaid-,HE.,And crowns her fwann. BouH. Crowns the happy maid and fJi n !,She
I 63 She waves her wand. THr D ENTRY. Soldiers descend the mountain y two different paths: t the bottom they lay down the spoils with which they rie loaded ; and then, advancing, to o m the following ballad. them ing,FIRST MAN. We have fought; we huve conquer'd: and England,once more Shall pfouriA in fae, as he fouriz'd besre Our fears are all fed, with our enemies lain : Could they ry up anew-,SE'COND.,:.e wouldflay tmim. aii". His monarch to serve, or to do h,'felf right, No Englilhmanyet ever flinch'dfriom the fight For why, neighbours all, 'we are free as the king: ' Tis this umakes us brave- -,FIRST.,And 'tis this makes us sing. Ourprince too, for this, will be thankfil tofate- It is, in our freedom, he finds himJelf great No force can be wanting, nor meaner court arts:," He is maler of all-,SECOND.,ztVho will reign in our hearts ! Should rebels within, or /houldfoes from without, Bring the crown on his head, or his honor in doubt;,The verses marked with an aReriik to be fun a second time by both..
[ 6% ] We are ready- -,Still ready nd boldly foretell, * That conquef /iall ever with liberty dwell ?,SECOND. But now, bring us forth, as the crown of our labor, Much wine and good cheer-,FIRST.,With the pipe and the tabor. Let our nymphs all be kind, and our frepherds be gay: For England, Old England, is happy to-day.,CHORUS. Let our nymphs all be kind, and ourrepherds be gay: . Far England, Old England, is happy to-day,They all mix in a dance, to the pipe and tabor.,THE END.