
Poems by Robert Fergusson
- - , F- ' --- .o¥;iB E0 T M AKo,<-*'l">' hnuse d hbY Xvhaer T-i Th onims IRitd di{iman.,,M b CC IJXIl,~~ ci~~~~~B:=~~~ L;.s-. A:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~·~~ I'~~~~~~~a
e i 3 c 0 N T E N T S,Page. 0 DE to Hope .,A Tale Extempore Verses on being asked which of,three sifters was most beautiful 6 The Rivers of'Scotland, an Ode ib Town and Country cbntrafted, an Epistle,to a 'Friend" 'i Ode to Pity ' 8 A Song o2 Morning, a Pastoral z2 Noon, a Paltoral . . 2, Night, a Pastoral 30 The Simile. .. 35 The Complaint, a Pastoral 36 Retirement 39 On the .cold month of April, a Poem 43,.~~~~~~' :,Verses
Verses written at the HEermitage of Braid,near Edinburgh 46 A Saturday's Expedition, in mock Heroicks 47 The Amputation, a Burlesque Elegy 55 The Canongale Play-hliouf in Ruins, a Bur.,lefque Poem 57 Dambn to his Friends, a Ballad 62 'The Peasant, the Hen, and young Ducks,,a Fable 65 'athion, a Poem . 68 On' the Death of Mr Thomas Lancashire,Comedian, an Epigram 72 'On.feeing a Lady paint herself, an Epigram ib On feeing Stanzas addrefied to Mrs Hartley;,wherein 1he is described as resembling ' Mary Queen of Scots, an Epigram 73 ASong ib Con'science, an Elegy 75 -Against Repining at Fortune,a Poem 77 The Decay of Friendhip, a Pastoral Elegy 80,S C 0 T S PO E M S. $adie and Willie, an Eclogue 'o Cerdie and ;Davie, an Eclogue to the Me,.mory f IDr.Wilkie 9a,.eg y
Elegy on the Death of Mr David Gregory 97 The Daft-Days 99 The King's Birth-Day in Edinburgh 102 Caller Oysters 107 Braid Claith I Elegy on the Death of Scots Music 13 Hallow-fair i,ERRATA. P. 2CL. 10. for lowring, read lowing. P. 33. L. 5. for fwav'd, read swayed. P. 5o. L. id. for suspect, read sus pes.
Entered in Stationers Hall.
P 0 E M,0 N VARIOUS,SUBJECTS. ODE TO HOPE, TJOPE! lively chearer of the mind,,In lieu of real bliss defign'd, Come from thy ever verdant bow'r To chace the dull and ling'ring hour; 0! bring, attending on thy reign, All thy ideal fairy train, To animate the lifeless clay, And bear my sorrows hence away.,Hence s A
r 2 .3 Hence gloomy featur'd black despair,,With all thy frantic furies fly, Nor rend my breaf with gnawing care,,For hope in lively garb is nigh; *Let pining discontentment mourn,,Let dull ey'd melancholy grieve, Since pleasing Hope must reign by turn,,And every bitter thought relieve. 0 fnmiling Hope! in adverse hour I feel thy influencing power: Though frowning Fortune fix my lot, In some defenceless lonely cot, Where poverty, with empty hands, In pallid meagre aspect lfands; Thou can'st enrobe me, 'midst the great, PVith all the crimson pomp of state, Where luxury invites his guests To pall them with his lavish feasts: What cave so dark, what gloom.fo drear, So black with horror, dead with fear! But thou can'st dart thy streaming ray, And change clofs night to open day.,Health
3 3 Health is attendant in thy radiant train, Round her the whifp'ring zephyrs gentlyplay, Behold her gladly tripping o'er the plain,,Bedeck'd with rural sweets and garlands gay.,When vital spirits are deprefs'd And heavy languor cloggs the breatR Comforting Hope! 'Lis thine to cure, Devoid ofi fculapian power; For oft thy friendly aid avails, When all the strength of physic fails. ay, even though death should aim his dart, I know he lifts his arm in vain, ince thou this lesson can'st impart,. Mankind but die to live again. Depriv'd of thee must banners fall; But where a living Hope is found, The legions liout at danger's call, And viftors are triumphant crown'd. Come then, bright Hope! in smiles array'd, Revive us by thy quickening breath, hen shall we never be afraid To walk thro' danger, and thro' death.,A2
E4 1 A TALE. T HOSE rigid pedagogues and fools,,rWho walk by felf-invented rules, Do often try, with empty head, The emptier mortals to mislead, And fain would urge, that none but.they Could rightly teach the A, B, C; On which they've got an endless comment, To trifling minds of mighty moment, Throwing such barriers in the way Of those who genius display, As often, ah ! too often, tease Them out of patience, and of fees, Before thry're able to explode Obflruflions, thrown on learning's road. May mankind all employ their tools, To banish pedantry from schools, And may each pedagogue avail, By lift'ning to the after tale.,Wife Mr BIRCH had long intended The alphabet should be amended,' And taught that H a breathing was, Ergo-he saw no proper cause,,Why
53 Why such a letter should exist: Thus in a breath was he difmifs'd, With, " 0 beware, beware, 0 youth! Take not the villain in your mouth.",One day this alphabetic finner Was eager to devour his dinner, When. to appease the craving glutton,: His boy onom produc'd the mutton. Was such difafler ever told ? Alas! the meat was deadly cold ! Here take and h-eat it, fays the mailer; Quoth Tom, that (hall be done, and fast, Sir: And few there are who will dispute it, But he went inflantly about it; For Birch had fcorn'd the H to fay, And blew him with a puff away.,The bell was rung with dread alarm; "Bring me the mutton, is it warm ?" Sir you defir'd, and I have eat it; " Yon lie, my orders were to heat it." Q9uoih Tom, I'll readily allow That H is but a breathing now.,EXTEMPORE, A3
E 6 EXTEMPORE, On being nJked which of three Sifters was the,mofl beautiful. \IHEN Paris gave his voice in Ida's grove,,For the resistless Venus, queen of love, 'Twas no great talk to pass a judgment there, Where ihe alone was exquisitely fair; But here what could his ab'leff judgment teach, When wifdom,power, and beauty reign in each; The youth nonplus'd behov'd to join with me, And wiflh the apple had been cut in three. THE RIVERS OF SCOTLAND.,AN O D E. Set to Music by Mr COLLETT. O 'ER SCOTIA'S parched land the NAIADS-,flew, From towering hills explor'd her llelter'd,vales, Caus'd FORTH in wild meanders please the,view, And lift her waters to the zephyrs gales.,Where
E 7 ] Where the glad fiain filrveys his fertile fields, And reaps the plenty which his harvest yields. Here did those lovely nymphs unseen,,Oft wander by the river's fide, And oft unbind their tresses green,,To bathe them in the fluid tide. Then to the fliady grottos would retire, And sweetly echo to the warbling choir; Or to the runsing waters tune their ihells,To call up echo from the woods, Or from the rocks, or chryftal floods, Or from surrounding banks, or hills, or dales.,CHORUS. Or to the rulhing waters tune their Ihells,,To call up echo from the woods, Or from the rocks or chryftal floods, Or from surrounding banks, or hills, or dales. When the cool fountains firfl their springs for.,sook, Murmuring smoothly to the azure main, Exulting Neptune then his trident nhook,,And wav'd his waters gently to the plain.
s8 ] The friendly Tritons on his chariot born, With cheeks dilated blew the hollow.founding,horn. Now Lothian and Fifan shores,,Resounding to the mermaids song, Gladly emit their limpid ltores,,And bid them finoothly fail along To Neptune's empire, and with him to roll Round the revolving sphere from pole to pole; To guard Britannia from envious foes,,To view her angry vengeance hurl'd In awful thunder round the world, And trembling nations bending to her blows.,CH O R U S. To guard Britannia from envious foes,,To Hew her angry vengeance hurl'd, In awful thunder round the world, And trembling nations bending to her blows. Higl towering on the zephyrs breezy wing,,Swift fly the Naiades from FORTuA'S (hores, And to the southern airy mountains bring,Their sweet enchantment, and their magic,powers.,Each
C 9 Each nymph her favourite willow takes,,The earth with fev'rous tremor (hakes, The stagnant lakes obey their call,,Streams o'er the grassy pastures fall. TWEED spreads her waters to the lucid ray, Upon the dimpled surf the sun.beams play: On her green banks tlie tuneful (hepherd lies,,Charm'd with the music of his reed, Amidst the wavings of the Tweed: From fky-reflecing streams the river nymphs,arise.,CH O R U S. On her green banks the tuneful shepherd lies,,Charm'd with the music of his reed, Amidst the waviugs of the Tweed, - From fky-reflecting freams the river nymphs,arise. The lift'ning muses heard the flepherd play,,Fame with her brazen trump proclaim'd his,name, And to attend the easy graceful lay,,PAN from Arcadia to Tweda came.,Fond
[ o1 3 Fond of the change, along the banks he ftray'd, And sung unmindful of th' Arcadian shade.,AI R, TWEEDSIDE.,I. Attend every fanciful swain,,Whose notes softly flow from the reed, With harmony guide the sweet firain,,To sing of the beauties of Tweed.,I I. Where the music of woods, and of freams,In soothing sweet melody join, To enliven your pafloral themes,,And make human numbers divine.,C H O R U'S. ; Ye, warblers from the vocal grove, The tender woodland strain approve, While Tweed in smoother cadence glides, O'er flow'ry vales in gentle tides; And as she rolls her silver waves along, Murmura and sighs to quit the rural song. SCOTIA's great GENIUS in rujfCt clad, From the cool sedgy bank exalts her head,,In
E 11 3 In joyful rapture ihe the change espies, Sees living freams descend, and groves arise.,A IR, GILDEROY.,I. As fable clouds at early day,Oft dim the flining ikies, So gloomy thoughts create dismay,And lufre leaves her eyes.,I I. " Yepowers! are Scotia's ample fields," With To much beauty grac'd, " To have those sweets your bounty yields,," By foreign foes defac'd?,I I I. " Jove! at whose supreme command " The limpid fountains play, " O'er Caledonia'r northern land *,," Let reflefs waters firay.," Since * Though Scotland and Caledonia are generally held as fynonimous terms, yet there is a diftindion: For of old, when the Pits inhabited this country, that part of it was only called Caledonia which lay to the northward of the Tay, which river is said to have been the boundary of the Roman conquests.
E 12,I V. it Since from the void creation rose,," Thou'ft made a sacred vow, cc That Caledon to foreign foes," Should ne'er be known to bow." The mighty Thund'rer on his faphire throne, In mercy's robes attir'd, heard the fwveet voice Of female woe-foft as the moving long Of Philomela 'midst the evening shades; And thus return'd an answer to her pray'rs: " Where birks at nature's call arise; " Where fragrance hails the'vaulted skies; "c Where my own oak-its umbrage spreads, "c Delightful 'midR the woody shades; " Where ivy mould'ring rocks entwines; " Where breezes bend the lofty pines: " There shall the laughing NAIADS firay, " 'MidRf the sweet banks of winding Tay." From the dark womb of earth Tay's waters,spring, Ordain'd by Jove's unalterable voice; The founding lyre celeRial muses string,,The choiring fongflers in the groves rejoice.,Each
[ 13 ] Each fount its chryftal fluids pours,,Which from surrounding mountains flow; The river baths its verdant shores,,Cool o'er the surf the breezes blow. Let England's sons extoll their gardens fair, Scotland may freely boast her gen'raus fireams, Their foil more fertile and their milder air,,Her fifles sporting in the solar beams. 'ThameJ, Humber, Severn, all must yield the bay To the pure streams of Forth, of Tweed, and,Tay.,CHORUS. hames, Humber, Severn, all muR yield the bay So the pure fireams of Forth, of Tweed, and,Tay. 0 Scotia! when such beauty claims, A mansion near thy flowing freams, Ne'er ihall fiern Mars in iron car, Drive his proud coursers to the war: But fairy forms shall frew around Their olives on the peaceful ground; And turtles join the warbling throng, To ufler in the morning song.,B,Or
1E 4 .1 Or shout in chorus all the live-long day, From the green banks of Forth, of Tweed,,and Tay. When gentle Phoebe's friendly light In silver radiance clothes the night; Still music's ever varying trains Shall tell the lovers, Cynthia reigns; And wooe them to her midnight bowers, Among the fragrant dew-clad flowers, Where every rock, and hill, and dale, With echoes greet the nightingale, Whole pleasing, soft, pathetic tongue, To kind condolance turns the song; And often wins the love-lick swain to fray To hear the tender variegated lay, Thro' the dark woods of Forth, of Tweed,,and Tay. Hail, native freams, and native groves ! Oozy caverns, green alcoves! Retreats for Cytherea's reign, With all the graces in her train. Hail, Fancy, thou whose ray so bright Dispels the glimm'ring taper's light !,Con,1
C s- 3 Come in aerial vefiure blue, Ever pleasing, ever new, In these recesses deign to dwell With me in yonder rofs.clad cell: Then flaall my reed successful tune the lay, In numbers wildly warbling as they firay Thro' the glad banks of Fortha, Tweed, and,Tay. The T.0 W N' and COUNTRY,.CONTRASTED. In an EPISTLE to a FRIEND. F ROM noisy bustle, from contention free,,Far from the bury town I careless loll,. Not like swain Tityrus, or the bards of old, Under a beechen, venerable shade; Bt on a furzy heath, where blooming broom, rind thorny whins the spacious plains adorn: ere health fits fniling on my youthful brow; or 'ere the fun beams forth his earliest ray, .nd all the eafl with yellow radiance crowns , E'er dame Aurora, from her purple bed, 'Gins with her kindling blush to paint the sky, The soaring lark, morn's chearful harbinger,,B 2 And.,i
r 16 ] And linnet joyful flutt'ring from the bulli, Stretch their finall throats in vocal melody, To hail the dawn, and drowsy sleep exhale From man,; frail man! on downy softness,ftretch'd. Such pleasing scenes Edina cannot boast; For there the slothful slumber seal'd mine eyes, Till nine successive strokes the clock had knel'd. There not the lark, but fifhwives noisy screams, And inundations plung'd from ten house height, With smell more fragrant than the spicy groves Of Indus, fraught with all her orient tores, Rous'd me from sleep; not sweet refreshing,sleep, But sleep infested with the burning fting Of bug infernal, who the live-long night With direst fucion sipp'd my liquid gore. There gloomy vapours in our zenith reign'd, And fill'd with irksome pefilence the air. There ling'ring sickness held his feeble court, Rejoicing in the havock he had made; And Death, grim Death ! with all his ghafRly,train, Watch'd the broke slumbers of Edina's sons.
c i7 3 Hail, rosy Health ! thou pleasing antidote- *Gainss troubling cares! all hail, these rural,fields, Those winding rivulets, and verdant shades, Where thou the heav'n-born Goddess deign'ft,to dwell !. With thee the hind, upon his flinple. fare, Lives chearful,. and from heaven no more de-,mands. But ah! how vast, how terrible the change With him who night by night in sickness pinesl Him nor his splendid equipage can please, Nor all the pageantry the world can boat; Nay, not the consolation of his friends Can ought avail.: his hours are anguish all, Nor cease till envious death hath clos'd' the,scene, But, Carlos) if we court this maid celeflial, Whether we thro' meand'ing. rivers flray, Or 'midst the city's jarring noise remain, Let temperance,. health's blyth concomitant, To our desires and appetites set bounds. Else, cloy'd at last, we surfeit every joy; Our flack'ned nerves rejet their wonted spring;,We B3
C 18 3 We reap the fruits of .qr:unkindly lufis, And feebly totter to the silent grave.;,OD'E' T PI TY. T O what fequefter'd gloomy (hade,* Hath ever gentle Pity ftray'd? What brook is water'd fiom her eyes ? What gales convey her tender sighs ?. Unworthy of her grateful lay, She hath de'pis'd the great, the gay; Nay, all the feelings 'fie imparts Are' far eftrang'd from human hearts.,Ah Pity ! whither would'st thou fly From human heart, from human eye? Are defart woods and twilight groves The scenes the fobbing pilgrim loves? If there thou dwelli'f, O Pity ! fay In what lone path you pensive stray. I'll know thee by the lily's hue, Befprinkl'd with the morning's dew: For thou wilt never blush to wear The pallid look and falling tear.,In
E 19 3 In broken cadence from thy tongue, Oft have we heard the mournful song; Oft have we view'd the loaded biei Bedew'd with pity's softest tear. Her sighs and tears were ne'er deny'd, When innocence and virtue died. But in this black and iron age, Where vice and all his demons rage, Though bells in solemn peal are rung, Though dirge in mournful verse is sung; Soon will the vain parade be o'er, Their name, their memory no more: Who love and innocence defpis'd, And ev'ry virtue facrific'd. Here Pity, as a statue dumb, Will pay no tribute to the tomb; Or wake the memory of those Who never felt for others woes.,Thou mistress of the feeling heart ! Thy pow'rs of sympathy impart. If mortals would but'fondly prize Thy falling tears, thy pafling sighs, Then fliould wan poverty no more Walk feebly from the rich man's door;,Humility
E 20 ] Humility should vanquish pride, And vice. be drove from virtue's fide,: Then happiness at length should reign, And golden age begin again.,SO N G. sAMIDST a rosy bank of flowers,,Young Damon mourn'd his forlorn fate; In sighs he spent his languid hours,,And breath'd his woes in lonely state. Gay joy no more Ihall cheer his mind,,No wanton sports can sooth his-care, Since sweet Amanda prov'd unkind,,And left him full of bleak despair. His looks that were as freth-as morn,Can now no longer smiles impart; His pensive foul, on fadfiefs born,,Is rack'd and torn by Cupid's dart. Turn, fair Amanda ! cheer your swain,,Unlhroud him from his veil of woe; Range every charm to ease the pain,That in his tortur'd breast doth grow.,PASTORAL
P A S T O R A L I.,MORNING. DAMON. ALEXIS.,DAMON. URORA now her welcome visit pays, Stern darkness flies before her cheerful,rays; Cool circling breezes whirl along the air, And early Ihepherds to the fields repair, Lead we our flocks then to the mountains brow, Where junipers and thorny brambles grow, Where fonts of water 'midR the daisies spring, And soaring Larks, and tuneful Linnets sing; Your pleasing song shall teach our flocks to,stray, While founding echoes smooth the silvan lay.,ALEXIS. 'Tis thine to sing the graces of the morn, The zephyr trembling o'er the ripening corn: 'Tis thine with ease to-chant the rural lay, While bubbling fountains to your numbers play.,Ne
' 22 ] No piping swain that treads the verdant field, But to your music, and your verse must yield; Sing then; for here, we may with safety keep, Our sportive lambkins on this nooffy sleep.,D A MON. With ruddy glow the Sun adorns the land, The,pearly dew-drops on the bushes stand; The lowing oxen from the folds we hear, And snowy flocks upon the hills appear.,ALEXIS. How ftveet the murmursof the nieighbouring rill!: Sweet are the slumbers which its floods distill: Thro' peebly channels winding as they run, And brilliant fparkiing to the rising fun.,DAMO N. Behold Edina's lofty turrets rife, Her ftrudures fair adorn the eaflern skies; As Pentland cliffs o'ertop yon distant plain, So she the cities on our north domain.,AL E X. IS. Boast not of cities, or their lofty towers, Where discord all her baneful influence pours,,The
r 23 ] The homely cottage, e wither'd tree, With sweet contenf all be preferr'd by me.,D DA M ON. The Hemlock dire shall please the heifers taste, Our lands like wild Arabia be waste; The bee forget to range for winter's food, 'hre I so fake the forest and the flood.,ALEXIS. Ye balmy breezes, wave the verdant field, Clouds allyour bounties, all your moisture yield: That fruits and herbage may our farms adorn, And furrowed ridges teem with loaded corn.,D A M N. The year already hath propitious fmil'd, Gentle in spring-time, and in summer mild; No cutting blasts have hurt my tender dams, No hoary frosts deftroy'd my infant lambs.,ALEXIS. If Ceres crown with joy the bounteous year, A sacred altar to her flrine I'll rear; A. vig'Jous ram (hall bleed, whose curling horns, Iis wooly neck and hardy front adorns.,DAMON.
r 24 ] DA MON. Teach me, 0 Pan! to tune the slender reed, No fav'rite ram fball at thine altars bleed; Each breathing morn thy woodland verse I'll,sing, And hollow dens shall with the numbers ring.,ALEXIS. Apollo, lend me thy celestial lyre, The woods in concert join at thy desire: At morn, at noon, at night, I'll.tune the lay, And bid fleet echo bear the found away.,D A M N. Sweet are the breezes when cool eve returns, To lowring herds when raging Syrius burns.: Not half so sweetly winds the breeze along, As does the murmur of your pleasing song.,ALEXIS. To hear your strains the cattle spurn their food, The feather'd fongRers leave their tender brood; Around your feat the silent lambs advance, And fcrarhbling he-goats on the mountains,.dance, r' / '· bA'AMON.
t i25 . DAMON. But hafe, Alexis, reach yon leafy shade, Which mantling ivy round the o-!ks hath madt; There we'll retire, and lift the warbling note That flos-s melodious from the blackbirds,-throat; Your easy numliers (hall his songs inspire, And every warbler Join the general choir.,P A S T O R A L IL,N O 0 Ns CORY DON. TIMANTHES.,CORYDO N. pTvHE iun the summit of his orb hath gaindd,,i\o flecker'd clouds his azure path hath,ftain'd; - Our pregnant ewes around us cease- to giaze, Stung with the keenness of his lultry rays The wveary bullock from the yoke is led, And youthful Ihepherds from the plains are fled,C To
[ 26 -] To dufliy shades, where scarce a glimmering ray Can dart its lustre through the leafy spray. Yon cooling riv'let where the wyaters gleam, :Where springing flowers adorn the 'limpi'd,Rream, ' . ,Invites us where the.drooping willow grows '- To guide our flocks, and take a coolTepofe.,TI'M ANTH ES. To thy advice a grateful ear I'll lend, The shades '11 court where slender osiers bend; Our weanlings young (hall crop the rising flower, While we retire to yonder twining bower; The woods (hall echo back thy cheerful Itrains, Admir'd by all our Caledonian swains.,CORYDON. There have I oft with gentle Delia ffray'd, Amidst th' embowering solitary ihade; Before the gods to thwart my wishes strove, By blasting every pleasing g!impfe of love: For Delia wanders o'er the Anglian plains, Where civil discord andfediioQn.reign.,There
[ 27 J There Scotia's sons in odious light appear, Tho' we for th'em have wav'd the hostile spear: For them my fire, enwrapp'd in curdled gore, Breath'd his last moments on a foreign shore.,TIM A N T H E S. Six lunar months, my friend, will loon expire, And Ihe return to crown your fond desire. For her! 0 rack not your desponding mind ! In Delia's breast a gen'rous flame'b'confin'd That burns for Corydon, whose piping lay Hath caus'd the tedious moments fleal away: Whose strains melodious mov'd the falling,floods To whisper Delia to the rising woods. O! ifyour sighs coiid aid the floating;gales, Thl.;t favbiiuable fweil hler-lofty fails; Ne'er fliould your; fobbs their rapid flight give,o'er Till Delia's presence gr'a'cd ouri northern flore.,CORYDON. Though Delia greet my love I fish in vain, Such joy unbounded can I ne'er obtain.,Her.
E 28, ] Herfire a thousand fleeces numbers oser, And grafly hills increase his milky flore; While the weak fences of a scanty fold Will all my sheep and tattening lambkins hold,T I M A N T HE S. Ah, hapless yout.h ! although the. early muse Painted her semblance on ihy youthful brows; Thqugh flie with laurels twin'd thy temples,round, And in thy ear diflil'd the magic found; A cheerless poverty attends.your woes, Your lfng melodious unrewarded flows,,C 0 R Y D O N. CO . RYDON Think not, Timnlthes, th4t. for wealth I pine; Though all the fates to.make me poor combine, 2Tay bounding o'er his banks with awless sway, Bore all my corns- all my flocks away. Of Jove's dread precepts. did I 'ere complain? SEre curse the rapid flood or dashing rain ? Ev'n now I sigh not for my former flore, But wilh the gods bad. deltin'd Delia poor..,TIMAN THES'.
C 29 1 T I M A N T H E S. 'Tis joy, my friend, to think I can repay The loss you bore by autumn's tigid sway. ont fertile meadow where the dairies {pring', Shall yearly pailure to--yoir heifers bring: Your flock.with mine fliall on o9n mountaijt,feed, . Cheer'd by the warbling f your:-tuneful reed : No more Ihall Delia's ever fretful fire Againlt your.hopes. and ardent love corirpire. Rous'd by her finiles you'll tune the happy lay, While. hills responsive waft your songs away. .,C:O R.Y D O N... Mlay plenteous crops your irksome labour crown, . lMay hood'\ink'd fortune cease her envious.,,frown;: May riches flill increase with growing years; Your flotks.be numerous as your silver hairs.,.,T:I MA-N-T:H-E S.;,. Bit lo ! the heats invite us at cur eare To court the twining (hades and cooling breeze;,C 3 Our..',.
'', ~ ~ t 30 l Our languid joints we'llpeaceably recline, And 'midJt the flowers and opening blossoms,dine. -P A S TO R A L IlL,N' I'G' H- T. 'AMYN'TAS; F LORELLUS.,A MYNTAS. \W7HILE yet gray twilight does his empire,hold, Drive all our heifers to the peaceful fold; With sullied, wing grim darknes!s oars along, And larks to nightingales resign the fqng: The weary ploughman flies the waving fields, To taRe what fare his humble cottage yields: As bees that daily thro' the meadows roam, Feed on the sweets they have prepar'd at home.,FLORELLUS.
[. 31 1 F.L O R EL LU S. The grafty meads that fmil'd serenely gay, Cheer'd by the everburning lamp of day; In dusky hue attir'd, are craiip'd 'viih colds, And springing flow'rets.fhlut their crimtifJln folds.,A M Y N T A S. What awful ilence reigns thro;ughout tihe iliade, The peaceful olive bends his drooping head; No found is heard o'er all the gloomy maze, Wide o'er the deep the fiery' meteors blazi'e.',FLO R E L L U S. The weft y'et tinig'd with Sol's effulgent ray, With feeble light illumes our homeward way; The olo vilg stars with keener lus(re bi'in, While round the earth their glowing axles turn.,-A M Y N T A:S. What mighty power conducts the flars on,high! Who bids these comets thro' our system fly!,Who
r 32 ]1 Who wafts the light'iing to the icy polel And ihro' .our regidns. bids. the thunders roll!,FL OR'E LL U S. But fay,. what' mightier, power..from nought.:,could raise The earth, the fun, and all.that fiery mate.. Of diRant flars that gild the azure Iky, And thro' the void in fetlled orbits flHy.,.A :M Y N T:A'S.. That. righteous power, before 'whose heavenly.;,eye The fRars are nothing, and the planets die; Whose breath diviue.fiipports our. mortal frame, Who made the lion wild, and lambkin tame.,FL.O. RE LL-U :;. At his command the bounteous spring returns; Hot (ilmiier, raging o'er th' Atlahric. burns; The yellow autumn crowns our fidltry toil , And winter's snows prepare the cumb'rous foil.,A MY NTA S.
C 33 3 A M YN.T A S. By him the morning darts her purple ray; To him the birds their early homage pay; Wilh vocal harmony the meadows ring, While swains in concert heav'nlv praises sing.,FLORE LL U S. Swav'd by his word the nutrient dews descend, And growing paftules to the moisture bend; The vernal blffroms sip -his falling flho ers; Ihe meads are garnifl'd with his opening,flowers.,AM. Y N T A For man, the object of his chiefell care, Fovls he hath t;,rm'd to wing the ambient air, For him tie fleer his-lufRy neck doth bend; Fiflies for him their 'caly fins extend.,FLORELLUS. Wide o'er the orient iky the moon appears, A foe to darkness and his idle fears;,Around
t 32 ]: Who wafts-the light'ning to the icy pole! And thro'.oar.regions. bids, the thunders roll!',F:L OR" E L L U S. But fay, what' mightierr power .from nought-,could raise. The earth, the fun, and all.that fiery maze.: Of difant flars-that gild the azure (ky, And thro' the void in fettled orbits fly .-,.A,:MY N T:A'S.' That righteous power, before 3whose heavenly.;,eye The stars are nothing, and the platets die; Whose breath diviue.fipports our. mortal frame, Who made the lion wild, and lambkin tame.,F L:O R E I L-U S. At his command the bounteous spring returns; Hot fi(iner, raging o'er th' Atlatiric. burns; The yellow autumn crowns our fiiltry toil, And winter's snows prepare.the cumb'rous foil,AMYNTAS.
33 AMY N T A S. By him the morning darts her purple ray; To him the birds their early homage pay; With vocal harmony the meadows ring, While swains in conctrt heav'nly praises sing.,FLO R E L L S. Swav'd by his word the nutrient dews descend, And growing pastures to the moisture bend; The vernal blufloms tip his falling fiboo ers; I he meads are garnifli'd with his opening,flowers.,A MY. N T A.. For man, the object of his chiefeft care, Fovls he hath tfrm'd to wing the ambient air, For him the fleer his-luRfy neck doth bend; Filies for him their scaly fins extend.,FLORELLUS. Wide o'er the orient iky the moon appears, A foe to darkness and his idle fears;,Around
r. 34- 3 Around her orb the stars in clusters shine. And distant planets tend-her silver (hrine.,A .MY'N T A S. Hush'd are the busy numbers of the day; On downy couch they sleep their hours away; Hail, balmy sleep, that southes the troubled,mind 1 Lock'd in thy arms, our cares a refuge find. Oft do you tempt us with delusive drenms, . When wild'ring. fancy darts her dazzling,beams; Asleep the lover with his mist'ress 'trays '1 hro' lonely thickets and untrodden ways; But when pale Cynlthia's fable ermpire's fled, And hovering slumbers shun the morning bed, Rous'd by the dawn, he wakes with frequent,sigh, And all his flattering visions quickly fly..,FLORE L LU S. Now owls and batts infest the midnight scene, Dire snakes invenom'd twine along the green;,Forsook
C 35 3 Forsook by man the rivers mourning glide, And groaning echoes l;fell the noisy tide, I Straight to our cottage let us bend our way; Ih y dcron\fy powers confess sleep's magic sway. ERafv and calm upon our couch we'll lie, While f.\eet reviinug slumbers round our pil-,lows fly.,T.aE S I M I L E. T noontide as Colin and Silvia lay Within a cool j, iFamine bower, buzteifly, wak'd by the heat of the day, VY as sipping the juice of each flower. ear the fliade of this covert a young ihepherd,boy, The gaudy brisk flatterer spies, Who held it as paltime to seek and destroy Each beautiful infe& that flies. rom ihe lily he hunted this fly to the rose, From the role to the lily again, ill weary with tracing its motions he chose To leave the pursuit with diidain.,Thet
Then Colin to Sylvia smilingly (aid,,Amnyntor has follow'd you long, From him like the butterfly flill have you fled!,Though w.obd by his musical tongue. Beware ii perfilfiig to start from his arms,,But with his fond wilhes comply; Come take my advice; or he's pali'd with yo,charms, Like the youth and the beautiful fly. Says Sylvia, Colin, thy simile's jua,,But flill to Amyntor I'm coy; For I vow Ibe's a simpleton blind that woul,trust A swain, when he courts to destroy.,THE C O M P L A I N T.,A PA S T O R A L. 'N E 4R the henrt of a fair spreading grot,ll'hofe .olinae fladed the green, djlJepherd, repining I;t love,,In an;uiijh was heard lo complain.
'I 37 3 0 Cupid! thou'wanton young boy!,Since, with thy invisible dart, Thou haft robb'd a fond youth of his joy, In return grant the wish of his heart. Send a Ihaft so severe from thy bow,(His pining, his sighs to remove), That STELLA, once wounded, may know How keen are the arrows of love. No swain once-fo happy as-I,,Nor tun'd with more pleafurethe reed My breaf never vented a figl.,,Till STELLA approach'd the gay mead. With-mirth, with contentment endow'd,,My hours they flew wantonly by; fought no repofe'in the wood, Nor from my few -leep would I fly. ow my reed have I carelessly broke, Its melody pleases no more; pay no regard to a flock That seldom hath wander'd before,,D
t 38 3 0 STELLA! whose beauty so fair,Excells the bright splendor of day, Ah! have you no pity to share,With DAM ON thus fall'n to decay? For you have I quitted the plain,,Forsaken my sheep and my fold; For you in dull languor and pain,,My tedious moments are told. For you have my roses grown pale,,They have faded untimely away; And will not such beauty bewail,A shepherd thus fall'n to decay. Since your eyes till requite me with scorn,,And kill with their merciless ray, Like a flar at the dawning of morn,,I fall to their luflre a prey. Some wvain who (hall mournfully go,To whisper love's sighs to the ihade, Will happ'ly some charity (how,,And under the turf fee me laid.,Would
C 39 ] Would my love but in pity appear,On the spot where he moulds my cold grave,. And bedew the green sod with a tear,,'Tis all the remembrance I crave. Io the fwaird then his visage he tuzrn'd;,'Twas wan as the lilies in May; Fair Stella may fee him inurn'd,,He hath fgh'd all his sorrows away..,RETIREMENT. OME inspiration from thy vernal bow'r,,To thy celestial voice attune the lyre; Smooth gliding trains in sweet profusion pour,,And aid my numbers with seraphic fire. Under a lonely spreading oak I lay,,My head upon the daified green reclin'd, The ev'ning fun beam'd forth his parting ray,.,The foliage bended to the hollow wind. There gentle sleep my acfing powers fuppreft,. The city's distant hum was heard no more;. et fancy fuffer'd not the mind to reft, Ever obedient to her wakeful power.,She
E 40 . She led me near a chryfial fbuntain's noie,).,Where. undulating waters sportive play.; Where a. young comely swain, with pleasing,voice, In tender accents sung his filyan lay. ?' Adieu, ye baneful pleasures of the town !," Farew.el, thou giddy. and unthinking,throng!: " Without regret your foibles I difiwn ;,{" Themes more exalted- claim the mnfei,song. " Your stony hearts no social feelings Ihare;-," Your fouls ofdiftant forrowsne'er partake; " Ne'er do you iiften to the needy prayer,," Nor drop a tear for tender pity's fake. " Welcome, ye fields, ye fountains,; and y,groves! i Ye flowery meadows and extensive plains i Where soaring warblers pour their plaintive,loves, "c Each landscape cheering; with, their voca,firains..
r 41 ] He Here rural beauty rears her pleasing shrine; " bhe on the margin of each fireamlet.,glows; " Where with the blooming hawthorn roses,twine, " Arid the.fair lily-of the valley grows. " Here chaflity may wander unaflail'd," Thro' fields where gay reducers cease to,rove; " Where open vice o'er virtue near prevail'd;," Where all is innocence, and all is love. " Peace with her olive wand triumphant::,reigns, . ( Guarding secure the peasant's humble bed; "-Envy is banifh'd from the happy plains,," And defamation's buly tongue is laid. " Health and contentment'ufher in the morn,.," With jocund. files they cheer the rural 1,swain, " For which the peer, to pompous titles born , " Forsaken sighs, but all.his sighs are vain.,I)3,C-Feo.T
C 42 . .J t~ For thie calm comforts of an easy mind,,ct In yonder-lonely cot delight to dwell; " And'leave the flatefman for the labouring,hind, " The regal pal-ace for th'e lowly cell; " Ye,. who. to wisdom. would, devote your,hours, " And'far from riot, far from difcbrd stray ! "; Look back disdainful on th'e city's' towers,,". Where pride, where folly point the flip.,p'ry way. ': Pure flows the limpid fiream inchryflaltides, " Thro' rocks, thro'ddens, and'ever verdant,vales, " Till to the town's' unhallow'd wall it glides,,..' Where ail its purity and lustre fails.,;p:;l ·~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,I
E 43 1 On the cold Month of APRIL 1771. Oh / wvho can hold a fire in his hand: By think'ing on the frosty Caucasus; Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite:, By bare imaginatibon of a feafti; Or tualloi' naked'i' December's snow, B.y thinking on fant.afhic.:Jummer's, hat:.,SJHAKESP. RICH. II. p OETS in vain have hail'd the op''ing fping,.,In tender accents woo'd the blooming maid, In vain have ta.ught the April birds to wing,Their flight thro' fields in verdant hue ar-,.,ray'd. The nmue in ev'ry seaso.n taught to filig. Amidst the defart snows by fancy's powers,. Can elevated soar, on placid wing,,To climes where spring her kindest influence,/howers..
r 44 ] April, once famous for the zephyr mild,,For sweets that early in the garden grow, Say, Jiow converted to this cheerless wild,,Rulhing with torrents of dissolving snow. Nurs'd by the moifure.of a gentle (hbwer,-,Thy foliage oft hath founded to-the breeze; Oft did thy choristers melodious pour.,Their melting numbers thro' the fhady-trees, Fair have I seen thy morn, in smiles array'd,.,With crimson blush bepaint the eastern sky; But now.the dawn creeps mournful o'er.the,glade, Shrowded in colours of a fable dye. So have I seen the fair with laughing eye,,And visage cheerful as the smiling morn, Alternate changing for the heaving sigh,,Or frowning afpedt of contemptuous scorn. Life ! What art thou? a variegated scene,Of mingl'd light and shade, of joy and woe. A sea where calms and forms promifcuou,reign, A fiream where sweet and bitter jointly flow,Mut,i
E 45 3 Mute are the plains; the shepherd pipes no,more; The reed's forsaken, and the tender flock, While echo, listening to the tempet's roar,,In silence wanders o'er the beetling rock. Winter, too potent for the solar ray,,Beltrides the blafl, ascends his icy throne, And views BRITANNIA, subjeA to his sway,,Floating emergent on the frigid zone. Thou savage tyrant of the fretful sky! Wilt thou for ever in our zenith reign ? To Greenland's seas, congeal'd in chillness, fly,,Where howling monsters tread the bleak,domain. Relent, 0 Boreas! leave thy frozen cell;,Resign to spring her portion of the year; Let weft winds temp'rate wave the flowing gale,,And hills, and vales, and woods, a vernal,aspe&t wear.,Written
46 3 Written at the HERMITAGE of BRAID,,near .EDINBURGH. W OULD you relish a rural retreat,,Or the pleasure the groves can inspire, The city's allurements forget,,To this spot of enchantment retire. Where a valley, and chryftaline brook,,Whose current glides sweetly along,, Give nature a fanciful look,The beautiful woodlands among. Behold the umbrageous trees.,A covert of verdure have spread, Where shepherds may loll at their ease,.,And pipe to the musical [hade: For lo! thro' each op'ning is heard,,In concert with waters below, The voice of a musical bird,,Wihofe numbers do gracefully flow. The bushes and arbours so green,,The tendrils of spray interwove, With foliage flelter the scene,,Anid form a retirement for love.,Here
E 47 1 Here Venus transported may rove,From pleasure to pleasure unseen, Nor.with for.the Cyprian grove,Her youthful Adonis to screen. Oft let me contemplative dwell,On a scene where such beauties appear; I could live in a cot or a cell,,And never think solitude near. A SATURDAY's EXPEDITION.,In mock HEROICS. Non mira, fed vera, canam. AT that sweet period of revolving time,When Phoebus lingers not in Thetis' lap, When twinkling flars their feeble influence,(bed, And scarcely glimmer thro' th' ethereal vault, ill Sol again his near approach proclaims, ith ray purpureal, and the blushing form f fair Aurora, goddess of the dawn, eading the winged coursers to the pole,or
t 48 3 Of Phoebus' car.-'Twas in that season fair, -When jocund summer did the meads array In Flora's rip'ning bloom-that we prepar'd To break the bond ofbufinerf,.and to roam Far from Edina's jarring noise a while.,Fair fmilPd the wak'ning morn on our design, And we with joy elate our march began For LBITH'S fair port, where oft EDINA'S COns The week conclude, and in carousal quaff Port, punch, rum, brandy, and Geneva fiong, Liquors too nervous for the feeble purse. With all convenient speed we there arriv'd, Nor had we time to touch at house or hall, Till from the boat a hollow thundering voice Bellow'd vociferous, and our ears aflailPd With, Ho! Kinghorn, oho! come firaight a',board. We fail'd not to obey the stern command, Utter'd with voice as dreadful as the roar Of Polyphemus, 'midst rebounding rodks, When overcome by rage Ulyites wiles. " Hiift up your fails," the angry skipper,cries, While fore and aft the busy sailors run,,And,I
t 49 3 And ioote th' entangled cordage--O'er the,deep 'ephyrus blows, and hugs our lofty fails, Which, in obedience to the powerful breeze, Swell o'er the foaming main, and kifs the wave.,Now o'er the convex surface of the flood Precipitate we fly-our foaming prow Divides the saline Ctream-on either fide Ridges ofyefly surge dilate apace; But from the poop the waters gently floiv And undulation for the time decays, Ineddies smoothly floating o'er the main. Here let the muse in doleful nuimbers'filg The woeful fate of those svhofe cruel stars lave doom'd them subject to the languid pow-,ers f wat'ry ficknefs-t'hough with itomach full Ofjuicy beef, of mutton in its prime, r dll the dainties luxury can boast, hey brave the elements.-Yet the rocking,bark, ruely regardless of their precious food, , onverts their visage to the ghafily pale, nd makes the sea partaker-of the sweets,E,On
r 5 31 On which they sumptuous far'd-And this the,cause Why those ofScotia's sons whose wealthy ftorp Hath blefs'd them with a splendid coach aud,fix, Rather incline to linger on the way, And cross the river Forth by Stirling-bridge, Than be fubjeded to the ocean's swell, To dang'rous ferries, and to sickness dire.,And now at equal distance flews the land; Gladly the tars the joyful talk pursue Of gathering in the freight--Debates ax ife From counterfeited half-pence-In the hold The seamen scrutinize and eager peep Through every corner where their watchful,eye Suspect a lurking place, or dark retreat, To hide the timid corpse of some poor foul, Whose scanty purse can scarce one groat afford,At length we chearful land on Fifan flore, Where sickness vani(hes, and all the ills Attendant on the paTage of Kinghorn. Our piliid cheeks resume their rosy hue, And empty flomachs keenly crave supply--,Wit,1
C 51 i With eager flep we reach'd the friendly inn, Nor did we think of beating our retreat Till every gnawing appetite was quell'd. Eastward along the Fifan coast we firay; And here th' unwearied eye may fondly gaze O'er all the tufted groves and pointed spires, With which the pleasant banks of Forth are,crown'd. Sweet navigable fiream I where commerce,reigns, Where peace and jocund plenty smile serene On thy green banks fits Liberty enthron'd, But not that shadow which the English youth So eagerly pursue; but freedom bought, When Caledonia's triumphant sword Taught the proud sons ofAnglia to bemoan Their fate at Bannockburn, where thousands,came Never to tread their native foil again. Far in a hollow den, where nature's hand Had careless flrew'd the rocks-a dreadful cave, Whose concave cieling echoed to the floods Their hollow murmurs on the trembling flore, Demanded our approach.-The yawning porch.,E 2. - Its.
E 5,z 3 Its massy fides difclos'd, and o'er the top The ivy tendrils twin'd th' uncultur'd fearn- Fearful, we pry into the dreary vault, Hoary with age, and breathing noxious damps. Here busy owls may unmolested' dwell In solitary gloom--for few there are Whose inclination leads them to review A cell where putrid fnlells infectious reign*.,Then turning westward, we our course pup.,sue Along the verge of Forthals briry flood,. Till we o'ertake the gradual rising dale Where. fair B.urntifand, rears her reverend,dome , And here the vulgar fign-pof, painted. o'er With imitations vile of man and horse, Of small beer froathing o'er th' unfhapelyjug, With courteous invitation, spoke us fair To enter in, and taste what precious drops. Were there reserved to moisten strangers,throats,. Too often parch'd upon the tedious way.,Afte * A large cave at a small diltance from Kinghorn, sup' posed, about a -entury ago, to have been the receptacl of thieves.,- ,..
[ 53- 1 After regaling here with fober cann-. Our limbs we plied, and nimbly meafur'd o'er- The hills, the vales, and the extensive plaiins, Which form the distance from BurntiJland'sr,port To Inverkeithing. Westward flill we went,. Till in the ferry-boat we loll'd at ease; Nor did we long on Neptune's empire float, For scarce ten porting minutes were elaps'd 1 ill we again on Terra Fina stood,, And to M'Laren's march'd, where roafled',lamb, With cooling lettice, crown'd our social board. Here too the cheering glass, chief foe to cares Ji Went briskly round; and many a virgin fair. Receiv'd our homage in a bumper ftll.. Thus having ficrific'd a jocund hour,-. To finiling mirth, we quit the happy scene, . And move progrelfive to Ldina's walls. Now fill returning eve creep'd gradual on, und the bright fun, as weary of the sky, 1eam'd forth a languid occidental ray; Whose ruby tiunctur'J radiance fainrly gleamn'd Jpon the airy cliffs and dillant lifires,,That -:
[ ' 54 3 That float on th' horizon's utnoft verge. So we, with feffive joints and ling'ring pace,. Moved slowly on, and did not reach the town, Till Phoebus had unyoked his.prancing freeds.,Ye Cons of Caledonia ! who delight, With all the pomp and pageantry. of fate,, To rol along in gilded affluence,. For. one poor moment, wean, your thought from.,these, And lift this humble strain., If you, like us,, Could brave the angry waters, be uprous'd, By the first. salutation to the morn Paid by the watchful cock; or be compell'd On foot.to. wander o'er the. lonely plain For twenty tedious miles; then should th,gout With all his racking pangs forsake your.frame. For he delights not to traverse the field, Or rugged deep, but prides hitn to recline On the luxuriance of a velvet fold, Where indolence on purple fopha lolls,
I 55 3 A BURLESQUE ELEGY ons the amputation of a,Student's Hair, before bis Orders. . SAD cataRtrophe ! 0 event dire ! I How shall the loss, the heavy loss be,born ? Or how the muse attune the plaintive lyre, To sing of Strephon with his ringlets ffiorn?- Say ye, who can divine the mighty cause, From whence this modern circumcilion,springs ? Why such oppressive and such rigid laws Are lill attendant on religious things?' Alas! poor Strephon, to the stern decree,Which prunes your tresses, are you doom'd,to yield ? Soon shall your caput, like the blasted tree,,Diffuse its faded honours o'er the field. Now let the solemn founds of mourning swell,,And wake fad echoes to prolong the lay; For hark ! methinks I hear the tragic knell;,This hour bespeaks the barberon his way.,0
[' 56 J 0 razor ! yet thy poignant edge suspend;,0 yet indulge me with a short delay, Till I once more pourtray my youthful friend,,'Ere his proud locks are fcatter'd on the clay.. "Ere the huge wig, in formal curls array'd,,With pulvile pregnant, fiall o'erflade his.,face; Or, like the wide .umbrella, lend its aid;,To banish lutre from the sacred place. Mourn, 0 ye Zephyrs! for, alas! no more,His waving ringlets shall your call obey! For, ah ! the ftubborp wig most now be wore,,Since Strephon's locks are fcatter'd on the,clay. Amanda, too, in bitter anguifl sighs,,And grieves the metamorphosis to fee; Mourn not, Amianda, for the hair that lies,Dead on the ground (hall be reviv'd for thee. Some flilful artist of a French frizeur,,With graceful ringlets shall thy temples bind, And cull the precious relics from the floor,,Which yet may flutter in the wanton wind.
t 57 2 The CANONGATE PLAY-HOUSE in RUINS.,A BURLESQUE POEM. y E few whose feeling hearts are ne'er e-,ftrang'd From soft emotions: Ye who often wear The eye of pity, and oft vent her sighs, When fad Melpomene, in woe.fraught firains, Gains entrance to the breast; or often smile When brisk Thalia gayly trips along Scenes of enlivening mirth; attend my song. And Fancy, thou ! whose ever-flaming light Can penetrate into the dark abyss Of chaos, and of hell: O! with thy blazing,torch The wasteful scene illumine, that the muse, M ith daring pinions, may her flight pursue, Nor with timidity be known to soar O'er the theatric tworld, to chaos chang'd.,Can I contemplate on those dreary scenes Of mould'ring desolation, and forbid The voice elegiac and the falling tear ! I'o more from box to box the basket pil'd,With
. 58 3 With oranges as radiant as the spheres, Shall with their luscious virtues charm the sense Of taste and frmell No more the gaudy beau, With handkerchief in lavender well drench'd, Or berganot, or roje uwatero pure, With flavoriferous sweets shall chace away The peltilential fumes of vulgar cits, W'ho, in impatience for the curtain's rife, Amus'd the lingering moments, and applied Thirfl-quenching porter to their parched lips.,Alas! Ihow sadly alter'd is the scene ? For lo those sacred walls, that late were,brufh'd By ruffling silks and waving capuchines, Are now become the (port of wrinkl'd time 1 Those walls, that late have echo'd to the voice OF stern King Richard, to the feat transform'd Of crawling spiders and detefred moths, Who in the lonely crevices reside; Or gender in the beams, that have upheld Gods, dermigods, and all the joyous crew Of thunderers in the galleries above.,0 Shakespeare! where are all thy tiufell'd,kings,,Thy
[ 59 1 Thy fawning courtiers, and thy waggish clowns? Where all thy fairies, spirits, witches, fiends, That here have gambol'd in nocurnal sport, Round the lone oak, or funk in fear away From the flrill summons of the cock at morn ? Where now the temples, palaces, and towers? Where now the groves that ever-verdant fmil'd? Where now the fireams that never ceas'd to,flow? Where now the clouds, the rains, the hails,,the winds, The thunders, light'nings, and the tempests,firong? Here flepherds, lolling in their woven bow'rs, In dull recitativo often sung Their loves, accompanied with clangor firong From horns, from trumpets, clarinets, bassoons; From violinos sharp, or droning bass, Or the brisk tinkling of a harpsichord.,Such is thy power, O music! such thy fame, That it has fabled been, how foreign song, Soft ifluing from Tenducci's slender throat, iHas drawn a plaudit from the gods enthron'd Round the empyreum of Jove himself,,High
t 6o 3 High feated on Olympus' airy top. Nay, that his fev'roas voice was known to,soothe The firill.ton'd prating of the females tongues) Who, in obedience to the lifelels song, All prostrate fell; all fainting died away In silent ecftacies of passing joy.,Ye who oft wander by the silver light Of filler Luna, or to church-yard's gloom, Or cypress {hades, if chance ffiould guide ybui',fleps To this fad mansion, think not that you tread Unconfecrated paths; for on this ground Have holy fireams been pour'd, and flow'rets,ftrew'd,; While many a kingly diadem, I ween, Lies useless here intolnb'd, with heaps of coin Stamp'd in theatric mint: offenceless gold! That carried not persuasion in its hue, To tutor mankind in their evil ways. After a lengthen'd series of years, When the unhallow'd spade Ihall difc6mpofe This mass of earth, then relics shall be founds Which, or for gems of worth, or Roman coins,,Well,S
t :x -5 Well niay obtrude on antiquary's eye. Ye spouting blades.! regard this ruin'd fane, And nightly come within those naked walls, To sied the tragic tear. Full many a drop Of precious inspiration have you fuck'd From its dramatic sources. O'! look here Upon this roofless and forsaken pile, And stalk in pensive forroxw o'er the ground. Where you've beheld so. many noble scenes. Thus, when trhe' mariner to 'foreign clime His bark conveys, where odoriferous gales, And orange-groves, and love-infpiring wine, Have oft repaid his toil; if earthquake dire, With hollow groanings and convulsive pangs, The ground hath rent, and all those beauties,foil'd, Will he refrain td shed the grateful drop, A tribute justly due (tho' seldom paid) To the blest mnemory of happier times'?,. D , . :-A ON . P . t :.D.-i\ M O N
I '62 3 D A M O N 'to his F RI EN D S.,A B A L LAD. .,·: i . . . T HE billows of life are fuppreft,,Its tumults, its toils disappear, Tor elinqufih the storms that are pat,,I think on the funnfine that's. near. Dame Fortune and I are agreed;,Her frowns I no longer endure; For'the goddess has kindly decreed,,That Damon 'no more hall be poor.,- ' Now riches will ope the dim eyes;,To view the increase of my store; And many my friend/hip will'prize,Who never knew Damon, before. But those I renounce and abjure,,Who carried contempt in their eye; 'May poverty flill be their dow'r,That to'uld look on misfortune awry!,Ye
C 63 1 Ye pow'rs that: weak, mortals govern, Keep pride at. his bay. from my mind ; 0 let me not haughtily. learn To despise thefew friends that were kind. For theirs was a feeling fiicerei : 'Twas free from delusion and art;; 0 may I that friendship revere,. And hold it yet dear to my heart: By which was-I ever forgot ? ' It was both my'phyfician and cure,. That frill found the way to my cot,. Altho' I was' wretched and poor:. 'Twas balm to my canker-tooth'd care; T'he wound of afflikion it heal'd; In distress it was Pity's soft tear,. And naked cold Poverty's shield.. Attend,'ye kind youth of the plain !' Who oft with my sorrows condol'd; ou cannot be deaf to the strain, Since Damon is mailer of gold.,F 2.
r 64 ' 1 have chose: a:fveet.fylyan:retreat,,Bedeqk'd w.ith the' beauties of spring ' Around my flocks nibble and bleat,:,While the rmuficai choristers firg. I force not the waters:to fland,In an artful canal..atmy door, But a river, at. Nature's command,,Meanders both limpid and pure. She's the goddess that darkens my bow'ra,With tendrils of ivy and vine; She tutors my shrubs and my flow'rs,,Her tafe is the Randard of mine. What a :pleafing.'diverfified group,Of trees has she Dfread o.er my' ground! She has taught the grave laryx to droop,,And the birch to. deal odours. around. For whom has: fie perfam'd my:groves?,For whom-has she clufter'd my'viie If friendship despise my alcoves,,They'll ne'er be.receffes of mine.,liH
r 65 J He who tafles his grape juices by fealtlh'i,Without chosen companions to 'fiare,- Is the bafefR of slaves to his wealth, And the pitifulminiion of care.- O come; and with Damon. retire- Amidfl the green umbrage embower'di -: Your mirth and your longs to inspire, Shall the juice of his vintage be pour'd. O come, ye dear friends of his yduth.!,Of all his good fortune partake; Nor think 'tis departing from truth, To fay 'twas .prefer.v'd for your fake° . aTe P E A S A N T, the HI EN and yomg:',D U C K-S.,.A: :FABLE:.: - i A HEN, of all the dung-hill crew .,The fairefl, fatelieft to view, Of laying tir'd, 'he fondly begs Her keeper's leave to hatch her eggs:,F 3
.r 66 3 He, dunn'd with the.itceffant cry, Was forc'd for peace' fake to comply;.: And in a month.the downy brood Came chirping round the hen. for food. : Who view'd them with parental eyes Of pleating fondintefs and' surprise, And was not at a loTs to trace Her likenefs:growing in their face; Tho' the broad Slils could well declare That they another's offspring were; So strong will.prejudices blind, And lead afray the easy mind.,To the green margin of the brook- The hen her fancied children took; Each young one shakes his unfledg'd wings, And to the flood by inftinc springs; With willing fRrokes they gladly fwvim, Or dive into the glafly fiream, While the fond mother vents her grief, And prays the peasant's kind relief. The peasant heard the bitter cries, And thus in terms of rage replies. " You fool! give o'er your useless moan, " Nor mourn miafortunes not your own;," But
C '6 -1 " But learn in wisdom to forsake " The offspring of the duck and drake." To whom the hen, with angry crest And scornful looks, herself addreft: "If rea/on were my conftantguide " (Of man the ornament and pridey, " Then should I boast a cruel heart, "And foreign feeling all depart; " But since poor I, by inflitm blind,.,Can-boaft no feelings so refign'd,. " 'Tis hop'd your reason will excuoe, "Tho' I youx counsel sage refuse, " And from the perils of the flood " Attempt, to save another's brood.",M O R A L. When pity, gen'rousnymph? pojlefl, And mov'd at will the human breast, No tongue its diliant sufferings told, But fle affiled, fle condol'd, And 'willing bore her tender part In all the feelings of the heart; But now from her our hearts decoy'd, To sense of others woes deflroy'd, A'e only from a elfijh view, Nor give the aid to pity due.,FASHION,
[ :68 ] FASHI ON. A' PO.E:M. Bred up whlere discipline .loft rare is, 14 Mi1itary Garden Paris. .,Hudibras, 0 .Nature, pareint goddess! 'at thy shrine,,prone tote eartth e emufe, inhumble,song, Thy aid implores: Nor wvill he wing her flight Till thou, bright form! in thy effulgence pure Deign'ft to look down upon her lowly state, And shed thy, powerful'influence benign.,Come then, regardless of yain fafhign's fools, Of all those vile enormities.of.fliape. That croud the.world, and with thee bring. Wisdom in.fober contemplation clad. To lash thoCe bold usurpers fromn the sage.,On that. blefs'd fpot-where the Parisian,dome' To fools the.ftealing hand of time displays, FASHI N her empire holds, a goddess. great!,Viem
69 ] View her a'nidft'the Millenarian train, On a'refplendent throne exalted high, Strangelj diverf'fi.ed with gew.gaw forms.. Her busy hand glides pleafureably o'er The darling novelties, the trinkets rare' That greet the fight of the admiring dames, Whose dear bought treasures o'er their native,isle Contagious spread, insed the wholesome air That cherifl'd vigour in Britannia's sons. Near this proud feat of Fashion's antic form A sphere revolves, on whbfe bright orb behold' The circulating mode of changeful dress, Which, like the image of the fun himself, Glories in courting thro' the diverse signs Which blazon in the zodiack of heaven. Around her throne coquets and petits beaux Unnumber'd fliine, and with each other vie In nameless ornaments and gaudy plumes. O worthy emulation! to excell In trifles fnch as there: how truly great'! Unworthy of the peevish blubbering boy; Crusl'd in his childhood by the fondling nurse, Who, for Come favourite toy, frets and pines.,Amongst
E 70o Amongst the proud .attendants of this lhrine, The wealthy, young and gay Clarinda draws,,, From poorer objec&s, the aftoninh'd eye? Her looks, her dress, and her.affecled mien. Doom her enthufiafl keen in Fashion's train:. White as the covered Alps, or wintry face ,. Of snowy Lapiand, her toupee uprear'd ,. Exhibits to the view a cumbrous mars Of curls high nodding o'er her polish'd brow; From which redundant flo.vs the Bruflels: lace, .With pendant ribbons too of various dye, Where all the coloursin th' ethereal: bovy. Unite, and blend, and tantalize the fight.,Nature i to thee alone, not Fashion's pomp, ·Does' beauty owe her all-commanding eye. From the green bosom of the wat'ry main, Array'd by thee, majestic Venus rose, With waving ringlets carelessly diffus'd,. Floating luxurious o'er the rellefs surge. What Rubens then, with his enliv'ning hand, Could paint the bright vermilion of her cheek, Pare as the rofeat portal.of the eat, That opens to receive the cheering ray Of Phoebus beamiig from the .orient iky ?,For
C E l 3 For sterling beauty iieeds no faint efiays, Or colourings of art, to gild her 'more: She is all perfec. And, if beauty fail, Where are those ornaments, those rich attires Which can reflect a luRre on that face, Where she with light innate disdains to shine? Britons, beware of Fahlion's luring wiles: On either hand, chief guardians of her power, And sole dictators of her fickle voice, Folly and duil effeminacy reign ;' ' Whose blackedl magic and unhallow'd spells The Roman ardour check'd;-their strength,decay'd, And all their glory fcatter'd to the winds.,Tremble, 0 Albion ! 'for the voice of fate Seems ready to decree thy after;fall. By. pride, by luxury, what fatal ills:' Unheeded have approach'd thy mortal frame! How many foreign 'weeds: their heads have,rear'd In thy fair garden? Hasaen 'ere their flrength And baneful vegetation taint the foil, To root out rank disease, which loon must,spread,
If no blefs'd antidote will purge away Falhiot's proud minions from our seagirt ile, On the 'i EA' H of 'ofMr 'T OM AS',L A'N C( A S'If'l'R', -Comedian. L A S, poor Thom ! how .oft, with merry,. heart, Have we beheld thee play .the Sexton's apart. Each comic heart nuft..now be griey'd to fee.. The -Sexton's dreary part perform'd on thee,,On feeing a LADY paint heifelf.. WV HEN, b.y- some inifiadviet.ure crofsd:, ',The bankcerihatth his fortune loft Credit his inftant.nbned .firppies, .. And f6r ;a jioment bliids our eyes.:. .. - So, Delia, when. her;beauty';s flowi, :... Trades on a bottom not her own,'...: Ahd -.abours t9 ct cape. detedtio(,,,- :' . By puttingon a false comiplexio.- , -,EXTEMPORE
C: 73 EXTEMPORE, On feeing STANZA's addresed to Mrs HART-,.LEY Comedian, 'wherein Jhe is described as resembling MARY jtueen of SCOTS. HARTLEY reienmbles Scotland's Oueeii,,S6me bard enraptur'd cries; A flattering bard he is, I ween, Or else the PAINTER LIES.,S O N G. HERE winding Forth adorns the vale,,Fond Strephon, 'once a flepherd gay, id to the rocks his lot bewail, And thus addrefs'd his plaintive lay:,Julia more than lily fair, "More blooming than the kindling role, How can thy breast relentless wear " A heart more cold than winter's finows.,Yet G
£ 74 3,II. " Yet nipping winter's keeneft-fway,," But for a fhort-liv'd space prevails; at Spring-time returns and cheers each swain,," Scented with Flora's fragrant gales. i Come, Julia, come, thy love obey,," Thou mistress of angelic charms-! ·' Come friling like the morn in May,," And center in thy Strephon's arms.,III. - Else haunted by the fiend despair,," He'll court some solitary grove, " Where mortal foot did ne'er repair,,'" .But swains opprefs'd by hapless love. c From the once pleasing rural throng,,c Remov'd, he'll thro' the defart tray. c Where Philomela's mournful song, c Shall join his melancholy:lay.. :,.. . . . . . . ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~..,CONSCIEN
E 75 3 CONSCIENCE. AN ELEGY. ,-.-- Leave her to heaven, And to the thorns that in her bofim lodge, To prick and fling her.,Shakespeare; O choiring warblers flutter in the sky;,Phoebus no longer holds his radiant. sway; ¥hile nature with a melancholy eye,. Bemoans the loss of his departed ray. happy he whose conscience knows no guile i He to the fable night can bid farewel; rom cheerless objects close his eyes a while, Within the silken folds of sleep to dwell. lyfian dreams shall hover round his bed, His foul shall wing, on pleasing fancies born, o shining, vales where flow'rets lift their,head, Wak'd by the breathing zephyrs of the morn.
[ 74 3,II. 4' Yet nipping winter's keenet sway,,c But for a Ihort-liv'd space prevails; " Spring-time returns and cheers each fvain,i Scented with Flora's fragrant gales. "' Come, Julia, come, thy love obey,," Thou miRrefs of angelic charms.! a' Come smiling like the morn in May,," And center in thy Strephon's arms.,III. , Else haunted by the fiend despair, " He'll court Come solitary grove, c" Where mortal foot did ne'er repair,," .But swains opprefs'd by hapless love. " From the once pleating rural throng,," Remov'd, he'll thro' the defart Rtray. - Where Philomela's mournful song,," Shall join his melancholy. lay.",CONSCIENI
C 75 3 CONSCIENCE. AN ELEGY.,---Leave her to heaven, And io the thorns that in her bosom lodge, To prick and fling. her.,Shakespeare. O choiring warblers flutter in the sky; Phoebus no longer holds his radiant. sway; While nature with a melancholy eye,. Bemoans the loss of his departed ray. happy he whose conscience knows no guile! He to the fable night can bid farewel; From cheerless objects close his eyes a while, Within the silken folds of sleep to dwell. Elysian dreams (hall hover round his bed, His foul shall wing, on pleasing fancies'born, ro shining vales where flow'rets'lift their,head, Wak'd by the breathing zephyrs of the morn.,G2 2u G 2,But.
E 76 ] But wretched he whose foul reproachful deeds,Can thro' an angry conscience wound his,reft - His eye too oft the balmy comfort. needs,,Tho'" slumber seldom. knows him. as. her,,guest. To calm the-'raging tumults of his foul,,If wearied nature should an hour demand, Around his bed the hfeeted fpedres howl,,Red with revenge the grinning furies sand. Nor state nor grandeur can his.pain allay;-,Where. shall he find a requiem to his woes? Power cannot chace the frightful gloom away,,Nor music lull him to a kind repose. Where is the' king that Conscience fears to,chide?. Conscience, that candid judge of right and,wrong, Will o'er the secrets of each heart preside,,Nor aw'd. by. pomp,. nor. tam'd by foothbil,song..,,J ai.4'
C 77 3 Againfl repining at FORTUNE. T HO' in-my narrow bounds of rural toil,.,No obelijk or splendid column rife; Tho' partial Fortune Rill averts her smile,,And views my labours with condemning:,eyes; Yet all the gorgeous vanity of-ftate I can contemplate with a cool disdain; Nor shall the honours of the gay and great E'er wound my bosom with-an envious pain.. Avails it ought the grandeur of.their.halls,. With all the glories of the pencil hung, If Truth, fair Truth! within th' unhallowv'd.,walls, Hath never whirper'd with her seraph,tongue? Avails it ought, if-mufic's gentle lay lath oft been echo'd by the founding dome ;' If music cannot sooth their griefs away, Or.change a wretched to a happy home ?,G 3.,Tho'
i 7&· 1 Tho' Fortune Ihould invest them. with her-,spoils, And banilh poverty with look severe, Enlarge their confines, and decrease their:toils,,Ah . what avails if he increase their care ? Tho' fickle Ihe disclaim my mofs.grown cot,. 'Nature, thou look'ft with more impartial,eyes: Smile thou, fair Goddess:! on my foberIlot;,I'll neither fear her fall, nor court her rife. When early larks Ihall:ceafe the matin song;,When Philomel at night resigns her lays; When melting numbers to the owl belongs,Then shall the reed be silent in thy praise. Can he, who with the tide of ortune fails,,More pleasure from the sweets of nature,lhare ? Do Zephyrs waft him more ambrosial gales,,Or do his groves a gayer livery wear To me the heav'ns unveil as pure a sky;,To me the flowers as rich a bloom disclose g,The
[: 79 1 The morning beams as radiant to my eye, And. darkness guides me to as sweet repose.. If luxury their lavilh dainties piles,,And still atteiids upon their fated hours, Doth health reward them with her open,smiles, Or exercise enlarge their, feeble pow'rs ? 'Tis not ii richest mines of Indian gold, That man thisjewel happiness can find, If his unfeeling.breaft, to virtue cold,,Denies her ntrance to his ruthless mind. Wealth, pomp and.honour are but gaudy toys;.,Alas! how poor the pleasures they impart! Virtue's the faered. source. of all the joys That claim a lfting mansion in theheart.,The
t: So 1 The DECAY of FRIEN.D'SH IP;,A PASTORAL ELEGY. W H E N gold, man's sacred deity, did,smile, My friends were plenty, and- my sorrows,fewr; Mirth, love, and bumpers did my hours beguile,,And arrowed Cupids round my slumbers,flew. What Ihepherd then could boast more happy,days? My lot was envied by each humbler swain; Each bard in smooth eulogium sung my praise,,And DAM oN listen'd to the guileful Rrain. FLATTERY, alluring as the Syren's lay,,And as deceitful thy inchanting tongue, How have you taught my wavering mind to,stray, Charm'd and attracted by the baneful song?
C A 1 My pleasant cottage, flelter'd from the gale,,Arose with moss, and rural ivy bound; And scarce a flow'ret in my lowly vale,,But was with bees of various colours crown'd, Free 'o'er my lands the neighbouring flocks,could roam; How welcome were the swains and flocks,to me! The lhepherds kindly were invited home, To chace the hours in merriment and glee. To wake emotions in the youthful mind,,Strephon with voice melodious tun'd the,Cong; Each fClvan youth the founding chorus' join'd, Fraught with contentment 'midst the fetrive,throng. .My cluf'ring grape coinpens'd their magic skill, The bowl capacious fwell'd in purple tide; To fliepherds, liberal, as the chryftal rill, Spontaneous gurgling from the mountain's,fide.
[ 82 3 But ah! there youthful sportive: hours are,fled; These scenes of jocund mirth are now no,more No healing slumbers tend my humble bed,,No friends condole the sorrows of the poor. And what avail the thoughts of former joy ?,What comfort bring they in the adverse,hour ? Can they the canker.worm of care destroy,,Or brighten fortune's discontented lour? He.ho hath long travers'd the fertile plain,,Where nature in its fairest vefure finil'd, Will he not cheerless view the fairy scene,,When lonely wand'ring o'er the barren wild? For now pale poverty, with haggard eye,And rueful aspet, darts her gloomy ray ;, My wonted guelts their proffer'd aid deny,.,And from the paths of Damon feal away.,Thus,
.83 Thus, when fair summer's lustre gilds the lawn,,When rip'ning blofloms deck the spreading,tree, The birds with melody salute the dawn,,And o'er the daisy hangs the humming bee. But when the beauties of the circling year,In chilling frosts and furious forms decay; No more the bees upon the plains appear, No more the warblers hail the infant day. To the lone corner of some distant shore,,In dreary devious pilgrimage I'll fly, And wander pensive where deceit no more,Shall trace my footsteps with a mortal eye. There solitary saunter o'er the beach,,And to the murm'ring fnrge my griefs dif.,close; There hlall my voice in plaintive wailings,teach The hollow caverns to resound my woes. Sweet are the waters to the parched tongue;,Sweet are the bloffomis to the wanton bee;,Sweet
f 84 3 Sweet- to the flepherd founds the lark's shrill,.... .. Song; , ..... .. *But sweeter far is SOLITUDE to me. Adieu, yer fields, where I have fondly firay'd!,Ye swains who once' thfe fav'rite DAM ON,knew . ;. Farewel, ye sharers of my bounty's aid !,Ye sons of base INGRATITUDS adieu !,S COTS
:- - _ SCOTS. POEMS.,AN ECLOGUE. .TWAS e'ening whan the fprecled gowvd,.fpink fang, Whan new. fa'an dew in blobs oi chryftal hang; Than Will and Sandie thought they'd wrought,eneugh, nd lnos'd their fair toil'd bwfen frae the,plengh -: efore they ca'd their cattle to the tbwn, he lads to draw thir breath e'en fat them,down: o the. siss sturdy aik they lean'd their backs, Vhile honest Sahdie thus began the cracks.,H SANDIE.
t 86 3 SAN DIE. Yence I could hear the laverock's (hrill-tun'd,throat, And liften to the clattering gowdfpink's note Yence I cou'd whittle cantilly as they, To owfen, as they till'd my raggit clay; But now I wou'd as leive maif lend my lugs To tuneless puddocks croakin i' the boggs; I sigh at hame, a.field am dowie too, To sows a tune I'll never crook my mou.,WILLIE. Foul fa me gif your bridal had na been Nae langer bygane than fin Hallow.e'en, I cou'd hae tell'd you but a warlock's art, That some daft lightlyin quean had ftos,your heart; .Our. beasties here will take their e'ening phic An' now fin Jock's gane hame the byres,muck, ..Fain wou'd I houp nmy.fiend will be inclin To gie me a' the secrets o' his mind: Heh! Sandie, lad, what dool's.come owrye no That you to whistle ne'er will crook your mi,SANDI,I
r- 87- 3 SA NDIE, Ah !-Wilie, Willie, i : may date my wae, Frae what beted me on my bridal day; Sair may I rue the hour in which our hands Were knit thegither in the haly bands; Sin that !'thrave fae ill, in troth I fancy, Some fiend or fairy, nae fae very chancy, Ilas driven me by pauky wiles uncommon, To wed this flyting fury of a woman.,W I LL I E; Ah! Sandie, aften hae I heard:you tell: Amang-the lasses a' flie. bure the bell; And fay, the modeft:glances o' her ein Far dang: the brightest beauties-o' the green ; You ca'd her ay fae innocent, fae young, thought she kent na how to use her tongue.,SA N D IE. Before I married her, I'll take my aith,. er tongue was never louder than her breath.; at now its turn'd fae fouple and fae bauld, Fhat Job himfell cou'd scarcely thole the:,fcauld.,W I L. I;E. H 2
[- s8 ]; WILLIE.: Lat her yelp on, be yo as'cal.misa'n mouse, Nor lat your whilht be heard into the house; Do what he can, or be as loud's she please, Ne'er; mind her flytes but set your heart at ease, Sit down and blaw your pipe; nor faufh your,thumb, An' there's my hand she'll tire, and soon sing,dumb; Sooner shou'd winter cald confine the sea, An' lat'the fma'eft o' our burns rin free; Sooner-.at Ydle-day ihall- the birk'be dreg, Or birds in. sapless bff'es big tlieir' :neff, Before a tonguey woman's: noisy plea Shou'd ever 'be a cause to dantan. me.,SAN.DI[E. Weel cou'd I this abide, but oh ! I fear '11l soon be twin'd o' a' my warldly gear; My kirnftaff now flands gizzand at the door, My cheefe-rack toom that ne'er.was toom be.,fore; My ky may now rin rowtin to the hill, And on the nakit yird their milknefs spill;,Slh
C 89 3 She feenil lays her hand upon. a turn, Neglests the kebbuck, and forgets the kirn; I vow my hair-mould milk would poison dogs,. As it flands lapper'd in the dirty cogs.,Before the feed I fell'd my serra cow, An wi' the profit cost a fiane.o' woo'.: lIthought, by priggin, that she might hae friun A plaidie, light, to screen me frae the fun; But though the filler's scant, the cleedin dear, She has na ca'd about a wheel the.year., Las ouk but ane I was frae.hame a day, Buying a threave or twa o' bedding ftrae: O' ilka -thing the-woman had her will, Had fouth-o' meal to bake, and hens to kill:: But hyn awa' to Edinbrough scoured she To get a making o' her fav'rite tea;: And 'cause I left .her not the weary clink,', She fell't the very tranchers frae iny bink...,W-L.L L I E.. Her tea! 'ah! wae betide sic colfly gear ., Or thein that ever wad the price o't spear. Sin'my auld gutcher first the warld knew, Fouk had-na fund the Indies, whare it.grew.,-H3
[ 90 . I mind myfell, it's nae fae lang fin syne, Whan Auntie Marion did her flamack tyne, That Davs.our gardiner came frae Apple-bogg, An' gae her tea to tak by way o' drog.,SANDIE. Whan ilka herd for cauld his fingers rubbs, An' cakes o' ice are seen upo' the dubbs; At morning, whan frae pleugh orfauld I come, I'll fee a braw reek rising frae my lum, An' ablins think to get a rantin blaze To fley the frost awa' an' toast my taes; But whan I Ihoot my nose in, ten to ane I:I weelfardly fee my ane hearthftane; She round the ingle with her gimmers fits, Crammin their gabbies wi her nicest bits, While the gudeman out-by maun fill his crap Frae the milk coggie, or the parritch cap.,WILLIE. Sandie, gif this were ony common plea, I lhou'd the lealefl o' my counsel gie; Butitnak'or meddle betwixt man and wife, Is what I never did in a' my life.
91 '] It's wearin on now to the tail o' May, An' just between the bear feed and the hay; As lang's an orrow morning may be spar'd, Stap your wa's east the haugh, an' tell the,laird; For he's a man weel vers'd in a' the laws, Kens baith their outs and ins, their cracks and,flaws, An' ay right gleg, whan things are out o'joint, At fattlin o' a nice or kittle point. But yonder's Jock, he'll ca' your owfen hame, And tak thir tidings to your thrawart dame, That ye're awa' ae peacefu' meal to prie, And take your supper kail or sowens wi' me.
] N 'V Si A Or TI TI,[ 92 3 AN ECLOG UE, To tbe Memory of Dr WILLIAM WILKTE,,late Profefor of Natural Philosophy in the: Univeifity of St Andrews.,GEORDIE AND DAVIE. .,GEORDIE.. LLAW fast, my reed,' and kindly to my |,- maen, Veel may ye thole a fast and doie strain;- lae mair to you shall flepherds in a ring, . 1Vi' blythnefs Ikip, or lasses lilt an' sing; ic sorrow now maun fadden ilka eie, n' ilka waefu' shepherd grieve wi' me. .,D A V.I E.. Wharefor begin a fad an' dowie tirain,. banish lilting frae the Fifan plain? ho' fitnmer's gane, an' we nae langer view-; he blades o' claver war wi' pearls o' dew. .,Cauld!
C 93. 3 Cauld winter's bleakefti blasts we'll eithly cowr, Our eldin's driven, an' our har'ft is owr; Our rucks fu' thick are ftackit i' the yard, For the Yzilefefl' a fautit mart's prepar'd; The ingle-nook supplies the simmer fields, An' aft as mony gleefiu' maments yields. Swyth man! siing a' your sleepy springs awa', An' on your canty whitfle gie's a blaw: Blythnefs, I trow, maun lighten ilka eie, An' ilka canty callant sing like me.,GEORD IE. Na, na; a canty spring wad now impart Just threefald sorrow to my heavy heart. Thof to the weet my ripen'd aits had fawn, Or llake-winds owr my rigs wi' pith had blawn, To this I cou'd hae said, " I carena by," Nor fund occasion now my cheeks to dry. Crosses like thae, or lake o' warld's gear, Are naething whan we tyne a friend that's,dear. Ah ! w:ies me for you, Willy ! mony a day Did I wi' you on yon broom.thackit brae Hound ass my sheep, an' lat them careless gang To harken to your cheery tale or fang;,Sangs
94 3 Sangs that for ay, on' Caledonia's firand, Shall fit the foremost' mang her tunefu' band.,I dreamt yestreen his deadly wraith I saw Gang by my ein as white's the driven fiaw; hly colley, Ringie, youf'd an' yowl'd a' night, Cour'd an' crap near me in an unco.fright,: I waken'd fley'd, an' fhookbaith lith an' limb; A cauldnefs took ime, an' my fight grew dhi; I kent that it forfpak approachin wae When my poor doggie was difurbit fae. Nae sooner did the day.begin to dawn, Than I beyont the know fu' speedy ran, Whare I was keppit wi' the heavy tale That sets ilk dowie fangfter to bewail.,DA VIE. An' wha on Fifan bents can weel refuse To gie the tear o' tribute to his mule ?- Fareweel ilk cheery spring, ilk canty note, Be daffin an' ilk idle play forgot; Bring ilka herd the mournfu', mournfil' boughs, Rosemary fad, and ever dreary yews; Thae lat be lteepit i' the faut, faut tear, To weet wi' hallow'd draps his sacred bier,,Whafe
:.95 3 Whafe fangs will ay in Scotland be rever'd, Whilefiow-gawn owuen turn the flow'ry fwaird; While bonny lambies lick the dews of spring, While gaudf/sen whittle, or while birdies .ing.,GEORDIE. 'Twas na for weel tim'd verse or fangs alane, He bore the bell frae ilka (hepherd swain. Nature to him had given a kindly lore, Deep a' her mystic ferlies to explore: For a' her secret workings he could gie Reasons that wi' her principles agree. Ye saw yourfell how weel his mailin thrave, Ay better faugh'd an' fiodit than the lave; Lang had the thriftles an' the dockans been In use to wag their taps upo' the green, Whare now his bonny riggs delight the view, An' thrivin hedges drink the caller dew *.,DA VIE. They tell me, Geordie, be-had sic a gift That scarce a Rarnie blinkit frae the lift,,But Dr Wilkie had a farm near St Andrews, in which he made remarkable improvements;
E g6 -35 But he wou'd some auld warid' name for't find, As gart him keep it frefily in his mind: 'For this rome ca'd him an uncanny wight; The clash gaed round, ." he had the second,fight;" . .. .. A tale that never fail'd to be, the pride Of grannies fpinnin at the ingle: fide.,G E O R.D I.E.,\ But now he's gane, an' Fame that, whan alive, Seenil lats ony o' her vot'ries thrive, Will frae his fhinin name a) motes withdraw, And on her loudest trump his praises blaw. Larng may his f'cred ban's untroubl'd ress ! Lang may his truffin gowans gay be dreft ! Scholars and bards unWheard of yet shall' come, And (lamp memorials on.his grassy tomb, Which in yon antient kirk-yard shall remain, Fam'd as the urn that hads the MANTUAN,twain.,ELEG Y
C 97 3 E LE G Y, On the Deatb of Mr DAVID GREGORY, late Profejor of Mathematics in the University of St Andrews.,OW mourn, ye college mailers a'! And frae your ein a tear lat fa', Fam'd Gregory death has taen awa',Without remeid; The fkaith ye've met wi's nae that fma',,Sin Gregory's dead. The students too will kmifs him fair, To school them weel his eident care, Now they may mourn for ever mair,,They hae great need; They'll hip the naift fek o' their lear,,Sin Gregory's deadi He could, by Euclid, prove lang fine A ganging point compos'd a line; By numbers too he cou'd divine,,Whan he did read, That three times three just made up nine;,But now he's dead.,I
r 9g 1 In Algebra weel' fill'd he was, An' kent fu' well proportion'7 laws; He cou'd make clear baith B's and A's,Wi' his lang head; Rin owr surd roots, but.cracks or flaws;,But now he's dead. Weel vers'd was he in architefture, An' kent the nature o' the felior, Upon baith globes.he weel cou'd leaure,,An' gar's tak held; Of geometry he was the he(or;,But now he's dead. Sae weel's he'd fley. the students a', Whan they war fkelpin at the ba', They took leg bail and ran awa',,. Wi' pith and fpeid; We winna get a sport fae braw,Sin Gregory's dead. Great 'cafion hae we a' to weep,. An' deed our 'kins .in mourning deep, For Gregory death will fairly keep,To take his nap; He'll till tlhe refurre5ion .leep,As found's a tap.,THI
C 99 ] THE DAFT-DAYS. OW mirk December's dowie face Glours our the rigs wi' four grimace, While, thro' his minimum of space,,The bleer.ey'd fun, Wi' blinkin light and stealing pace,,His race doth run. From naked groves nae birdie sings, . To Ihepherd's pipe nae hillock rings, The breeze nae od'rous flavour brings,From Borean cave, And dwyning nature droops her wings,,Wi' visage grave.. Mankind but scanty pleasure glean Frae fnawy hill or barren plain, Whan Winter, 'midst his nipping train,,Wi' frozen spear, Sends drift owr a' his bleak domain,,And guides the weir.,1Auld I 2
[ Ito 3 Auld Reikie! thou'rt the canty hole, A bield for mony caldrife foul,, Wha snugly at thine ingle loll,,Baith warm and couth. While round they gar the bicker roll,To weet their mouth, When merry Yule-day comes, I trow You'll fcantlins find a hungry mou-; Sma' are our caress our ftamacks fou,O' gusty gear, And kickflaws, strangers to our view,,Sin Fairn-year. Ye browfter wives, now buik ye bra, And fling your sorrows far awa'; Then come and gies the tither blaw,'Of reaming ale, Mair precious than the well of Spa,,Our hearts to heal. Then, tho' at odds wi' a' the warl', Amang ourfells we'll never quarrel; The' Discord gie a canker'd snarl,To spoil our glee,,As
[ xoI1l 3 As lang's-there's pith into the barrel.,We'll drink and 'gree. Fidlers, your pins in temper fix, And rose't weel your fiddle-flicks, But baaifi vile Italian tricks,From out your quorum1 Nor fortes wi' pianob mix,,Gie's Tulloch Gorum. For nought can cheer the heart fae weil As can a canty Highland reel,. It even vivifies the heel.,To lkip and dance: Lifelefi.is he wha canna feel,Its influence.. Let mirth abound,let social cheer Invest the dawning of the year; Let blithesome innocence appear,To crown our joy, Nor.envy wi' sarcastic sneer,Our bliss destroy. And thou, great god of -Ayua Vita ! Wha'fways the empire of this city,,.3,When-..
t 102 1 When fou We're fonitiimes capernoity,.,- : . Be thou prepar'& To hedge us frae that black banditti,,The City.Guard. The KING'S BIRTH-DAY .i Edinburgh. Oh ! qualis hurly-burly suit, si forte vidiffes.,Polemo.Middinia, SING the day fae aften sung, Wi' which our lugs hae yearly rung,. In whafe loud praise the Muse has dung,A' kind o' print; But wow ! the limmer's fairly flung,There's naething in't. I'm fain to think the joys the fame In London town as here at hame, Whare fock of ilka age and name,,Baith blind and cripple, Forgather aft, fy for fhatne-!,. : To drink and tipple.,(
E 163 - 0 Muse, be kind, and diina fali us. To flee awa' beyont Parnaflus, Nor seek for Helicon to wafll us,,That heath'nifh spring; Wi' Highland whisky scour our hawres,,And gar us sing, Begin then, dame, ye've drunk your fill, You woudna hae the tither gill? You'll trust me, mair wou'd do you ill,,And ding you doitet; Troth 'wou'd be fair agains my will,To hae the wyte o't.. Sing then, how, on the fourtb of June, ' Our bells screed ass a loyal tune, Our antient cafile flhoots at noon,,Wi' flag.ftaffbukit . Frae which the soldier blades come down,To cock their mulket. Oh will*ain's! MONs MEG, for you, 'Twas firing crack'd thy muckle mou; What black milhanter gart ye spew,Baith gut and ga'.,I
C 104 1 I:fear they, bang'd thy belly fu' ..,Againftthe law. Right seldom am Igi'.en to bannin, But, by my faul, ye was a.cannon,. Cou'd hit a man,. had he been ftannin,In /hire o'Fife, Sax long Scots miles ayont Clackmannan,.,And tak his life. The hills in terror wou'd cry out, And echo to thy dinfome .rout;. The herds wou'd .gather in their nowti,That glowr'd wi' wonder, Haflins afraid to bide thereout,To hear- thy thunder, Sing likewise, Muse, how blue-govwn bodies, Like fear.craws new ta'en.down frae woodies, Come here to cafl their clouted duddies,,And get their pay:- Than them, what magistrate mair proud is,On king's birth-day ? On this great day the city-guard, In military art well lear'd,
r toS 1 Wi' powder'd pow and ihaven beard,,Gang thro' their fuantions, By hostile rabble seldom spar'd,: Of clarty unAions. Ofoldiersl for your ain dear fakes, For Scotland's, alias Land of Cakes, Gie not her bairns sic deadly pakes,,Nor be fae rude, Wi' firelock or Lochaber aix,,As spill their blude. Now round and round the Jerpents whiz, Wi' hifling wrath and angry phiz; Sometimes they catch a gentle gizz,,Alake the day ! And singe, wi' hair-devouring bizz,,Its curls away. Shou'd th' owner patiently keek round, To view the nature of his wound, Dead puffie, dragled thro' the pond,,Takes him a lounder, Which lays his honour on the ground,As flat's a flounder.,The
[ io6 . The Muse maun: also now implore Auld wives to.feek ilk hole and bore; If baudrins flip but tQ the door,-,I fear, I fear., She'll no lang shank upon all-four,This time o' year. Next day each hero tells his news, · 0' crackit crowns and broken brows, And deeds that here forbid the Muse,Her theme to swell, Or time mair precious abuse,Their crimes to tell. She'll rather to the fields reforti. Whare music gars the day seem ihort, Whare doggies play, and lambies sport,On gowany braes, Whare peerless Fancy hads her court,,And tunes her lays.,C A L L'E R
. jxo7 :i CALLER OYSTERS. Happy the man iwho, free from care and flrife, In silken or in leathern put:e retains- - A splendid fJilling.: He nor hears aivith pain.- Newv oyfers. cry'd, nor sighs for chearfid. ale.,PHILLIPS. O f a' the waters that can hobble,A fiiflin yole or salmon coble, And can reward the filhers trouble;,Or south or north, There's nane fae spacious and fae noble,As Firth o' .Forth. In her the fiate and-codlin fail, The eil fou fouple wags her tail,. - i i' herrin, fleuk, and mackarel,,,::?And whitens dainty: Their fpindle.fhank sthe labflers trail,,Wi' partans plenty. AULD REIKIE'S sons blyth faces wear; September's merry month is near,,That
E Io8 3 That brings in Neptune's caller cheer,,New oyRers fresh; The halefomeft and nicet gear,Of filh or flesh. O! then we needna gie a plack For dand'ring mountebank or quack, Wha o' their drogs fae bauldly crack,,And fpred sic notions, As gar their feckless patient tak,Their Rinkin potions. Come prie, frail man ! for gin thou art sick, The oyfler is a rare cathartic, As ever do&or patient gart lick,To cure his ails; Whether you hae the head or heart-ake,,It ay prevails. Ye tiplers, open a' your poses, Ye wha are faufh'd wi' plouky nores, Fling owr your craig sufficient doses,,You'll thole a hunder, To fleg awa' your fiimmer roses,,And naething under.,What
C o19 ] Whan big as burns the gutters rin, Gin ye hae catcht a droukit skin, To Luckie Middlemnif's loup in,,And fit fu snug Oe'r oyflers and a drain o' gin,,Or haddock lug... . When auld Saunt Giles, at aught o' clock, Gars merchant lowns their chopies lock, There we adjourn wi' hearty fock,To birle our bodles, And get wharewi' to crack our joke,,And clear our noddles. Whan Phwbus did his windocks sleek, How aften at that ingle cheek Did I my frofly fingers beek,,And tale gude fare I trow there was nae hame to seek,.Whan fieghin there, While glakit fools, o'er rife o' cash, Pamper their weyms wi' foufoi trash, I think a cbiel may gayly pass;,He's no ill boden,-That K
[ ilo 3 That gus his gabb .i' oyster Cauce,,And hen "weel soden. At Miffelbrotgh, . and. eke Neevhavef, The fifier-wives ;ill get top livin, Whan lads gang out on Sunday's even,To treat their joes, And tak of fat pandours a prieven,,Or nluffel brose.: Thanfometimes 'ere they flit their doup, They'll ablins a' their filler coup For liquor clear frae cutty stoup,,To weet their Wizen, And swallow o'er a dainty soup,,For fear they gizzen. _' ye wha canna tand fae sicker, Whan twice you've toom'd the big ars'd bicker Mix caller oyflers wi' your liquor,,And I'm your debtor, If greedy pries or drouthy vicar,Will thole it better.,BRAII
BRAID CIAITH. E wha are fain to hae your name Wrote in the bonny book of fame, Let merit nae pretension claim,To laurel'd wreath, But hpa ye weel, baith back and wame,,In gude Braid Claith.. He that fontie ells o' this may fa,. An' flae-black hat on pow like fnaw,. Bids bauld to bear the gtee awa',,Wi' ar this graith, Whan bienly clad wi' Ihell fu' braw,O' gude Braid Claith. Waefuck fdr him' wha has na fek o't ! For he's a gowk they're sure to geck at, A chiel that ne'er will be refpekit,While he draws breath, Till. his four quarters are bedeclit,Wi' gude Braid Claith. On Sabbath.days the barber spark, Whan he has done wi' fcrapin wark,,K VWi'
[ 112 3. Wi' filler broachie in his fark,,Gangs trigly, faith I Or to the Meadow, or the Park,,In gude Braid Claith. Weel might ye trow, to fee them there, That they to have your haffits bare, Or curl an' fleck a pickle hair,,Wou'd be right laith, ,Whan pacing wi' a gawfy air,In gude Braid Claith. If ony mettl'd ftlrrah green For favour frae a lady's ein, He maunna care for being seen,Before he sheath His body in a scabbard clean,0' gude Braid Claith. For, gin he come wi' coat thread-bare, A seg for him Ihe winna care, But crook her bonny mou' fu' fair,,And scald him baith. Wooers shou'd ay their travel spare,Without Braid Claith,,Braid
E' I13 1 Braid Claith lends 'ock an unco heefe, Makes mony kail-worms butter-flies, Gies mony a dpocor his degrees,For little fkaith: In short, you may be what you please,Wi' gude.Braid Claith. For thof ye had as wife a snout on As Shakespeare or Sir Isaac Newton). Your judgment fouk wou'd hae a doubt on,,I'll tak my aith, Till they cou'd fee ye wi' a suit on,0' gude Braid Claith.. E L E G Y, On the DEAT : of ScoTs Mus i -. Mark it, Ciefario; it is old.and plain, The fpinJlers and the knitters in the fin, And the free maids that weave their. thread with honcs, Do life to chant it. .,Shakespeare's Twelfth Night . O N Scotia's-plains,. in days of yore, .,When lads and lasses tartan wore . . Saft Music rang on ilka lhore,,In hamely weid; But harmony is now no more,,And music dead, K 3,RounaS.;
·E 114 i Round her the feather'd choir would wing,. Sae bonnily flie wont to sing, And fleely wake the sleeping firing,.,Their fang to lead,. Sweet as the zephyrs of the spring;;,But now fle's dead. Mourn ilka nymph-and-ilka swain, Ilk funny hill and dowie glen; Let weeping fireams and Naiads-drain,Their fountain head;: Let echo swell the dolefu'. frain,,Since music's dead. Whan the fast vernal breezes cal' The. grey.hair'd Winter's fogs awa', Naebody than is heard to blaw,,Near hill or mead,. On chaunter, or on. aiten. fraw,,Since music's dead. Nae lafles now, on simmer days,. Will lilt at bleaching of their claes;. Nae herds on Yarrow's bonny braes,,'.~* ~ Or banks of Tweed, Delight to chant their hameil lays,.,Since music's dead.,At
E 115 ] At glomin now the bagpipe's diumib, Whan weary owfen hamneward come; Sae sweetly as it wont to bumn,,And Pibrachs fkreed) We never hear its warlike hum;,For music's dead. Macgibbon's gane.: Ah ! waes my heart.! The man in music maift expert, Wha cou'd sweet melody impart,,And' tune the reed, Wi' sic a flee and pawky art;,But now he's dead. Ilk carline now may grunt and grane, Ilk bonny-laffie make great mane, Since he's awa', I trow there's nane,Can fill his Read; The blytheft fangfter on the plain!,Alake, he's dead! Now foreign sonnets bear the gree,- And crabbit queer variety Of founds frelh sprung frae Italy,,A. bastard breed!-,Unlike
Jnlike that faft.tongu'd melody,Which now lies dead. Cou'd lav'rocks at the dawning day, Co1'd lintirs chirming frae the Ipray, Or todling burns that smoothly play,O'et gow den bed, Compare wi' Birks of Indermay ?,Bnt now they're dead. O SCOTLAND ! that cou'd yence afford To bang the pith of Roman sword, Winna your sons, wi' joint accord,,To battle speed? And fight till Music be reftor'd,,Which now lies dead. HALL OW-FAIR AT Hallowmas, whan nights grow lang,,And flarnies shine fu' clear, Whan fock, the nippin cald to bang,,Their winter hap.warms wear,,Near c[ x6 3
[ 117 j Near Edinbrough a fair there bads,,I wat there's nane whafe name is, For frappin dames and sturdy lads,,And cap and stoup, mair famous,Than it that day. Upo' the tap o' ilka lum,The fun began to keek, And bad the trig made maidens come,A lightly joe to seek At Hallow-fair, whare browfters rare,Keep gude ale ori the gantries, And dinna fcrimp'ye o'-a ikair,0' kebbucks frae their pantries,,Fu' faut that day. Here country John in bonnet blue,,An' eke his Sunday's claife on, Rins after Meg wi' rokelay new,,An' Lappy kifles lays on; She'll tauntin fay, Ye filly coof!,Be o' your gab mair fpairin; He'll tak the hint, and crielh her loof,Wi' what will buy her fairin,,To chow that day.,Here
C 1 1 8 I. Here chapmen billies tak -their fland,.,An' flaw their bonny wallies; Wow, but they lie si' gleg ass hand.,To trick the filly fallows: Heh, Sirs ! what: caird and tinklers come,.,An' ne'er-do-weel horfe-coupers, An' fpae-wives fenzyingtto be dumb,,Wi' a' ficlike landloupers,,To thrive that day. Here Sawny cries, frae Aberdeen;," Come ye to me fa need: - . " The braweft shanks that e'er were seen," I'll fell ye cheap an' guid. cc I wyt they are as protty hose," As come frae .weyr or leen: " Here tak a rug, and shaw's your pose :," Forfeeth,'my ain's but teem,- An' light this day." Ye wives, as ye gang thro' the fairs,0 mak your bargains hooly ! O' a' thir wylie lowns beware,,Or segs they will ye fpulzie.,For
c .I I'9 3 For fairn.year .Meg Thamfon got,,Frae thir mischievous villains, A fcaw'd bit o' a penny note,,That loft a fore o' fIillins,To her that day. The dinlin drums alarm our ears,,The serjeant screechs fu' loud, " A' gentlemen and volunteers," That wish your country gude, cc Come here to me, and I fall gie,"c Twa guineas an' a crown, ac A bowl o' punch, that like the lea," Will foum a lang dragoon," Wi' ease this day." Without the cuiffers prance and nicker,,An' our the ley-rig scud; In tents the caries bend the bicker),An' rant an' roar like wud. Then there's sic yellowchin and din,,Wi' wives and wee-anes gablin, That ane might true they were a-kin,To a' the tongues at Babylon,,Confus'd that day.,Whaa
·120 IJ Whan Phobus ligs in Thetis lap,,Auld Reikie gies them ffielter, Whare cadgily they kifs the cap,,An' ca't round helter-fkelter. Jock :Bell gaed furth to play his freaks,,Great cause he had to rue it, For frae a flark Lochaber aix,He gat a clamiehewit,,Fu' fair that night. " Ohon !" quo' he, " I'd rather be," By sword or bqgnet flickit, i" Than hae my crown or body wi," Sic deadly weapons nicket." Wi' that he gat anither firaik,Mair weighty than before, That gar'd his feckless body aik,,An' spew the reikin gore,,Fa red thatnight. He peching on the cawsey lay,,O' kicks and cuffs weel fair'd;. A Highland aithr the serjeant gae,," She maun pe fee our guard.",Out
C 12I1 Out fpak the weirlike corporal,," Pring in ta drunken sot." They.trail'd him ben, an' by my faul,,He paid his drunken groat,For that neift day. Good Cock, as ye come frae the fair,,Bide yont frae this black squad; There's nae sic savages elsewhere,Allow'd to. wear cockade. Than the itrong lion's hungry maw,,Or tusk o' Ruffian bear, Frae their wanruly fellin paw,Mair cause ye hae to fear,Your death that day. A wee soup drink dis unco weel,To had the heart aboon; It's good as lang's a canny chiel,Can fland Ileeve in his floon. But gin a birkie's owr weel fair'd,It gars him aften stammer To pleys that bring him to the guard,,An' eke the Coundil.cha-a'tMir,,WXi' nfame that day. L
^/^-^.x^C*^^^':^^^^^^^
A G L 0 S S A R,0 R E'X P L A N A T:I,OF THE,0 N S C O T S W O R D S contained in thl,foregoing POEMS.,A ABLINS,Aboon Aik A-kin Aith Ane As leave Awyt,Perhaps Above Oak Related Oath One As soon I'm sure B Bang'd Bannin Bauld,Crammed, defeated Swearing Bold,Bawdrins L 2
. 124 3 Bawdrint Bend Bicker Bink Blatles Blaw 1l3ear ey'd Blinkit Blobs Bogs Bonny wallies Braw Bridal Browflers Burns But Bofsit .Buifes Ca'd Cairds Callant Canny Canrilly Carline Cap Capernoity Cauld Chirming Claife Clamihewit Clattering Claver Cleiding,C at Drink Wooden dish Shelf Leaves A Drink Dim eye'd Look'd hastily Globules Marflhy ground -ewgaws Fine Wedding Brewers Rivulets Without Deck'd& Bushes C,Drave Vagrants Youth IHappy Cheer fully Old womr in Small wooden dish BHad temper'd Cold Warbling Cloaths A severe blow Chattering Clover Clatihing,Clouted
c 125 3 Clouted duddies Cogs Cost Colley Cowp Couth Cowr Cour'd Cracks Cracks Crap Crap Cutty fRoup,Patched cloaths Wooden dishes Bought Sheep dog Exchange Social Recover Was terrified. . Discourse Rents Crept Stomach A quartern measure D Daffin Dandering Dauntin Dinnling Doited Dowie Draigled Droukit Dubbs Dule Dwining,Diversion Wandering To dejedt Shaking Crazy, stupid Gloomy Drenched Wet Pools Vexation Decaying E,Evening Fewel Easily,Fairlnyear 1.3
r 126 .3 Fairn.year Faugh'd Fauld Faufll Feck Feckless Ferlies Fley Fley'd Fling Fliting Flung Forfeeth Foul fa me South Fraiks Furth,Lafl year Fallow'd Fold Trouble A quantity Void of strength Myferies To fright Afrighted Throw Scolding Baffled, deceived Forsooth 111 befall me Plenty T'ricks Out of the house G Gab Gabbling Gacd Gart Gaw Gawfy air Gebbies Geck Giminers Gizz Gizzand Gleg Glowrs,Mouth Speaking Went Caus'd. Gall , Looking biE Stomachs Slight Women Wig Rent with Clever Looks,heat, d y: Gowdfpink
Gowdfpink Graith Grannies Gudeman Gufly Gutcher Guid,E 1:7 31,Goldfinch Accoutrements Grandmothers The matter of the hous£e Tafly Grandfather Good H Haffits Haly Halefomeft Hame Hameit HarRf Haugh Haufes Heefe Helter-fkelter Hind awa' Hobble Hooly,Cheeks Holy Wholefomeft Home :Homebred Harvest - Low ground by the fide,of a river 'Throats A lift Cheerfully and quickly Hence away Move Slow r Every Sweethearts Fire K,Look Cheese Ilka Joes Ingle Keek Kebbuck
[ 128 - Kent na Kirnftaff Kittle Ky Lapper'd Lave Laverock Lealeft Lear'd Leem Lightlying Ligs Lounder Lows'd Lugs Melin Mirk Mifiaunter 1Mon Nicker Nook,Knew not Churnflaff Difficult Cows L,Curdled The reft Lark Surest -learned Loom Despising Lies Severe blow Loosed Ears M,Farm Dark MiRhap Mouth N,Neigh Corner 0 Ohon OrroW owiei,Alas .Spare Oxen,paiks
E 129 3 Paiks Parridge Pawky Pleys Pow Prie Priggin Protty Puddocks Rair Raggit Rang Ranting Rigs Rowt Rowting Rue ucks rug,, Strokes Pottage Cunning Discords Head To tafle Intreating Pretty Frog Dame .R Roar Rugged Reigned JBrifl Ridges To make a noifb ,Lowing Repent Stacks Good bargain s S.ir Sair'd Saul Sautit mart,Sore Serv'd Soul Salted bull or cov,Scald
E 3jo 1 Scald Scold Scant Scarce Scantlins Scarcely Scour - Make clean Scour'd Ran Scrimp Spare Scud Run Soum : ' Swim Seenil Seldom Shanks Stock;ngs Shank Walk Shoon Shoes Sicker Sure Siller Money Sle black Sloe black Sleek Smooth Steepit Socked Souple Pliant Sows A low whistle Smaeft Smallest Snodit K ept in order Snowt Votehead Spae-wives Fortune.tellers Spew Vomit Spindle.fhank Small limbs Spreckled Spot:ed Springs Tunes Spulzie Spoil Stamack Stomach Stane A flone weight Stap your wa's Step your way Stark Stout Starnie Star Steghin Gorgirfg Steeve Firm Stickit Stabbed Stown Stole,Strae
t 1'3t · Strae Straik Strappin Swyth,Straw Stroke LuHty Hafle T Tail of May Tauntin lTeemn Thole Thrawart Thuds Tine Toddling Trigly Trou Tulloch Gorum To in Tufl Twin'd,End of May Scoffing ilupty Suffer Bad temper'd Blows Lose Gently moving Genteely Believe Name of a tune Emply Tooth Depriving U Ulco,Strange W Wae WVae betide WVame VTan'ruly WVarlock Vee-anes,Woe Woe befall W omb Unruly V,'izzard Children,WVeelfar'dly
Weelfar'dly Wee soup Weet Weir Weirl;ke Weer Whifit Willawils Wizzen -Wook Wreath W ud Wylie,'-i '13^ ;I,Cleverly, with a good,grace Small quantity Moisture War Warlike W ire Be silent Well-a day Throat Week Spirit Alad Cunning Y Yellochin Yelp Yence Yird Youf'd . Yule.day,Screaming To make a noise Once Earth Barked Christmas -F..1 N1 5 ,- --