BRITISH EDUCATION: 
"Or, The Source of the | 
'D1S 0 RD REES 
OF 


GREAT BRITAIN. 


BEING 


An Ess Ax towards proving, that the Imm orality, 


Ignorance, and falſe Taſte, which ſo generally pre- 
vail, are the natural and neceſſary Conſequences of 
the preſent defective SysTEM of EDUCATION. 


By THOMAS SHERIDAN, A. M. 


Hoc opus, hoc ſtudium, parvi properemus, et ampli, 
Si volumus patriz, fi nobis vivere chari. Hor. 
A NEW EDITION. 
Reviſed by the AuTHoR, with Additions and Alterations. 


—_— 


2» 


— 


L F 0-4 


Printed for EDwARD and CyaRLes DII IV, in the Poultry, 
MDCCLAXIX, + 


=, 


DEDICAT I O N. 


F there be in England one man 

of conſequence who has under- 
ſtanding enough to comprehend the 
following Work, and who has vir- 
tue and ſpirit enough to exert 1 
his beſt endeavours to carry into 
execution the Plan of Education 
founded upon this Work, to him 
is this book inſcribed; and the 
author will eſteem himſelf happy 
to have an opportunity of pre- 
fixing ſuch a name to a future 
Edition. 


A 3 TO 


TO THE READER. 


T is now ſome years fince this 
1 Work firſt made its appearance 
in the world, upon a ſubject of the 
greateſt importance. The end of 
it was no leſs than to lay open the 
true ſource of all the diſorders and 
evils under which this country has 
ſo long laboured ; and, at the ſame 
time, to point out an eaſy, ſafe, 
and adequate method of cure. Nay, 
farther, to ſhew that there was ſo 
much virtue in the propoſed reme- 
dy, as not only to reſtore us to per- 
fect health, but afterwards to raiſe 
Great Britain, in every thing that 
can dignify human nature, or con- 
tribute to the happineſs of ſociety, 
to ſuch a pitch, as far to exceed all 
other nations that either do, or 
ever did, exiſt upon earth. Surely, 
this was an object chat demanded 
the higheſt attention, and it was 
1 well 


viii TO.THE READER. 


well worth while to examine with 
the utmoſt care, whether what was 
advanced upon this ſubject was 
well-founded. Accordingly, it did 
undergo a ſtrict examination by 
many perſons of diſtinguiſhed learn- 
ing and capacity ; and the author 
can now with confidence affirm, 
upon the authority of ſome of the 
cooleſt, cleareſt, and ableſt heads 
in Great Britain, that he has fully 
made out his point. As a collate- 
ral proof of this, it 1s certain, that 
there never has been any attempt 
made to anſwer or refute the Worx, 
or any part of it; tho”, could they 
have done it with any proſpect of 
ſucceſs, it was incumbent on all 
thoſe who are concerned in the pre- 
ſent mode of education, to have 
made the attempt. 

The Author had promiſed, if the 
Work met with approbation, to lay 
before the Public a Plan of Educa- 
tion 


TO THE READER, ix 
tion for the young nobility and 
gentry of this country, conform- 
able to the principles laid down 
in His Book, Many unforeſeen 
events, of which it is not neceflary 
to inform the world, retarded his 
defign ; ſo that it is but lately he 
has been able to publiſh ſuch a 
plan, Let it be examined with can- 
dour ; and he will yenture to ſay, 
that there is no one of common 
ſenſe who will not allow that the 
execution of it would be attended 
with the greateſt advantages both 
to the ſtate and to ſociety in gene- 
ral; and thoſe of a deeper reach of 
thought, would evidently ſee, that 
it would be the ſure way, as the 
great biſhop of Cloyne has, it is 
hoped, prophetically ſaid, not 

only to prevent our final ruin, 
but alſo to render us a more 


6 
0 b and flouriſhing people than 7 
ever. 


if 


x TO THE READER, 
If the importance of the ſubject 
will not attract attention; if the 
plaineſt conviction of the truths ſet 
forth in the plan, and of the prac- 
ticability of the deſign, will not 
rouſe thoſe whoſe buſineſs, whoſe 
duty, whoſe intereſt it is to ſee it 
carried into execution, it would be 
a more fatal ſymptom of our ap- 
proaching deſtruction than all that 
have yet appeared. It would be a 
proof of ſo profound a lethargy, 
added to a complication of the 
worſt diſorders, in the body politic, 
as muſt be a ſure fore- runner of 
diſſolution; and of ſuch inſanity 
of 'mind, as can be accounted for 
upon no other principle but one, 
Quos Jupiter vult perdere prius dementat. 
Thoſe whom God has doomed to 
deſtruction, he firſt infatuates. 


3 


CON 


0 0 NT ENT S. 


BOOK 'L 


CAP. I. Or the Power of Education. / 
Page 1 

Crap, IT. Our preſent Syſtem of Education 
_ conſidered.” 17 
Caray. III. 07 the principles upon which 
a @ ſyſtem of education ſhould be founded. 34 
Cu p. IV. Of the different pr mciples of the 
di TY governments known i in the world. 


37 
C: nA. V. That our e can not be 


ſupported by any of theſe three principles, 
- tho" they may be all uſeful to it. 40 
Cnrae. VI. The neceſſity of another prin- 
. Ciple to regulate theſe. 41 
CHAP. VII. Of the peer and extent. of 
bis principle. 44 
Cup. VIII. Of the * of virtue. 45 
Cu Ap. IX. The metbods taken in antient edu- 
cation to promote and encourage virtue. 46 
Cray. X. The Study of oratory neceſſary to 
us in every point where it was ſo. to the 
antients. 48 


Char. 


i CONTENTS. 


CaaP. XI. That there is one point in which 
* the fludy of oratory is eſſentially neceſſary 
to us, but was not at all ſo to the anti- 
ents. 52 
Cuay. XII. 2. hough virtue might have been 
4. ſufficient principle to have ſupported the 


antient republicks, yet it would not be 
fuſfictent to ſupport our form of govern- 
ment, notwithſtanding it be _P ne- 
cefſary to it. 54 
CAT. XIII. That the cauſe of the failure 
and decay of the principle in theſe, was, 
that the means to ſupport it were inade- 
guate; and that thoſe means, or indeed 
any of human invention, muſt be of infinitely 
teſs efficacy with us than with them. 58 
Cray. XIV. That. from the nature of our 
tuation and the peculiarity of our cir- 
cumſtances, nothing could poſſibly make us, 
or continue us a great and flouriſhing 
people, but an immediate revelation from 
God. 70 
CnaP. XV. Of the means by aobich the 
principle of religion may be ſupported, and 
the chief cauſe of it's decay ſhewn to ariſe 
from a material defect in education. 81 


CHAP. 


CONTENTS. xiii 


Cray. XVI. I/ conſequences of this defecs 
both to church and ſtate, and the great 
advantages whith would reſult to both 


| from the ſtudy of oratory. 139 
BO OE UI. 

CAP. I. of the excellence and uſe of the 

Greek and Roman languages. 165 


CAP. II. That the perfection of the Greek 
and Roman languages was chiefly owing 
to the ſtudy and practice of oratory. 176 
 Cnap. III. That the Greek and Roman 
languages owed their flability and per- 
manence to oratory. With ſome animad- 
verſions upon the neglect of fludying the 
Engliſh language. 182 
Chae. IV. Cauſes of the neglect hitherto 
of fludying the Enghſh language. 193 
Cray. V. That thoſe canſes no longer ope- 
rate, nor are of any force. The great 
neceſſity of Nudying our language ſhewn. 
sf [ x 206 
CAP. VI. That the means to arrive at 
perfection in our language are equally in 
our power, that cur inducements to it 
; are 


Xiv CONTENTS. 


are ftronger, and that we. might in all 
probability compaſs our end in a ſhorter 
ſpace of time, and with leſs labour, than 
the Romans did. | 224. 
Cray. VII. That if our language were once 
brought to a ſtandard, we, have more 
powerful and certain means to fix and pre- 
ſerve it in it's late of perfection, than 
they had. 230 
CAP. VIII. That we have it more in our 
power to propagate our language in other 
countries, and make it univerſal, than they 
had. 254, 
Cnay. IX. Whether our language be ca- 
| fable of a ſuſficient degree perfection 
to make the fludy of it general, and to 
afford as good a profpett of it's duration 
as the Latin. 261 
Cup. X. Of the means whereby our lan- 
guage may be refined and aſcertained. 3 50 


BOOK III. 


Cc nA. I. Of the liberal arts, and their 


ſource.” | 36r 
CHay. II. That the liberal arts never flou- 
riſhed, or arrived at perfection in any 
cDun- 


CONTENTS ww 


country, however otherwiſe remarkable 
or knowlege, and ingenuity, where the 
Audy and — of oratory was neglect- 
ed. 367 
Chr. III. That in thoſe countries where 
the liberal arts arrived at their higheſt 
pitch of glory, there were no traces of 
them, previous to the ſtudy of oratory. 369 
Cnavy. IV. That the liberal arts always fol- 
lowed oratory in their progreſs towards 
perſection; arrived at their ſummit ſoon 
after that did; declined as that declined z 
and, when that was baniſhed, wholly diſ- 
appeared. 371 
Crap. V. That it is much more probable 
that oratory raiſed and ſupported the 
liberal arts, than that the liberal arts 


raiſed and ſupported oratory. 377 
CAP. VI. Of Poetry, Mufick, and Paint- 
ing, and their Source. 382 


Cray. VII. That it is almoſt impoſſible that 
the maſters in theſe ſeveral arts ſhould ar- 
rive at perfectian, without the lights and 
 effiſtance borrowed from oratory. 410 
CnapP. VIII. Of the encouragements given 
to the ſeveral artiſts during the flouriſh- 

- ing ſtate of. oratory. 425 


Crap. 


x CONTENTS. 


CRHAP. IX. Objeftion to the above Gele. 
drawn from the works of the modern ar 


tlie; and anſwer to the objettion, - — 5 
Crap. X. That the ſuppoſed perfection; 
modern works, has not been ſettled by any 


© abſolute . but by perde — 


Cray. XI. That the few ada. which 
_ - have been produced fince the revival of 
. the arts, bave been indebted for their 
chief value to orutor j. 4353 
Cnar. XII. Good conſequences. to Great 

Britain, ſhould the above e be found 

to be true. 462 
cur. XIII. Whether it is not probable 

that the arts might arrive at as high a 
- pitch in this „ 6s at Athens or 


Rome? Mn „ 
_ Cray, XIV. The chief Shorders of Britain 
| and fo one Jource. nn w_hs © 


BRITISH 


2 R 1 1 RX s H. 
EDUCATION, Ke. 


fo 


BOOK 1. CHAP. "0 
c the Power of E ducation,” 


MIDST the general outcry 
"x againſt the enormity of the 
times, the endeavours of our 
3 beſt writers and preachers to 
Aneren =D the attention of the legiſ- 
lature, ſo often rouzed of late by his 
majeſty's paternal care, and the number 
of penal laws made to check the progreſs 
of vice, the torrent is ſtill too ſtrong to 
de Gefiſted, - and theſe weak damms are 
borne away : irreligion, immorality, and 
corruption, are viſibly e e 
a new ſtrength... 


= 


A 


2 BRITISH Deer I. 


If a phyfician ſhould find his patient 
ſtill growing worſe under the regitnen 
* preſcribed, he will not obſtinately 
perſiſt in the ſame courſe; but will try 
new remedies. Yet if he be not ac- 
quainted with the ſource of the diſorder, 
he may go through the whole materia 
medica to no purpoſe. The firſt ſtep to- 
wards a Cure, is to know the cauſe of the 
diſeaſe, and when that is removed the 
effect will ceaſe of courſe. 
When a nation is ſunk to a certain de- 
gree of depravity and corruption, penal 
laws are of little force. Their efficacy 
depends upon their execution; and when 
that is rendered difficult, or impoſſible, 
they become of little or no uſe. When 
| the bulk of mankind are good, it is the 
intereſt of each individual to detect and 
puniſh a villain : when they are bad, it 
becomes their intereſt to ſcreen him from 
puniſhment, for crimes, of which they are 
equally guilty, and conſequently equally 
liable to the ſame puniſhment. Thuscthe 
ſting of the law is taken out, or often. 
turned upon the innocent. The few good 
are awed by the 3 confederacy 
F amongſt 


Caae.T. EDUCATION. © 3 
amongſt the numerous wicked. If they 


attempt to bring an offender to juſtice, 
they are often branded with the name of 
informers; they are baffled by pack'd ju- 
ries, and ſuborned witneſſes: or if they 
carry their point, it is at ſuch an expence 
as will deter moſt people from following 
their example. At ſuch a criſis, the vir- 
tuous few, finding their endeavours to 
ſerve the publick ineffectual, or even dan- 
gerous, retire as ſoon as poſſible from the 
buſy world, and leave the field open to 
the vicious to range in at large without 
controul. They who ſtill keep their poſts, 
and remain in the legiſlature as guardians 
to their country, may waſte their time in 
making new penal laws, for new crimes 
and the fertile invention of man in wick- 
edneſs, will furniſh them with ſufficient 
employment. Theſe laws, if not executed, 
are at beſt uſeleſs; but when ſwelled to an 
immoderate ſize, become a greater evil 
than the diſcaſe. 

When the law is trampled under fave 
and puniſhment no longer dreaded, how 
can we expect that weaker inſtruments 
was have any effect? The hal of ſatyr 


B 2 cannot 


4 BRITISH _Boox1. 


cannot prevail againſt men, who cloath - 
themſelves with vice, as with an armour ; 
nor will the ſting of ridicule be felt by 
| thoſe, who are invulnerable to ſhame. 

Such ſymptoms in a'ſtate are ſure prog- 
noſticks of approaching ruin; and its end 
cannot be far off, unleſs prevented by ad- 
equate remedies. As the diſeaſe ariſes 
from an univerſal corruption of manners, 
it can be cured only by a general refor- 
mation. Our manners depend upon our 
notions and opinions, and our opinions 
and notions are the reſult of education. 
This, and this alone, muſt neceſſarily be 
the ſource of all our diſorders; and here, 
and here only, muſt we therefore look for 
a cure. 

| Wiſdom and knowlege, are the pa- 
rents of religion and virtue; folly and ig- 
norance, of vice and impiety : where . 
wiſdom and knowlege are wanting in a 
nation, virtue and religion will hardly be 
found; and when ignorance and folly 
reign, vice and impiety will be ſcen tri- 
umphant. The only way then to bring 
about a reformation of manners, is to re- 
ſtore wiſdom, and knowlege. This can 

zan be 


CAP. I. EDUCATION, 92 
be effected only by a right ſyſtem of edu- 


cation. Wiſdom, knowlege, and conſe- 
quently virtue, are not to be acquired any 
other way. If we look into the hiſtory 
of all nations, we ſhall find their flouriſh- 
ing ſtate owing to the proper education of 
their youth. What but that raiſed the 
petty ſtate of Athens to its amazing pitch 
of glory and power? What but that made 
Rome the miſtreſs of the world? By that 
the Chineſe government hath remained 
unaltered upwards of two thouſand years, 
notwithſtanding ſeveral inteſtine commo- 
tions, and. ſeveral conqueſts by foreign 
enemies. Nay it {till continues the ſame, 
without the leaſt variation, altho' it was 
intirely ſubdued by the Tartars, in whoſe 
poſſeſſion it has been for more than a cen- 
tury. : 

But the prodigious power a education 
was never ſeen ſo ſtrongly as in the Spar- 
tan commonwealth; for by the force of 
that alone, was their ſtate preſerved in vi- 
gour for upwards of ſeven hundred years, 
upon principles directly oppoſite to the na- 
ture of man. How much greater then 
enk its power be in afliſting nature ? Let 

1393917) | B 3 us 


6 BRITISH Book I. 
us caſt our eyes towards the now barba- 
rous Africk, once the ſource of arts and 
ſciences ; to what owes ſhe her preſent 
deplorable condition, but to the want of 
education ? Whilſt on the other hand, it 
is by that alone the northern and weſtern 
regions of Europe, once rude and ſavage, 
have riſen to their preſent ſplendour. So 
that it is evident there is no eſſential dif- 
ſerence from nature between men of dif- 
ferent regions of the earth, but that the 
whole depends upon the culture of their 
underſtandings *. Nay ſuch is the power of 
a well-diſciplined mind, that it hath been 
known that one or two perſons only of 
eminence in a ſtate, ſo trained, have ſud- 
denly raiſed their country from anden 
to glory. 

Thebes, and 1 on account of 
their ſtupidity, and ignorance, were held 
in ſuch contempt by the other ſtates of 


* When Chaldea and Agypt were learned and civil, 
Greece and Rome were rude and barbarous, as all Egypt 
and Syria now are, and have been long. When Greece 
and Rome were at their heights in arts and ſciences, Gaul, 
Germany, Britain, were as ignorant and barbarous, as 
any parts of Greece or Turkey ean be now. 


Sir William Temple, eſſay upon ancient and modern 
learning. 


1 Che, 


Cuae.I, EDUCATION. 4 
Greece, that their names were proverbial: 
yet, when in the former of theſe, Epami- 
nondas and Pelopidas arofe, enlightened 
by the precepts of Lyſis, one of the great- 
eſt philoſophers of the age, they raiſed 
the Theban name to ſuch a pitch of glory, 
as to obſcure all others, and ſtruck terror 
into the mighty commonwealths of Spar- 
ta, and of Athens. It is very remarkable 
alfo, that Philip, born in Macedon, hap- 
pening to be a hoſtage in the houſe of the 
father of Epaminondas at Thebes, receiv- 
ed the benefits of the fame education, un- 
der the ſame tutor ; and that this man af- 
terwards raiſed the poor deſpiſed ſtate of 
Macedon ſo high, as to give law to all 
Greece, and in ſome time to the greateſt 
part of the then known world. It was to 
the extraordinary care taken in his educa- 
tion by his father, that Rome owed her 
Scipio, the preſerver of his country, the 
conqueror of Carthage, one of the beſt 
men, and greateſt heroes of antiquity, 
When Paulus Amilius conquered Per- 
feus, he looked down upon his riches with 
contempt, and would ſuffer his ſons to 
take nothing away but his library, which 
B 4 10 


j 


8 BRITISH Box I. 


be looked upon as . true mines 


of real treaſure. 

There need not nee from hiſtory. 
to prove, that the well-being of a ſtate de- 
pends upon the education of their youth. 
There cannot be a good, and wiſe com- 
munity, made up of fooliſh and vicious in- 
dividuals ; and individuals cannot be made 
wiſe or good, but by education. If that 
be faulty or wrong, the effects will neceſ- 
farily; ſhew themſelves in the lives of men. 
When the fountain head is polluted, the 
ſtreams which flow from it cannot be 
clear . 

The power of the firſt impreſſions 9 — 
upon the minds of men, and the influ- 
ence they have upon their conduct ever 
after, is a beaten topick: holy writ, and the 
claſſick writers, abound in ſentences to this 
effect; and hiſtory furniſhes us with innu- 
merable examples. Of which there is none 
more remarkable than that of Alexander 
the great; whoſe early mind received ſuch 
a tincture, and imbibed ſuch notions: of 
falſe glory, from the leſſons of a ſervile 
dattaring; tutar. n as could not af- 

| terwards 


$*Is+4 SF 


Cnae..l. EDUCATION. 9 
terwards be effaced by the 2 and fill 
of an Ariſtotle. 17 tvs; 
_From eddycaajati 8 flowed all 
the various cuſtoms, and manners; all the 
different inſtitutions, civil, and religious; 
all the ſeveral ſyſtems, moral, and political, 
of the ſeveral nations of this peopled earth. 
If we are more unſettled in our notions, 
and conſequently more irregular in our ac- 
tions, than any other nation under the ſun; 
if what the late biſhop of Cloyne ſays be 
true, that, The pretenſions and diſcourſes 
of men throughout theſe kingdoms 
*.would, at firſt view, lead one to think 
© that the inhabitants were all politicians; 
and yet, perhaps, political wiſdom hath 
in no age or country, been more talked 
of or leſs underſtood. Licence is taken 
for the end of government, and popular 
© humour for its origin. No. reverence 
for the laws, no attachment to the con- 
ſtitution, little attention to matters of 
conſequence, and great altereation upon 
trifles; ſuch idle projects about religion, 
and government, as if the public had both 
to chuſe; a general contempt of all au- 
thority, divine and human; an indiffe- 
© rence 


a 2 "i * 8 2 


10 BRITISH Book I. 
<' rence about the prevailing opinions, 
© whether they tend to produce order, or 
diſorder, to promote the empire of God, 
or the devil: theſe are the ſymptoms 
that ſtrongly mark the. preſent age. If 
all this, I fay, be fo, whence can it pro- 
ceed but from a defective education, which 
not taking care to ſettle the notions of men 
upon the baſis of right reaſon, leaves their 
unfurniſhed minds open to receive any opi- 
nion which chance may throw in their 
way, which caprice may hunt after, or 
inclination graſp at? 

Evident as this point is, is it not amaz- 
ing, as if men were blind, or infatuated, 
that they have not hitherto turned their 
thoughts to examine the only ſource, from 
which all the happineſs or miſery of the 
nation muſt. neceflarily flow ? That they 
ſhould employ their time either in crying 
out againſt the increaſing tide of corrup- 
tion, which threatens a deluge to the land; 
or in endeavouring to raiſe damms in thoſe 
places where the breadth, depth, and ra- 
pidity of the waters, baffle all the efforts 
of man to ſtop their courſe ? And though 
4 daily end their labours ineffectual, 


and 


cnAP. I. EDUCATION. 11 


and likely to continue ſo from the violence 
of the torrent, yet that they ſhould ob- 
ſtinately perſiſt in the fame courſe, with- 
out once going to the fountain head; 
which they might not only purge, and 
cleanſe, but with eaſe divert its courſe into 
ſeveral channels, ſo as to ſend forth ſalu- 
Brious ſtreams to water the whole land. 
Important as it is to the ſtate, education 
hath never once claimed the attention of 
the legiſlature ſince its firſt inſtitution; 
Tho' it was eſtabliſhed in times of great 
ignorance, and conſequently muſt be ſup- 
poſed to be very defective, yet have we 
gone on in the ſame ſyſtem, with the 
ſame blind obedience, that the Roman ca- 
tholicks pay to the infallibility of the pope. 
Intereſting as it is to every individual of 
ſociety, yet no one topick has leſsemployed 
the pens of our writers. Whether it be 
that they were blinded by prejudice in fa- 
vour of a method in which they them- 
ſelves were trained; or that the diffic 

of a reformation deterred them from the 
attempt; ſoit is, that we have in our whole 
language but two treatiſes of any note ex- 
er written on that ſubject. The firſt, 
a ſhort 


12 BRITISH Book I. 
a ſhort one by Milton, the other, by Mr. 
Locke. The former clearly points out 
the faults and defects in our education, 
but the remedies propoſed are too ſtrong 
for men of a fickly habit of body, made 
weak and feeble by long diſeaſe. They 
are calculated only for thoſe of robuſt ath- 
letick conſtitutions, labouring under ſmall 
diſorders; or, as he himſelf expreſſes it, 
This is not a bow for every man to ſhoot 
in, but will require finews almoſt equal 
© to_ thoſe which Homer gave Ulyſſes. 
The other by Mr. Locke, is only an at- 
tempt to mend and patch our preſent ſyſ- 
tem, ſuch as it is, and to make ſome alte- 
rations in it; but is far from containing 
2avour towards extending it. This 
he himſelf acknowledges in the latter part 
of his treatiſe,” where he ſays, Tho' I am 
now come to a concluſion of what ob- 
« vious remarks have ſuggeſted to me con- 
* cerning education, J would not have it 
thought that Llook on it as a juſt treatiſe 
on that ſubject. I have touched little 
more than thoſe heads which I judged 
neceſſary for the breeding of a young 
(i e and have now publiſhed 
"lk 8 * thoſe 


cuar. I. EDUCATION. 3 


© thoſe my occaſional thoughts with this 
| © hope, that tho' this be far from being a 
complete treatiſe on this ſubje&, or ſuch 
© as that every one may find what will juſt 
fit his child in it, yet it may give ſome 
« ſmall lights to thoſe whoſe concern for 
© their dear little ones makes them. ſo irre- 
gularly bold, that they dare venture to 
© conſult their own reaſon in the education 
of their children, rather than 0 to 
G rely on old cuſtom.” 

In all well-regulated ſtates, the twoprin- 
cipal points in view in the education of 
youth, ought to be, firſt, to make them 
good men, good members of the univer- 
ſal ſociety of mankind; and in the next 
place to frame their minds in ſuch a man- 
ner, as to make them moſt uſeful to that 
ſociety to which. they more immediately 
belong; and to ſhape their talents, in ſuch 
a way, as will render them molt ſerviceable 
to the ſupport of that government, under 
which they were born, and on the ſtrength 
and vigour of which, the well-being of 
every individual, in ſome meaſure de- 
pends. If neither of theſe points are pro- 
vided for in our ſyſtem, I cannot ſee how 
2309 77 we 


14 BRITISH Book I. 
we are to expect good men or good ſub- 
jects. Nay the contrary muſt in general 
be the conſequence, for the mind of man 
being active will neceſſarily find itſelf em- 
ployment; if our youth are not trained 
in the right way, they will probably go 
wrong; if they are not taught to do good, 
they will be likely to commit evil. 

This point is ſo obvious, that it might 
ſeem unneceſſary to ſupport it either by 
reaſon or authority; and yet ſo little atten- 
tion has been paid to it, that it may not 
be wholly uſeleſs to quote the ſentiments 
of a man upon this head, who is allowed 
to have been poſſeſſed of the deepeſt pene- 
tration . In his epiſtle dedicatory to his 
treatiſe on education, he has the following 
paſſages. * I myſelf have been conſulted of 
late by ſo many, who profeſs themſelves 
© ata loſs how to breed their children, and 
© the early corruption of youth is now 
© become ſo general a complaint, that 
© he cannot be thought wholly imper- 
tinent, who brings the conſideration 
of this matter on the ſtage, and offers 
« ſome thing, if it be but to excite others, 

__ * Mr, Locke. 


© or 


Cnay: I. EDUCATION. T- 


o 


tion once ſet right, they will quickly 


or afford matter of correction: for er- 


rors in education ſhould be leſs indulged 


than any. Theſe, like faults in the firſt 
concoction, that are never mended in 
the ſecond, or third, carry their after- 
wards /incorrigible taint with them, 


through all the parts and ations of life. 
The well-educating of their children 
is ſo much the duty and concern of pa- 


rents, and the welfare and proſperity of 


the nation ſo much depend on it, that 
I would have every one lay it ſeriouſly to 
heart ; and after having well examined 
and diſtinguiſhed what fancy, cuſtom, or 


reaſon adviſes in the caſe, ſet his helping 
hand to promote every where that wayof 
training up youth, with regard to their 


ſeveral conditions, which is the cafieſt, 
ſhorteſt, and likelieſt to produce virtuous, 


uſeful, and able men in their diſtin& 


callings ; though that moſt to be taken 


care of is the gentleman's calling. For 
if thoſe of that rank are by their educa- 


bring all the reſt into order. | 
In his treatife on education he ſays, 1 
wiſh, that thoſe who complain of the 


great 


16 B RIT I 8 H Boom I, 


great decay of chriſtian piety and yirtue 
every where, and of learning-acquired 
improvements in the gentry of this gene- 

ration, would conſider how to retrieve 
them in the next. This I am ſure; that 
if the foundation of it be not laid in the 
education and principling of the youth, 
all other endeavours will be vain. And 
if the innocence, ſobriety, and induſtry 
of thoſe who are coming up, be not 
taken care of and preſerved, it will be 
ridiculous to expect, that thoſe who are 
to ſucceed next on the ſtage, ſhould 
abound in that virtue, ability, and learn- 
ing, which has hitherto made mn 
conſiderable in the world. 

From theſe and many other paſſages 
to the ſame effect, it is eaſy to ſee what his 
opinion was of our method of training 
youth, and how neceſſary he judged an 
alteration to be. Let us therefore with 
candour and impartiality examine our 
ſyſtem of education, as it now ſtands : 
I am much deceived if it will appear cal- 
culated to promote knowlege and virtue; 
on the contrary I believe, it will be found 

to be the true ſource of all our follies, 
| vices, 


| 6 a @ © © @ M =. a a = > 


Cnae. II. EDUCATION. 17 
vices, ignorance and falſe taſte: Should 


it prove ſo, this advantage will reſult from 
the enquiry, that in the courſe of it, pro- 
per remedies will ſuggeſt themſelves as the 
errors appear, and upon a right applica- 
tion they cannot fail of effecting a cure. 


CHAP. IT. 


Our ek Syſtem of Education conſu dered, 


THEN a boy can read Engliſh with 

tolerable fluency, which is gene- 
rally about the ageof ſeven or eight years, 
he is put to ſchool to learn Latin and 
Greek ; where, ſeven years are employ- 
ed in acquiring but a moderate ſkill in 
thoſe languages. At the age of fifteen or 
thereabouts, he is removed to one of the 
univerſities, where he paſſes four years 
more in procuringa more competent know= 
ledge of Greek and Latin, in learning the 
rudiments of logick, natural philoſophy, 
aſtronomy, metaphyſicks, and the heathen, 
morality. At the age of nineteen or twenty 
a degree in the arts is taken, and here 


ends the education of a gentleman. 
C When 


18 BRITISH Book 1. 
When education is ſaid to be finiſhed, 
one would imagine that the perſon is qua- 
lified immediately to enter upon his part 
on'the great ſtage of life ; and yet it would 
be hard to ſay what ſingle duty of ſociety, | 
or what-ſingle office as a citizen, he is qua- 
lifed to diſcharge, or ſuſtain, after his 
cloſe application of fo many years. It 
may be aſked with Seneca, what fruits 
are to be expected, from a vain oſten- 
tation of the politer ſtudies, and unavail- 
ing learning ? Whoſe errors will they di- 
© miniſh ? whoſe paſſions will they re- 
* ftrain? whomwillthey make more brave, 
* more juſt, more liberal ?” 
The ill effects of this method are de- 
ſcribed by Milton in ſuch nervous and con- 
ciſe terms, that I ſhall not ſtand in need 
of any apology with the reader, for pre- 
fenting him with his obſervations upon 
this occaſion, inſtead of my own. 
As for the uſual method of teaching 
arts, I deem it to be an old error of uni- 
« yerfities, not yet well recovered from the 
ſcholaſtick groffneſs of barbarous agee, 
that inftead of beginning with arts moſt 
. eaſy, and thoſe-be fach as are moſt obvi- 
© ous 
6 


Cray. II. EDUCATION. 19 


<-ous to the ſenſe, they preſent their young 
unmatriculated novices at firſt coming 
© with the moſt intellective abſtractions of 
© Jogick and metaphyſicks: ſo that they 
© having but newly left thoſe grammatick 
flats and ſhallows, where they ſtuck un- 
© reaſonably, to learn a few words, with 
© Jamentable conſtruction, and now on the 
i ſudden tranſported under another cli- 
mate, to be toſſed and turmoiled with 
© their unballaſted wits in fathomleſs and 
unquiet deeps of controverſy, do for the 
* moſt patt grow into hatred and contempt 
of learning, mocked and deluded all this 
while with ragged notions and babble- 
ments, while they expected worthy and 
e delightful knowlege. Till poverty or 
youthful years call them importunately 
their ſeveral ways, and haften them, 
with the fway of friends, either to an 
* ambitious and mercenary, or ignorantly 
© zealous divinity. Some allured to the - 
trade of law, grounding their purpoſes, 
not on the prudent and heavenly con- 
7 templation of juſtice and equity (which 
was never taught them) but on the pro- 
o! INE and pleafing thoughts of litigious 
C 2 © terms, 


20 BRITISH Book J. 
terms, fat contentions, and flowing fees. 
© Others betake them to-ſtate affairs, with 
*\ ſouls ſo upprincipled in virtue, and true 

* generous breeding, that flattery and court 
* ſhifts, and tyrannous aphoriſms appear 
* to them the higheſt points of wiſdom; 
© inſtilling their barren hearts with a con- 
« ſcientious ſlavery, if, as I rather think, 
it be not feigned. - Others, laſtly, of a 
more delicious and airy ſpirit, retire 
© themſclves, knowing no better, to the 
* enjoyments of eaſe and luxury, living 
out their days in feaſt and jollity ; which 
indeed is the wiſeſt and ſafeſt courſe of 
all theſe, unleſs they were with more 
« integrity undertaken. And theſe are the 
fruits of miſpending our prime youth in 
the ſchools and univerſities as we do, 
either in learning meer words, or ſuch: 
* things chiefly as were better unlearnt.” 
Mr. Locke, in delivering his ſentiments 
on the ſame ſubject, perfectly agrees with 
Milton. In — * of the education of 
a gentleman, he ſays, Since it cannot be 
* hoped he ſhould have time and ſtrength 
to learn all things, moſt pains ſhould be 
a taken about that which is moſt neceſ- 


ſary; 


Crap; II. EDUCATION. 27 


« 
« 


c 


fary ; and that principally looked after, 
which will be of moſt and frequenteſt 
uſe to him in the world. 


Seneca complains of the contrary prac- 


c 
c 
o 
C 
6 
6 
c 
(4 
c 
C 
0 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
6 
c 
c 
« 
6 
s 


tice in his time; and yet the Burgerſ- 


dicius's and the Scheiblers did not ſwarm 
in thoſe days, as they do now in theſe. 


What would he have thought, if he had 


lived now, when the tutors think it their 


great buſineſs to fill the ſtudies and heads 
of their pupils with ſuch authors as 
theſe? He would have had much more 


reaſon to ſay, as he does, Non vitæ ſed 
ſcholæ diſcimus, We learn not to live, 
but to diſpute ; and our education fits us 
rather for the univerſities, than the world. 


© But it is no wonder if thoſe who make 


the faſhion, ſuit it to what they have, 
* and not what their pupils want. The 


85 faſhion being once eſtabliſhed, who can 
think it ſtrange, that in this, as well as 
in all other things, it ſhould prevail ? 


and that the greateſt part of thoſe, who 


find their account in an eaſy ſubmiſſion 
to it, ſhould” be ready to cry out he- 
_ © rely, when any one departs from it? 


'Tis nevertheleſs matter of aſtoniſhment, 
C3 that 


22 BRITISH Book I. 
that men of quality and parts, ſhould 
* ſuffer themſelves to be ſo far miſled. by 
* cuſtom and implicit faith. Reaſon, if 
* conſulted with, would adviſe, that their 
children's time ſhould be ſpent in ac- 
* quiring what might be uſeful to them, 
when they come to be men, rather than 
© to have their heads ſtuffed with a deal 
* of traſh, agreat part whereof they uſual- 
ly never do ('tis certain they never need 
to) think on again as Jong as they live z 
and ſo much of it as does ſtick to them, 
they are only the worſe for. _ 

This is ſo well known, that I appeal 
e to parents themſelves, who have been at 
coſt to have their young heirs taught it, 
* whether it be not ridiculous for their 
ſons to have any tincture of that ſort of 
learning, when they come abroad into 
the world; whether any appearance of 
it would not leſſen and diſgrace them in 
company? And that certainly muſt be 
an admirable acquiſition, and deſerves 
« well to make a part in education, which 
men are aſhamed of, where they are 


* moſt concerned to ſhew their Parts and 
a : breeding.“ 


1 


CAP. II. EDUCATION. 23 
It is evident that both theſe great men 
thought our method of education as pro 
ductive of evil, inſtead of good; of mii- 
chief to mankind, inſtead of benefit. But 
amongſt ſuch as have received no ill taint 
from it, I believe it will be allowed by 
much the greater part, that they never 
find either profit or pleaſure from it in the 
reſt of their lives. | | 
Upon their entrance into the world, a 
very ſhort experience will convince them 
that they cannot apply what they have 
been learning to any uſeful purpoſe ; that 
to ſucceed in life they muſt enter upon 
entirely new ſtudies, and that they muſt 
even have the double labour of unlearn- 
ing many things which they before 
thought the perfection of human know- 
ledge. Their Greek and Latinauthors, their 


"4 books of logick and metaphyſicks, &c. are 


laid aſide, and in a few years all the traces 
of their early acquirements, of ſo many 
years pains and labour, are wholly oblite- 
rated. Is it not a lamentable thing to think 
that the prime of life hath thus been loſt ; - 
that a fertile ſoil hath thus been tilled, and 
manured, at great-pains and coſt, and ſuch ' 
| C 4 ſeed 


24 BRITISH Book I. 
ſeed ſown as will never produce a valuable 
crop? Or is there reaſon to wonder, that 
the richneſs of the ſoil ſhould waſte itſelf 
in a luxuriance of weeds? Of the few, 
who, from a love to the arts in which they 
have been trained, would ſtill keep them 
alive in their memories, and diſplay their 
talents to the world, much the greater 
part ſerve only to increaſe the number of 
bad verſifiers, miſerable eſſay writers, and 
minute philoſophers. The ſtudious and 
contemplative minds indeed, may be fur- 
niſhed with matter to employ their leiſure 
hours in innocent amuſements, ſo that 
they may not be hurtful members of ſo- 
ciety, however uſeleſs; and this perhaps 
is the greateſt benefit which the publick 
derives from it. The divine, the lawyer, 
and the phyſician, may convert theſe ru- 
diments of ſcience to their own advantage 
in their ſeveral profeſſions ; ; but the gentle- 
man finding n6 immediate uſe for them, 
neglects, and of courſe ſoon forgets them. 

Thus the education of a gentleman, which 
is of all others the moſt important to the 
publick, is not at all provided for. Were 
it defective in all other arts and profeſ- 


| ſions, 


Cray. II. EDUCATION. 25 
fions, tho' the grievance would be felt, it 
might be attended with no danger to the 
ſtate. But gentlemen, born to be legi- 
flators, to be the bulwarks of our conſti- 

tution ; to fill up poſts which require wiſ- 
dom, conduct, and the moſt improved 
abilities ; to animate and give motion to 
the whole body of the people; to be an 
example and model to all; the fountain 
of manners and ſource of principles; if 
their education be defective, or bad, the 
whole conſtitution is affected by it: the 
diſeaſe has attacked the vitals, and well 
either be removed, or inevitable diſſolu- 
tion muſt follow. BY 
To remedy this, two eminent phyficians 
have preſcribed very oppoſite courſes. - The 
firſt ſtrikes at the root of the diſeaſe, which 
he would endeavour wholly to eradi- 
cate; but, as it was before obſerved, his 
medicines are too powerful in their opera- 
tion, for the ſtrength of the patient's con- 
| ſtitution. The other ſeems to think the 
caſe deſperate, and has therefore only di- 
rected a courſe of lenitives, which may 
give caſe to, and prolong the life of the 
| patient, tho' not effect a cure. Milton's 
ſcheme 


26 BRITISH Boos I. 


ſcheme ſeems better calculated for the 
times of the Spartan republick, and old 
Rome, than for the preſent age: however 
beautiful it may look in theory, it would 
be found impracticable in the trial; or 
.cou'd it be reduced to practice, it might 
in time change our form of government 
into a republick. Locke on the other 
fide ſeems to deſpair of any effectual re- 
formation in the publick eſtabliſhed ſy- 
ſtem ; he has therefore turned his whole 
thoughts towards private education. 'To 
this there are innumerable objections, but 
particularly in our conſtitution ; as that 
method is the beſt calculated for deſpotick 
ſtates, and if it became general, wou'd be 
the ſureſt means to eſtabliſh arbitrary 
power. An evil of all others the moſt to 
be dreaded by a free people. 
But ſurely between theſe two extremes, 
a medium may be found which will effect- 
vally anſwer all the ends propoſed. Sup- 
poſe inſtead of a total ſubverſion, an at- 
tempt were made to correct the errors in 
the preſent ſyſtem, to ſupply ſome de- 
fects, and extend and enlarge the whole: 
perhaps in purſuing chis method, an eaſy 
and 


CAP. II. EDUCATION. 27 


and practicable plan might be ſtruck out, 
which would exceed all that have been 
hitherto eſtabliſned in any part of the 
world. 
The evils of our preſent mode of edu- 
cation do not ſo much ariſe from it's faults, 
as from it's defects; from what it does, as 
from what it leaves undone ; from it's im- 
perfections ſo far as it goes, as from it's 
ſtopping ſhort at an improper time, when 
there is moſt occaſion for it's influence. 
The end ſeems to be forgot, and the 
means are made the end. The rudiments 
of the arts are taught, as if they were de- 
ſireable only for their own ſakes; but their 
uſes for the purpoſes of life are never 
pointed out. Seneca in ſpeaking upon this 
ſubject, aſks, © For what reaſon is it 
that we train our children up in the ſtudy 
of the arts and ſciences ? It is not becauſe 
* they can inſpire virtue, but becauſe they 
prepare the mind for it's reception. Juſt 
* as the rudiments of thoſe, from which 
boys learn their firſt principles, do not 
directly teach the liberal arts, but pre- 
« pare the way for their reception: ſo the 
« liberal arts themſelves do not directiy 
lead 


28 TY” FFS EF 
"0 lead the mind to virtue, but give it a 
right diſpoſition for it. 

- Should a maſter, after having inſtructed 
his pupil in the rules of grammar, leave 
him to make his way thro' the claſſicks, 
as well as he could, without affiſting him 
in his progreſs, and pointing out to him 
the uſe and application of thoſe rules as he 
went along; could he ever with reaſon ex- 
pect to find him a good ſcholar ? And 

ſhall leſs care and pains be thought ſuffi- 
cient to make a good man? ls it eafier, 
after having learned the rudiments of 
knowlege, and morality, for a man to 
guide himſelf right in the labyrinths of 
wiſdom, and ſteer, unpiloted, a ſteady 
courſe of virtue, through the ſhoals, the 
rocks, the quickſands of life; and in a veſ- 
ſel without ballaſt, ſtand the ſwelling tides 
of corruption, and the ftorms of paſſion, 
than to underſtand a Greek or Roman au- 
_ thor? And yet abſurd as it may feem, 
ſuch is our practice. At the very junc- 
ture, when the uſes of all he has been 
reading ought to be pointed out to him 
with the utmoſt care and attention, in or- 
der to encourage him to go on in his 
courſe, 


CnAr. II. EDUCATION. 29 


courſe, to reap the fruit of his toils; at 
that moſt critical time of life, when the 
paſſions begin to be too ſtrong for reaſon, 
even when guarded to the utmoſt, is a 
young gentleman left to himſelf without 
a guide, without aſſiſtance, to follow the 
bent of his inclinations. Is it any wonder 
that they ſhould lead him away from a dry 
and laborious courſe of ſtudy, in which he 
had ever proceeded with reluctance and 
diſguſt? Is it any wonder that they ſhould 
immediately plunge him into a gulph of 
pleaſure, from which he may never more 
emerge ? 

Is it not a fact, that after the age of 
twenty or thereabouts, a gentleman, tho 
ever ſo deſirous to finiſh his education, 
cannot find the means of doing it in Eng- 
land? And has not this reduced all parents, 
who wiſh to ſee their ſons accompliſhed, 
to the neceſſity of ſending them either to 
foreign academies, or to travel? Both 
which have been attended with the worſt 
conſequences. . Thoſe academies are in 
countries which differ widely from ours, 
both in religious and civil inſtitutions 3 
nor will it appear improbable, that their 
prin- 


46 BRITISH Book, 
principles i in both may be much corrupted, 
when it is conſidered what little knowlege 
of their own religion and government they 
carry with them abroad. It is no wonder, 
when we reflect on the places where they 
paſs the firſt parts of their rational life, 
and the tutors from whom' they receive the 
firſt knowlege of things inſtead of words, 
that ſo many ſhould return confirmed re- 
publicans. And ſo many others, captivated 
by the charms, and outward appearances 
of the courts abroad, ſhould entertain too 
favourable notions of monarchy. Their 
religion indeed will be in no great danger 
of being changed, as there is not much 
temptation to it ; but as they carried but 
| little abroad with them, there is a great 
Hazard of their loſing that little, and re- 
turning without any. And this perhaps 
may be found not the moſt nen 
fource of infidelity. 

They who at that time of day are ſent 
to travel, are yet in a more deplorable ſitu- 
ation, ** To put them out of their parents 
view, at a great diſtance, under a gover- 
* nour, when they think thetlclves de 

11 Locke. 14 

| c too 


Caae. II. EDUCATION. = 


£c 
.c 
6 
6 
* 
Cc 
c 
s 
6 
c 
c 
* 
= 
4 
4 
- 
4 
6 
« 
6 
* 
6 
4 
6 
8 
5 


too much men to be governed by others, 
and yet have not ptudence and experi- 


ence enough to govern themſelves, what 


is it but to expoſe them to all the great- 


eſt dangers of their whole life, when 


they have the leaſt fence or guard againſt 
them? Till that boiling boiſterous part 
of life comes in, it may be hoped the 
tutor may have ſome authority : neither 
the ſtubbornneſs of age, nor the tempta- 
tion or example of others, can take him 
from his tutor's conduct till fifteen or 
ſixteen: but then, when he begins to 
conſort himſelf with men, and thinks 
himſelf one; when he comes to reliſh, 
and pride himſelf in manly vices, and 
thinks it a ſhame to be any longer under 
the conduct and controul of another, 
what can be hoped from even the moſt 


careful and diſcreet governour, when 
neither he has power to compel, nor his 


pupil a diſpoſition to be perſuaded; but 
on the contrary has the advice of warm 
blood, and prevailing faſhion, to hearken 
to the temptations of his companions, 
juſt as wiſe as himſelf, rather than to 


the perſaaions of his tutor, who is now 


© looked 


32 BRITISH Book 1. 


© looked on as the enemy to his freedom? 
And when is a man ſo likely to miſcarry, 
as when at the ſame time he is both 
raw and unruly ? 

This is the ſeaſon of all his life that 
© moſt requires the eye and authority of 
© his parents and friends to govern it. 
The flexibleneſs of the former part of a 
* man's age, not yet grown up to be head- 
* ſtrong, makes it more governable and 
« ſafe; and in the after-part,. reaſon and 
« foreſight begin a little to take place, and 
mind a man of his ſafety and improve- 
ment. 

If this picture be juſt, if this reaſoning 
be right, ſhall we have any cauſe to wonder 
at the merchandiſe which thoſe young 
adventurers bring back ? What indeed can 
be expected from them but an importation 
of all the follies, fopperies, vices and lux- 
uries of the ſeveral countries thro' which 
they have paſſed. Thele are to be found 
in the ſtreets, and on the high-ways ; and 
to be picked up riding poſt ; but to col- 
le& valuable ſtores of knowlege, and to 
treaſure up wiſe obſervations, demands the 
{kill and experience of more advanced 


4 years; 


En. II. EDUCATION. 33 
yeats; it requires much longer reſidence, 
cloſe attention, and painful reſearches into 
places, far from the common road, and 
vulgar haunts of men. COS 
It is evident that there can be no greater 
evil than the ſending our youth abroad at 
fo improper and dangerous a ſeaſon. This 
evil ariſes from the fad alternative of being 
either obliged to do ſo, or of entering 
them too ſoon at home into the buſineſs 
of life. One or the other muſt be done 
as things are now circumſtanced, or they 
muſt remain for ſome years in a ſtate of 
idleneſs and ination. Yet the remedy 
for this is not hard to be found. But be- 
fore I ſpeak to that point, it will be pro- 
per to take a more exact view of the pre- 
vious part of education, as the finiſhing 
muſt in a great meaſure depend upon the 
preparation. i 
It has been ſaid before, that the evils of 
our preſent ſyſtem do not ſo much ariſe 
from it's faults, as from it's defects; from 
what it does, as from what it omits to do. 
Indeed there is, nothing taught in our 
ſchools and univerſities either improper 
or unbecoming a gentleman to know ; on 
| the 


34 BRITISH Book], 


the contrary, whatever he learns there, if 
it be properly applied, he will find both 
uſeful and ornamental to him in whatever 
ſituation of life he may afterwards be 
placed. That theſe inſtructions ſeldom 
or never anſwer this end, is owing partly 
to the manner jn which they are given, 
and partly to an entire omiſſion or neglect 
of ſome ſtudies which are eſſentially ne- 
ceſſary to render the others uſeful, as wel] 
as ornamental. | 

In order to prove this, it will be neceſ- 
ſary to lay down ſome principles relative 
to education, and then to try our ſyſtem 
by thoſs principles, 


C HAP. IH. 


of the principles upon which a fyſtem of 
education ſhould be Founded. 


*c HE laws of education are the 

_ firſt impreſſions we receiye; and 
* as they prepare us for civil life, each par- 
ticular family ought to be governed pur- 
Fb ſuant to the plan of the great family 


7 Spirit of Laws. 
1 which 


Caae. III. EDUCATION. 35 
* which comprehends them all. If the 

people in general have a principle, their 
conſtituent parts, that is, the ſeveral fa- 
* milies, will have one alfo.” e 

Hence it follows, that in every ſtate it 
ſhould be a fundamental maxim, firſt, that 
the education of youth ſhould be particu- 
larly formed and adapted to the nature and 
end of it's government. Secondly, that 
the principle by which the whole com- 
munity is ſupported, ought to be the moſt 
ſtrongly inculcated on the minds of every 
individual. Where theſe rules are not ob- 
ſerved, no ſtate can flouriſh, or even ſubſiſt 
tor any length of time, The beſt educa- 
tion upon any other principles may make 
good men, but it cannot make good citi- 
zens; it may make them virtuous and 
wiſe, but it cannot make them uſeful 
members of that particular _— to 
which they belong. 

Every kind of government hath it's na- 
ture, it's end, and it's principle. It's na- 
ture 1s it's particular conſtitution or con- 
ſtruction to anſwer ſome end; it's end is 
that which is ſought after by ſuch conſti- 
tytion ; and it's principle is the means of 

Es D 2 com- 


36 BRITISH Book I. 


compaſſing that end. From this view it 
is evident, that the principle is the moſt 
eſſential part; is the ſoul of government, 
which puts it into motion, which gives it 
life and action. The beſt conſtitution in 
the world, and framed to the beſt end, 
without a principle, is nothing but a name, 
and without a right one, muſt neceſſarily 
be deſtroyed; for if the principle be 
wrong, a different end will be purſued 
than what was the object of it's inſtitution. 
It follows alſo, that the principle ſhould be 
ſuited to the end, not only in it's nature, 
but in it's degree of power, and ſtrength; 
for ſo far as it falls ſhort of the end, ſo far 
is the government weak and defective. 

The natural order of enquiry therefore 
will be, whether we have a principle; whe- 
ther this principle be ſuited to the nature 
of our government ; whether it be of force 
enough to anſwer the end ; and whether 
this principle be e inculcated by 
education. | 


CHAP. 


Caae. IV. EDUCATION. 37 


rn 
O the different principles of the different 


governments known in the warld. 


LL the different forms of govern- 
ment known in the world; may be 
reduced to three ſpecies ; the republican, 
monarchical, and deſpotick. To theſe 
the celebrated Monteſquieu has annexed . 
three principles. To the republican, vir= 
tue; to the monarchical, honour ; to the. 
deſpotick, fear. In the firſt and the laſt 
of theſe he has inconteſtibly proved, that 
either theſe muſt be the principles, or the 
government could not ſubſiſt. But in 
what relates to the monarchical, he has 
not made uſe of that clearneſs and preciſion 
which appear ſo evidently in the reſt of his 
work. As he ſeems to have formed his 
idea of monarchy intirely from that, under 
which he was born, ſo he has laid down 
rules in general for it, from the particular 
practice of that ſtate. He hath accurately 
diſtinguiſhed between the two republican 


forms, the ariſtocracy and democracy, and 
D 3 the 


38 BRITISH Deen I. 


the various manner in which the principle 
is to operate in thoſe different forms ; nor 
was there leſs reaſon to diſtinguiſh between 
the different forms of monarchy, the leſs 
limited approaching to the deſpotick, and 
the more limited bordering upon the re- 
publiean. It will not require much pe- 
netzation to diſcover, that ſuch a monarchy 
as that of England cannot ſubſiſt upon his 
principle of honour. To convince an 
Engliſhman of this, there needs only to 
preſent him with part of the deſcription 
which he himſelf. gives of the principle. 

By the laws of honour he ſays, That 
the actions of men are not judged as 
good, but as ſhining ;. not as juſt, but as 
great; not as. reaſonable, but extraor- 
©, dinary. 

Jo this whimſical honour it is owing 
that the virtues are only juſt what it 
* pleaſes, and as it pleaſes ; it adds rules 
© of it's own invention to every thing 
< preſcribed to us; it extends or limits 
our duties according to it's own fan- 
cy, whether they proceed from religion, 
* ,politicks, or morality. There is nothing 
* ſo ſtrongly inculcated in monarchies, by 

| «. the 


CAP. IV. EDUCATION. 39 
* the laws, by religion, and honour, as 
* ſubmiſſion to the prince's will. 

What are the neceſſary conſequences 
of ſuch a principle? Monteſquieu himfelf 
has deſcribed them in glaring colours in 
another place. Ambition joined to idle- 
neſs, and baſeneſs to pride; a deſire of 
obtaining riches without labour, and an 
averſiom to truth; flattery, treaſon, per- 
* fidy, violation of engagements, contempt 
* of civil duties, fear of the prince's virtue, 
hope from his weakneſs, but above all, 
a perpetual ridicule caſt upon virtue. 

Far, far from Britain be for ever kept 
this blaſting principle | | 

As the profeſſed intention of this author, 
was to treat accurately of all the various 
governments known in the world, and 
their ſeveral principles, it is evident that 
he has been defective in the execution of 
one part of his deſign. For tho from his 
own deſcriptions, he found that our form 

of government would not come exactly. 
under any of the heads into which he dif- 
tinguiſhed them; tho' he has allotted a 
ſeparate chapter to treat of ourconſtitution, 
a5 a  difinQ ſpecies from any other ; yet 
D 4 he 


40 BRITISH Book I. 


he has not though: proper to ſay one ſyl- 
lavle about the principle, by which it may 
be preſerved, but has contented himſelf 
with foretelling the means by which it 
may be deſtroyed. Whether this was the 
effect of negligence or deſign, or whether 
he durſt not deliver his fentiments freely 
upon that head, from the reſtraints of po- 


licy and. religion, muſt be left to con- 
jecture. 


; TRAPS 
That our conſtitution can not be ſupported ty ; 


- any of theſe three principles, tho they may 
be all uſe ful to it. | 


S cur conſtitution is made up of a, 
due mixture of the three ſpecies of 
government, being. partly monarchical, 
partly republican, and partly abſolute, 
from the union of thoſe two; it follows, 
that no particular principle belonging to 
any of thoſe will be ſufficient to anſwer 
its end. But all the three may be em- 
ployed in it to advantage. | 
The bulk of the people ſhould be bred 
up to fear the laws, which ſhould be con- 
4 ſidered 


CAP. VI, EDUCATION. 4t 


ſidered as veſted with deſpotick power. 
The legiſlative or republican part ſhould 
have virtue for it's object. And the princi- 
ple of honour may be employed by the 
executive or royal authority with ſucceſs. 
By honour I do not mean here that baſtard 
kind deſcribed above, (which was ſubſti- 
tuted by princes really poſſeſſed of deſpo- 
tick power, tho' maſked under the title of 
monarchy, in the room of fear, as'a more- 
uſeful and active inſtrument to promote 
their ambitious views) but that genuine 
and refined fort, ariſing from a love of 
fame, and therewards attending it; which 
often ſtood in the place of virtue in re- 
publicks. 


CHAP VL 
The neceſſity of another | principle to re- 
gulate theſe. 


HEN three different principles. 

act in one ſtate, in which there is 

no ſubordination, or neceſſary dependance 
of the one on the other; as it would be ex- 
treamly difficult to confine them within 
their 


4 BRITTSH Boo L. 
their due bounds, ſo as that no one ſhould 
become predominant; and as ſuch a pre- 
dominance of any one of theſe over the 
others, muſt neceſſarily bring about a 
change in the conſtitution; it were to be 
wiſhed, that a principle of ſuperior force to 
any of theſe could be found out, whoſe of- 
fice it ſhould be to preſerve the balance 
between theothers, to reſtrain them within 
their due limits, and confine them to their 
proper objects. Nor have we far to ſeek 
for ſuch a principle. It can be no other 
than RELIGION. 

To the great power and energy of this 
principle, Monteſquieu himſelf has borne 
teſtimony; for though he has never 
mentioned it as a neceſſary one to any 
of the forms of government, which he 
treats of, yet he occaſionally ſays in a 
part of his work, not profeſſedly upon that 
point, that © The principles of chriſtianity 
deeply engraved on the heart, would be 
© infinitely more powerful than the falſe 
© honour of monarchies, than the humane 
« virtues of republicks, or the ſervile fear 
© of deſpotick ſtates. 


Hence 


Cnær. VI. EDUCATION. 33 

Hence it is evident he thought that the 
principle of true religion was much ſtronger 
than the force of all the others together; 
and confequently that a ſtate founded upon 
this principle muſt be fixed upon the moſt 
ſolid and durable baſis. Hence alſo we 
may trace the reaſon of his ſilence upon 
that head in treating of the Britiſh conſti- 
tution ; for as he clearly faw that it could 
be ſupported by no other principle but 
that of religion, and that the religion muſt 
be ſuited to the nature of our government, 
he muſt of neceſſity have given the pre- 
ference to it in it's reformed ſtate ; and 
this would have been a point of too much 
danger for a ſubje& of France, and a Ro- 
man catholick by profeſſion, to meddle 
with. This conjecture appears the more 
probable, when we ſee that this important 
article ſeems accidentally and careleſsly 
dropped in a chapter, whoſetitle is, Ano- 
« ther of Mr. Bayle's paradoxes.' 


CHAP. 


„ BRITTICH Ben 1. 
CHAP. vir. 
of the power and extent of this principle. 


8 the different parts of which our 

\. conſtitution is compoſed, of courſe 
introduced different principles, the ſame 
policy which pointed out the neceſſity of 
a head to govern the whole ſtate, ſhewed 
alſo the neceſſity of a regulating principle; 
and the ſame analogy will diſcover to us, 
that the power of this principle over the 
others, ſhould be of the ſame nature and 
extent, as the power of the monarch over 
the different members of which the ſtate 
is compoſed. It ſhould be rather coer- 
cive, than active; rather direct, than go- 
vern; reſtrain, than impel. Whilſt it 
pretends to no more, it will give no um- 
brage to a free people; and the three 
principles of virtue, fear, and honour, 
may all be exerciſed with more force and 
advantage, under the guidance and in- 
fluence of ſuch a principle, as they will 
be confined within due bounds, and directed 
to proper ends. From all which it mani- 
feſtly 


Curt. VII. EDUCATION. 4 
feſtly appears, that this principle above 
all others ſhould be chiefly inculcated by 
education. 


iS: 0. as 
Of the principle of virtue. 


T is eaſy to ſee that virtue in — of 
A order, dignity, and uſe, is the fore- 
moſt of the three other principles. It is 
alſo evident, that it is the moſt ſuĩted to 
the nature of our government, in as much 
as that partakes more of the republican 
than any other form. If therefore we 
want to know how to cultivate this noble 
and neceſſary principle, let us look into 
the methods practiſed by thoſe antient 
and wiſe republicks of Greece, and Rome, 
where it flouriſhed in it's higheſt degree. 
This enquiry alſo may perhaps lead us into 
the beſt manner of propagating religion 
too ; for virtue and religion are nearly al- 
lied, they give and receive mutual aids, 
and the one W eb the mind 
for the other. 


CHAP. 


46 BRITISH Book J. 


CHAP. IX. 


The methods taken in antient education to 
promote and encourage virtue. 


HE great republicks of Athens 
and Rome, like us, had liberty 

for their object. Liberty could not exiſt 
without virtue, nor be preſerved without 
. wiſdom. Knowlege of all human affairs 
joined with virtue, was neceſſary to the 
internal polity, order, and tranquillity of 
the ſtate : fortitude, the reſult of - virtue, 
joined with policy, was neceſſary to pre- 
ſerve it from external violence. Nor was 
the mere poſſeſſion of wiſdom and know- 
lege ſufficient in their ſtateſmen, no more 
than courage without ſkill in their citi- 
zens. As their councils were the reſult 
of publick debates ; wiſdom, and policy, 
to have their due effects, muſt be diſplay- 
ed and communicated to others; the wiſeſt 
councellor in ſuch a ſtate, without a power 
and facility of delivering his ſentiments, 
could be of little uſe to the publick. Such 
communication could be made no other 


way 


way than * eee a 1 1 
of that was therefore abſolutely neceſſary. 
But as the mere communication alone 
might not always produce the effect of 
bringing others into the ſame way of 
thinking; ; it was neceſſary that this com- 
munication ſhould be made in a clear and 
forcible manner, ſo as to enlighten the 
underſtanding, and to make ſtrong im- 
preſſions on the hearts of the hearers. To 
do this, it was neceſſary that their thoughts 
and words ſhould be ranged in due order, 
and the whole delivered with proper tones 
and geſtures. Or, in other ® . rds, the art 
of oratory was eſſential to thoſe who 
ſpoke in publick. Hence we may trace 
the principles upon which their ſyſtem of 
education was built. Their end was li- 
berty ; liberty could not ſubſiſt without 
virtue, nor be maintained without wiſdom 
and knowlege; and wiſdom and knowlege, 
unleſs communicated with force and per- 
ſpicuity, were uſeleſs to the ſtate. But 
as virtue is a painful renunciation of all 
ſelfiſh paſſions; and as wiſdom and know- 
lege, with the art of perſuaſion, are the 
. of laborious ſtudy, application, and 
prac- 


6 


48 BRITISH  Boox I, 
practice; it was neceſſary that men ſhould 
be encouraged by rewards, and aſſiſted by 
inſtruction in thoſe difficult purſuits. Ac- 
cordingly we find, that in the education 
of their youth, after having taken care to 
inſtil ſtrongly the principle of virtue, their 


chief attention was to inſtruct them i in the 


moſt accurate knowlege of their own lan- 
guage, and to train them from their child- 
hood in the practice of oratory, as the 
ſure means to preferment in the ſtate. 


CHAP. X. 


7 he Audy of oratory y to us in x every 
Hoint where it was ſo to the antients. 


HERE is not one point in which this 
art was neceſſary or uſeful to the 
antients, wherein it is not equally fo to us. 
Nor was there any incitement to the 
ſtudy of it, either of pleaſure, profit, or 
honour, , which with us is not equally 
ſtrong. That the uſes are the ſame in all 
points common to us with them, may be 
| Few by * looking over the following 
5 ; ele- 
0 | 


Canb. X. EDUCATION. 49 


elegant; and ſummary view of them drawn 
up by Cicero. -_ 

Nothing ſeems to me to be more truly 
excellent, than to be able by the powers 
of oratory to engage the attention of pub- 
lick aſſemblies, to win their good opi- 
nion, to drive their: paſſions whither you 
© like, and bring them back at pleaſure. 
This art alone has ever flouriſhed, and 
© borne the greateſt ſway in all free ſtates, eſ- 
« peciallyin times of peace and tranquility. 

For what can ſo juſtly excite our ad- 
© miration, as that one man of a million 
© ſhould either alone, or at leaſt with but 
few others, be able to do that which 
nature ſeems to have put into the power 
of all men? What can give ſuch pleaſure 
© both to our hearing and underſtanding, - 
© as a polite and elegant oration, filled with 
© ſentiments of wiſdom, and expreſſions of 
* dignity? What can be an inſtance of 
« ſuch teal power and magnificence, as 
© thatpopular commotions, the ſacred opi- 
© nions of judges, and the majeſty of 
* ſenates, ſhould be ſwayed by ie * 
of one fingle perſon, 


. 5 Cic. de Orat, lib. 1. 25 
8 ry E c Be- 


7 BRITISH Box I. 


© Beſides, what ſo noble, ſo generous, 
0 royal, as to relieve the ſuppliant, to 
_ © raiſe the afflicted, to be the diſpenſer of 
« ſafety, the deliverer from danger, and 
© the means of preſerving it's members to a 
community? What ſo neceſſary as to be 
always prepared with arms, by which 
* you may defend yourſelf, ſet your ene- 
mies at defiance, or take vengeance when 
© provoked ? But farther, that we may 
not always confine this point to the fo- 
rum, the bench, the roſtrum, or the ſe- 
* nate-houlſe, what in the retirements of 
* private life can. give more delight, or 
* more properly belong tocivilized huma- 
* nity, thanpleaſant and poliſhed diſcourſe 
© free from altmarks of ruſticity For in 
this alons conſiſts our ehief pre- eminence 
over brute-beaſts, that we can converſe 
9 together, and hy ſpeech expreſs the ſen- 
timents of our minds? 
Who then ſhall not think this an ob- 
ject juſtly worth his admiration, and de- 
6 ſerving his ſevereſt labours, to be able 
« in that very circumſtance by which men 
excel other animals, ta excel all other. 
© men? 


We 


Cup. X. EDUCATION. 51 

We as well as they have councils, 
ſenates, and aſſemblies of the people [by 
their repreſentatives] where matters of as 
great moment are deliberated, debated on, 
and concluded; where eloquence and ora 
tory have as ample fields in which they 
may diſplay themſelves, and where the q re- 
wards and honours paid to them are equal. 
Nor is oratory leſs neceſſary to us at the bar 
than it was to them, tho' it's mode may 
be ſomewhat altered by the difference of 
our conſtitution, and it's powers confined 
in narrower limits. 

To expatiate upon theſe topicks would 
be only loſs of time, as the point muſt be 
obvious to the moſt common diſcern- 
ment. | - 

+ If we look into the hiſtory of England fince the re- 
formation, we ſhall find that moſt perſoas have made their 
way to the head of affairs, and got into the higheſt em- 


loyments, not by birth or fortune, but by being what 
commonly called good ſpeakers. 


EA CHAP, 


52 BRITISH Boo I. 


CHAP. XI. 


That there is one point in which the ſtudy of 
. oratory is eſſentially neceſſary to us, but 
. wwas not at all ſo to the antients. 


HE article I mean is of the utmoſt 
importance to us; it is the baſis of 

our conſtitution, and pillar of our ſtate. 
It is that which gives our's the greateſt ad- 
vantage over all other forms of govern- 
ment, by furniſhing it with the moſt ſuit- 
able means to anſwer it's end: it is in 
ſhort that regulating principle, which I 
have before ſpoken of, fo eſſentially neceſ- 
ſary to the preſervation of our conſtitution, 
I mean Religion. As the religion of the 
antients conſiſted chiefly in rites and cere- 
monies, it could derive no aſſiſtance from 
oratory; but there is not the ſmalleſt branch 
of ours which can be well executed with- 
out {kill in ſpeaking ; and the more im- 
portant parts calculated to anſwer the great 
ends, evidently require the whole oratorial 
Powers. But before I enlarge upon the 
means hy which it may be preſerved, it 
| wall 


Char. XI. EDUCATION. 53 


will not be improper in theſe days, wherein 
religion is fallen into ſuch contempt, to 
prove the abſolute neceſſity of the princi- 
ple itſelf to the preſervation of the ſtate. 
In order to do this I ſhall endeavour, firſt, 
to ſhew, that tho' virtue might have been 
a ſufficient principle to have ſupported the 
antient republicks, yet that it could not 
be ſufficient to ſupport our form of govern; 
ment, notwithſtanding it be equally ne- 
ceſſary to it. Secondly, that the cauſe of 
the failure and decay of the principle of 
virtue in thoſe ſtates, was, that the means 
to ſupport it were inadequate ; and that 
thoſe means, or any indeed of human in- 
vention, mult be of infinitely leſs efficacy 
with us than with them. "Thirdly, that 
from the nature of our ſituation, and the 
peculiarity of our circumſtances, nothing 
could poſſibly make us, or continue us to 
be a great and flouriſhing people, but an 
immediate revelation of the divine will, 
and a perfect obedience paid on our part 
to that will ſo revealed. Fourthly, that 
the means made uſe of by the antients to 
ſupport their principle of virtue, tho“ 
found inſuſſicient and inadequate to that 
5 E 3 end, 


84 BRITISH Book I. 
end, yet would be found forcible enough, 


and abundantly effectual to preſerve our 
principle of religion. 


. 


Though virtue might have been a ſufficient 
principle to have ſupported the antient re- 
publicks, yet it would not be ſufficient to 
ſupport our form of government, notwith+ 

- ftanding it be equally neceſſary to it. 


Hoever hath a mind to be con- 

vinced of the abſolute neceſſity of 

virtue to a republican form of government, 
inſomuch that it cannot poffibly ſubſiſt 
without it, may ſee the point undeniably 
proved by Monteſquieu in his Spirit of 
laws. He will alſo find it evidently ſhewn, 
that liberty cannot exiſt without virtue; 
whence he may deduce the neceflity of it 
alſo to our conſtitution, That it was a ſuf- 
ficient principle to anſwer all the ends of a 
republican ſtate, the experience of ages has 


fully ſhewn. For all the great republicks 


were ſtrong and flouriſhed whilſt that 
principle remained in it's Ie as that 
: grew 


Cnap. XII. EDUCATION. 35 


grew weak, they declined ; and with the 
total corruption of it, were deſtroyed. So 
that their ruin was not occaſioned by any 
defect in the principle itſelf, but by the 
corruption of it, thro the negle& or want 
of proper means to ſupport it. Theſe were 
found too weak to oppoſe luxury, which 
like a mighty torrent always overturned 
and carried all before it. By that Athens 
fell; by that Rome periſhed. 


— Sever armis 
Luxuria incubuit, victumgue ulciſcitur orbem. 


In the Spartan commonwealth the mighty 
power of this principle of virtue was 
ſhewn in it's greateſt height. For as it's 
deadlieſt foe, luxury, had been baniſhed 
by the inftitutions of Lycurgus, it laſted 
with little or no alteration for more than 
700 Fears. And at the time when there 
ſcemed to be a general combination againſt - 
the freedom of mankind ; when luxury 
and tyranny went hand in hand over the 
face of the earth; in that little ſlate the 
| facred flame of liberty was ſtill preſerved: 
there ſhe had ſtill an aſylum, and ſup- 
ported by virtue, ſeemed to defy the 
E 4 Aunited 


united endeavours of mankind. Tho' often 
conquered, tho'-often thrown to earth, by 
the ſuperior force of their antagoniſts, yet 
like Antæus they aroſe again freſh and 
vigorous: thro' the divine energy of their 
principle. Till their enemies deſpairing 
of ever being able to ſubdue their ſtate 
whilſt their virtue remained, found it ne- 
ceſſary to pave the way for luxury by al- 
tering the inſtitutions of Lycurgus, and 
changing their mode of education. This 
ſoon effected what the force of arms could 
never have done, and in a ſhort time r 
were no longer a people. - _— - 
However powerful this principle may 
be, however equal to anſwer all the ends 
of republican governments, it would be 
far from being ſufficient to our purpoſe. 
From the nature of their inſtitution, that 
muſt be their ſole ruling principl®; nor 
could it have any other to contend with, 
except what aroſe from the ambition of 
private men. It had no occaſion for con- 
troul or reſtraint; ſince even it's exceſs 
could not be hurtful to the ſtate. 
But in the very groundwork of our 
codſtication are ſown the ſeeds of other 
-Y prin- 


. 
/ 


Cup. XII. EDUCATION, a 


-principles. A monarch has not neceſſa- 
rily virtue for his object; the increaſe of 
his power may perhaps be a more natural 
aim. A nobility may have in view the 
enlargement of their property, and addi- 
tion to their honours; and the increaſe of 
' kingly power may by them be canſidered as 
the ſhorteſt road to theſe. To guard againſt 
their encroachments will be the buſineſs 
of virtue in the repreſentatives of the peo- 
ple. But then this virtue muſt be con- 
fined within due bounds ; for ſhould it run 
into exceſs, it would as neceſſarily over- 
turn the conſtitution as ſucceſsful ambi- 
tion in the others +. As in the one caſe 
our ſtate would become wholly monar- 
chical, ſo in the other it muſt of courſe 
be republican. Hence we may deduce 
the neceſſity of a principle ſuperior to vir- 
tue, to regulate its motions, and confine 
it within proper limits. As man is to be 
controuled by man, ſo muſt principle by 
principle. For: ſhould we entruſt the 
power of regulating or eſtabliſhing prin- 
ciples to man, we at the ſame time give 
him power to modify them as he pleaſes, 

+ Vide reign of Charles . 
or 


58 BRITISH BooxTI. 
or to deſtroy them; and conſequently 
furniſh him with the means of tyran- 
nizing. 


CHAP. XII. 


That the cauſe of the failure and decay of 
the principle m thoſe, was, that the means 
to ſupport it were inadequate ; and that 
thoſe means, or indeed any of human in- 
vention, muſt be of infinitely leſs efficacy 

eit h us than with them. - 


E means uſed by the antients to 

"ſupport virtue were education, ora- 
tory, and reward. By the firſt, proper and 
early notions of it were inſtilled before the 
mind was capable of judging. By the ſe- 
cond, thoſe notions were confirmed and 
eſtabliſhed in the moſt forcible manner, 
which at once informed the underſtand- 
ing, and wrought upon the paſſions of 
mankind. By the laſt, men were allured 
and excited to reduce theſe notions to prac- 
tice, both for their own benefit and that 
of ſociety. As the laſt therefore was the 
great mover to action, it is evident, that 
the 


Cxay. XIII, EDUCATION. 39 
the efficacy of the former depended upon 
that. Whilſt therefore reward was the 
neceſſary attendant on virtue, virtue of 
courſe was the chief object of educa- 
tion, and the chief point inculcated by 
oratory 3 but ſhould reward change it's 
object, and ſhould vice lead to it inſtead 
of virtue, it is eaſy to ſee, that there would 
be a change in the road alſo. | 
Whilſt republicks preſerved their prin- 
ciple, virtue was neceſſarily the firſt object 
in education, Oratory, as the means of 
diſplaying virtue in it's brighteſt colours, 
and imprinting it ſtrongly on the minds of 
others, was of courſe ſtudied, and rewards 
were the natural reſult of virtue and im- 
proved talents. For the whole power of 
reward lying in the people, whilſt they 
were taught to believe, that the good and 
fafety of each individual, depended upon 
the good and ſafety of the whole; they na- 
turally, to the beſt of their judgments, 
conferred rewards on the moſt deſerving, 
on ſuch as were beſt able to ſupport the 
republick. But, when their principle was 
corrupted, when luxury deſtroyed publick 
ſpirit, and favoured ſelfiſh gratifications, 


1e 


la-- BRITISH Book I, 


rewards were then diſtributed, not from 
views of publick good, but to anſwer 
private ends; the moſt corrupt men were 
choſen into places of power by corrupt 
voters; the means to thrive in the world 
were the ends ſought afrer by education; 
and oratory was proſtituted to anſwer the 
ſame purpoſes. But in our conſtitution, 
as the power of reward lies principally in 
the monarch, and his miniſters, it is evi- 
dent enough that they can give what bias 
they pleaſe to education. If their view be 
to extend their power, they will hardly 
ſuffer virtue to be it's object, nor will they 
care to have the youth exerciſed and made 
{kilful in the uſe of ſo dangerous a weapon 
as oratory; From the very nature of our 
government indeed, the incitements to 
virtue cannot be ſo great as in republicks, 
There the field is open to all candidates, 
and the ſpirits of a man are ſupported, and 
animated in his fatiguing purſuits, by the 
moral certainty of the ſucceſs which will 
attend his labours. Whereas with us the 
avenues are barred to many of perhaps the 
beſt talents, and brighteſt accompliſh- 
ments; and the reward depending upon 

the 


Cuae. XIII. EDUCATION. Gt 


the will and pleaſure of one or a few, who 
may not be either the moſt ſkilful, or un- 
corrupt, induſtry of courſe flags, and me- 
rit drops it's wing. 

We ſhould have but few artiſts ni 
their pieces with care and exactneſs, whoſe 
value was to be ſettled by the throwing of 
dice, by the deciſion of corrupt, or the ca- 
price of ignorant judges. 

Hence it is manifeſt that the means of 

ſupporting virtue are much weaker with 
us than with the antients ; if therefore 1t 
be proved that the cauſes of it's deſtruction 
are much ſtronger with us than with them, 
how abſurd muſt it appear to think of 
eſtabliſhing that as ourprinciple, which it 
is impoſſible for us to ſupport. 

The great cauſe of the deſtruction of 
virtue amongſt the antients, was luxury ; 
but it was not the native growth of their 
foil. It was tranſplanted from other 
climes, was a long time before it grew 
to any height, and might eaſily have been 
checked and kept low. It is true, at 
different times, from different conqueſts, 
ſudden torrents of wealth poured in upon 
_—_ which filled the channels of luxury, 

| | and 


\ 


62 BRITISH Boon f. 
and threatened danger to the land: but 
it required only a little reſolution and 
ſteadineſs to oppoſe their firſt violence, 
and their force would ſoon ſpend itſelf. 
Sumptuary laws, and the office of cenſor 
properly executed, were ſufficient to guard 
the ſtate from any very dangerous conſe- 
quences, had it not been ſor the ambition 
of private men, whoſe intereſt it was to 
propagate corruption. But when we take 
a view of the fituation of our country, 
that it is an iſland, that it muſt of courſe 
owe its ſplendor and power intirely to 
commerce, not to conqueſt; that commerce 
produces wealth, and wealth of neceſſity 
introduces luxury; we ſee, that with the 
ſeeds of our conſtitution are ſown the ſeeds 
of it's corruption; that both muſt grow up 
together, and unleſs proper care be taken 
the weeds muſt choak the grain. Wealth 
flows not in upon us by ſudden guſhes, 
and mountainy floods after rain or ſhows 
ers ; it has an inexhauſtible ſource, from 
which flows a regular conſtant river, that 
grows wider and deeper as it advances. 
But as it has no boundleſs ocean to loſe 
itſelf in; as it terminates in the central 

2 pool 


ena. XIII. EDUCATION. 63 


pool of luxury, the whole land muſt in 
time be deluged, if conſtant care be not 
taken to prevent it. 

The Dutch have not more cauſe to be | 
watchful over their dykes, as they ſee the 
ſea gaining upon them, than we have to 
guard our bulwarks againſt the increaſing 
tide of corruption. Luxury is not only ar- 
rived at a greater pitch, and become more 
general than it formerly was, but it muſt 
daily receive new additions from our con- 
nections with the eaſtern and weſtern In- 
dies. The power of our enemy hath been 
much increaſed, which hath rendered it's 
attacks more formidable, and hard to be 
reſiſted. Not greater additional force hath 
been given to military engines by the in- 
vention of gunpowder, than to the aſſaults 
of luxury, by our commercial diſcoverics. 
- And what bulwarks have we to guard us, 
what weapons to defend us againſt it's at- 
tacks ? Monarchs, and favourers of mo- 
narchy, will hardly promote ſumptuary 
laws, or eſtabliſh the office of cenſor. ' In 
this reſpe& our conſtitution is as naked 
and void of ſtrong holds, and fortified 
places, as our country, when an enemy 

; has 


64 BRITISH Boo I 
has once got footing in it. In both caſes 
there is no other reſource but in the vit- 
tue and valour of the people. | £ 
If then the antients were not able to 
ſupport virtue, when their means were {6 
much greater, againſt the attacks of luxu- 
ry when it's force was ſo much leſs; how 
ſhall we hope to do it, when the means to 
ſupport virtue are ſo much leſs, and the 
force of luxury ſo much increaſed ? 
Perhaps it may be ſaid, that tho' virtue 
be loſt, vice may be reſtrained, and that 
the power of the laws, and puniſhments, 
may be ſufficient to check it's progreſs. 
| Suppoſe this were granted, yet it muſt ne- 
ceſſarily be at the expence of our liberty. 
The principle of deſpotiek government is 
fear, and the means to ſupport that prin- 
eiple are puniſhments. The more there- 
fore we citabliſh that principle, and the 
more we rely upon thoſe means, the nearer 
do we approach to a ſtate of ſlavery. Hear 
what Monteſquieu ſays upon this ſubject. 
© It is a perpetual remark of the Chineſe 
authors, that the more the puniſhments 
of criminals were increaſed, in their em- 
c * the nearer they were to a revolu- 
a tion. 


8 


. 


Cnap, XIII. EDUCATION. 69 


© tion. This is becauſe puniſhments were 
* augmented in proportion as the public 
* morals were corrupted. 
It would be an eaſy matter to prove, 
* that in all, or almoſt all the govern- 
ments of Europe, puniſhments have 
* increaſed or diminiſhed in proportion as 
* thoſe governments fayoured or diſcou- 
« raged liberty *. 

| | In 


* Spirit of Laws, vol. i. b. vi. ch. g. 
In proportion as luxury gains ground in a republick, 
the minds of the people are turned towards their particu- 
lar intereſts. Thoſe who are allowed only what is ne- 
ceſſary, have nothing to wiſh for but their own and their 
country's glory ; but a ſoul depraved by luxury has many 
other deſires, and ſoon becomes an enemy to the laws 
that cbmfine it.. ff 
No ſooner were the Romans corrupted, than their de- 
fires became boundleſs and immenſe. | 
When the whole world, impelled by the foree of 2 
neral corruption, is immerſed. in voluptuouſneſs, what 
muſt then become of virtue? 
| Spirit of Laws, vol. i. b. vu. ch: 2. 

When virtue is bäniſhed, ambition invades the hearts 
of thoſe who are diſpoſed to receive it, and avarice poſ- 
ſeſſes the whole community. The deſires now change 
their objects; what they were fond of before becomes in- 
different; they were free, while under the reſtraint of 
laws, they will now be free to act againſt law; and as 
every citizen is like a flave eſcaped from his maſter's 
houſe, what was a maxim of equity they call rigour ; 
what was a rule of action, they call conſtraint ; and to 
precaution, they give the name of fear, Frugality, and: 
not the thirſt of gain, now paſles for avarice. ' Formerly 
the wealth of individuals ä the publick 1 


* 


66 BRITISH Book I. 
In another place he ſays; * Men muſt 
not be led by exceſs of violence; we 
* ought to make a prudent uſe of the 
means which nature has given us to con- 
duct them. If we enquire into the cauſe 
of all human corruptions, we ſhall find 
* that they proceed from the impunity of 
© crimes, and not from the moderation 
of puniſhments.” | 
It will follow therefore, my that in mo- 
* derate governments a good legiſlator. is 
* leſs bent upon puniſhing, than prevent- 
ing crimes; he is more attentive to in- 
* ſpire good morals, than to infli puniſh- 
© ments.” 
But it often happens that a legiſlator 
* defirous of reforming an evil, thinks of 
nothing but of this reformation ; his eyes 
are open only to this object, and ſhut to 
it's inconveniencies. When the evil is 
redreſſed, there is nothing ſeen but the 
© ſeverity of the legiſlator ; yet there will 


o 
5 © 


but now the publick treaſure is become the patrimony of 
private perſons. The members of the commonwealth- 
riot on the publick ſpoils, and it's ſtrength 1s only the: 
power of ſome citizens, and the licentiouſneſs of the 
whole community. 


Book vi. ch. 12: + Ch. 9, $3 Ch 12. 
= re- 


Cxxy. XIII. EDUCATION. 67 
remain an evil in the ſtate that has ſprung 
from this ſeverity ; the minds of the 
* people are corrupted, and become ha- 
© bituated to deſpotick power.” 
It would therefore be but a bad omen 
if we faw the legiſlature relying wholly 
upon puniſhments for the preſervation of 
morals ; for either the means would not 
be effectual, or if effectual, we muſt ſoon 
change our freedom for ſlavery. One of 
the two following caſes mentioned by 
Monteſquieu muſt inevitably be our lot. 
+ © There are two ſorts of corruption; one, 
© when the people do not obſerve the 
© laws; the other, when they are cor- 
6 rupted by the laws; an incurable evil, 
© becaule it is in the very remedy itſelf,” 
The antients knew the force and ne- 
ceflity of the principle of fear, but they 
alſo Lice how to make a right uſe of it. 
As only the few were to be allured to vir- 
tue by reward, the bulk of the people could 
be kept from vice by nothing but puniſh- 
ment. But as puniſhment acts by fear, 
and the direct tendency of fear is to de- 
preſs the ſpirits, and check that nobility 


1 Ch. 12. „ 
F 2 of 


68 BRITISH Book I. 


of ſoul which alone could ſupport a free 
republick, they uſed it with a ſparing 
hand. Penal laws with them were few, 
and their puniſhments of the lighteſt kind. 
But tho! the fear of man, or any thing be- 
longing to him, or his inſtitutions, might 
debaſe man.; yet the fear of the gods, as 
ſuperior beings, and a reverence to their 
commands, could be no degradation to hu- 
man nature. Hence we ſee that the di- 
rect intent of their laws was to promote 
virtue, and to engage the obedience of 
their citizens to them by reward; whilſt 
vice was diſcouraged by a dread of puniſh- 
ment from the gods, and an hatred to it. 
inculcated chiefly by the laws of religion. 
Thus. had they the full uſe of this prin- 
ciple without any of it's ill effects. Re- 
ligious awe deprefles not the ſoul, on the 
contrary it invigorates it in the cauſe of 
virtue; and the operation of fear muſt be 
ivfinitely more powerful, when it's ob- 
ject is a ſuperior being, the effects of 
whoſe diſpleaſure are unavoidable by us, 
than when it's object is mere man, or his. 
laws, which force may reſiſt, or cunning 
may evade. * we find that a 
greater 


Crar. XIII. EDUCATION. 69 


greater purity of morals was preſerved, 
and fewer crimes committed in thoſe 
ſtates, under the influence of this religious 
ſenſe, than in any of thoſe countries which 
depended upon the ſeverity of their laws, 
and the rigour of their puniſhments. 

But as their religion was merely of 
human inſtitution, and it's whole force 
depended upon the belief of the contrary, 
it was no difficult matter to overturn it. 
The groſs abſurdities with which it was 
filled, were ſufficient to deſtroy it's credibi- 
lity, whenever the eyes of the people were - 
opened. It did not require much pains 
to perſuade men that a thing was falſe, 
which they wiſhed to be ſo: or to free 
them from the fetters of prejudice, when 
their paſſions were too ſtrong for reſtraint. 
As they had not any juſt notions of a 
future ſtate, the obſervatian of the unequal 
diſtribution of rewards and puniſhments 
in this life would ſoon deſtroy all truſt in 
providence, and make man alone the ob- 
ject of their hopes and fears; and when 
the leaders who knew it to be nothing but 

a political ſcheme, found it their intereſt 
1 N off the maſk, and to act againſt it's 


F 3 pre- 


70 BRITISH Book 1. 

precepts, their example was ſoon followed 
by the multitude. No great labour was 
þ 2 a to make them pull down altars 
Taiſed to men, and to break in pieces like 
potters clay, and trample under foot, the 
gods of their own making. Thus virtue, 
morals, and religion, were all borne a- 
way by the icrefiſtable tide of corruption. 


CH AP. XIV. 


That from the nature of our ſituation and 
the peculiarity f our circumſtances, no- 
thing could poſſibly make us, or continue 


us a great and flouriſhing people, but an 
immediate revelation from God. 


II will be granted, that without liberty 

we cannot either be a great ora flouriſh- 
ing people. It will be granted, that liberty 
cannot ſubſiſt without virtue; and it has 
been proved by the experience of all ages, 
and countries, that virtue is neceſſarily 
deſtroyed by luxury. It has been ſhewn 
that all human means to preſerve virtue, 
are weaker and fewer with us; and the 
cauſes which introduce and promote lux- 
ury, more certain and more powerful, both 


6 in 


Cna?. XIV. EDUCATION. 71 


in degree and number, than in any other 
free country. It will therefore neceſſarily 
follow, that we haye leſs probability of 
preſerving our liberty, by any means hi- 
therto practiſed, and that it's duration 
muſt of courſe be ſhorter than in any of 
thoſe ſtates where it once flouriſhed, and 
was afterwards deſtroyed. When it is 
conſidered that liberty, and conſequently 
virtue, are abſolutely neceſſary to our well- 
being; and that riches, and conſequently 
luxury, muſt unavoidably flow in upon us 
from the nature of our ſituation; that 
theſe two are utterly incompatible, and 
that the one muſt neceſſarily deſtroy the 
other; that either to get rid of our luxury 
we muſt part with our wealth, without 
which we can not be a flouriſhing people, 
or defend ourſelves againſt the power of 
our enemies; or if our luxury remains, 
we muſt part with our virtue, and conſe- 
quently our liberty, which would render 
us ſtill leſs flouriſhing, and leſs powerful; 
the preſervation of ſuch a ſtate ſeems to 
he beyond the power of all human means, 
and can be effected by nothing but divine 
interpoſition. 


F 4 In 


52 BRITISH Booxl1. 

In a ſtate ſo circumſtanced nothing can 
poſſibly engage men in the painful and 
ſelf-denying practice of virtue, in ſpite of 
the conſtant temptations in their way, but 
the certainty of a ſuitable reward ; and no- 
thing can deter them from vice, when ſti- 
mulated and inflamed by paſſions, but un- 
avoidable puniſhments adequate to their 
crimes. This can not be on earth, where 
man is to be the judge; it muſt therefore 
be in a future ſtate, and the office belong 
to God alone, the ſearcher of hearts, But 
as the light of nature and unaſſiſted reaſon, 
could never diſcover this with a ſufficient 
degree of certainty to make ita principle of 
action, it was neceſſary that it ſhould come 
to us by an immediate revelation from 
God. To give this force, it was not ſuf- 
ficient to khow that there would be a fu- 
ture ſtate, in which rewards and puniſh- 
ments would be diſtributed ; it was neceſ- 
fary alſo that a ſyſtem. of laws ſhould be 
promulged for our conduct in life, the ob- 
ſervance or breach of which ſhould entitle 
us to reward, or ſubject us to puniſhment. 
To enforce the obſervation of theſe laws, 


it 


Cray. XIV. EDUCATION, 73 


it was alſo neceſſary that they ſhould be 
believed to come from God himſelf. 
I ſhall not attempt to enter upon ſo 
beaten a topick as the proof of the authen- 
ticity of our holy religion. This has em- 
ployed the pens of many who have never 
been excelled in clearneſs of underſtand- 
ing, ſolidity of judgment, and depth of 
penetration; ſo that probably nothing new 
can be ſaid upon that head. I ſhall con- 
tent myſelf with ſhewing, that if ever a 
divine revelation was neceſſary to man, it 
was more particularly ſo to the Britiſh na- 
tion, than to any other upon earth : that it 
was impoſſible, without ſuch a revelation, 
we ſhould ever be, or at leaſt continue to 
be, a great and flouriſhing people : and 
that the ſyſtem now nominally eſtabliſhed 
amongſt us as the revealed will of God, 
were it really believed to be ſuch univer- 
fally, and accordingly practiſed, would 


raiſe us above all other nations that either 


do, or ever did exiſt upon earth; and 
preſerve us unalterably ſuch to the end of 
time, provided that ſyſtem continued to 
retain it's due influence. 


It 


| 


1088 
110 
17 4 
10 
I 
WA 
Ha 
| | 
1 
. U * 
1 
5 1 « 
my. 
wires” 

4 4 ' 
'* 
WY 
! 

i 


wy 


28 I 
Cs 


-- 2 
3 
5 * 


— women 
— . -- _ 


2 n 


74 BRITISH Book I. 
It was a maxim of Tully's, That it is 
impoſſible for thoſe who have no belief 
of the immortality of the ſoul, or a fu- 
ture ſtate of rewards and puniſhments; 
to ſacrifice their particular intereſts and 
© paſſions to the publick good, or to have 
© a generous concern for poſterity. And 
the moſt enlightened of the heathens, 
the almoſt inſpired Plato, has delivered 
it as his opinion, that * concerning thoſe 
| © great duties which men's appetites and 
« paſſions render difficult, it ſhould ſeem 
rather the work of God to provide, than 
of human legiſlators, if it were poſſible 
© to hope for a ſyſtem of laws framed and 

« promulged by God himſelf. 
Here we ſee how neceflary the wiſeſt 
of the heathens judged ſuch a revelation 
to be, could it have been hoped for. 
And if he thought fo in his days, how 
much more neceflary ought we to think 
it in the preſent times? In the antient 
free ſtates, there aroſe from the nature 
of their conſtitution, a principle ſufficient 
to preſerve them, God had done his part 
by them; he had furniſhed them with 
proper means for their ſecurity, and if 
| they 


Cnae. XIV. EDUCATION. 55 


they ſuffered them to fail in their hands, 
it was their fault. But whoever examines 
the conſtitution of Great Britain, will find 
that from it's nature it had no principle 
and conſidering the diſcordant and jarring 
parts of which it is compoſed, it muſt 
neceſſarily fall to pieces in a ſhort time, 
unleſs they were cemented by religion. 
To them therefore ſuch a revelation was 
more abſolutely neceſſary than to any other 
nation. 

When it is conſidered that Great Bri- 
tain 1s particularly circumſtanced in re- 
gard to any other country that ever made 
a figure in the world; and that in order 
to be conſpicuous, ſne muſt have other 
principles than what the wit of man has 
ever yet diſcovered, would it not be a 
ſtrong preſumptive proof in favour of 
their divine original, ſhould ſuch princi- 
ples be provided for her without her. ſeek- 
ing, at a time when ſhe had moſt occa- 
ſion for them? Her flouriſhing ſtate was 
to ariſe from commerce; for this the won- 
derful invention of the compaſs made 
way, by which thoſe amazing diſcoveries 
of new worlds on this globe were made. 


By 


76 BRITISH Book 1. 
By commerce, riches; and by riches, lux- 
ury muſt neceſſarily be introduced, againſt 
which no ſtate was ever able to ſtand ; 
and ſhe, from the nature of her con- 
ſtitution, was leſs able than any. When 
it is conſidered, that previous to the 
great opening of commerce, a ſyſtem of 
laws was provided for her, and promul- 
gated over the whole nation, which alone 
was able to prevent the deſtruction atten- 
dant on luxury; that this ſyſtem was not 
framed by any legiſlator of her own 
country, (as in all other caſes) not culti- 
vated and eſtabliſhed by the wiſdom or 
deſign of man, in times of knowlege, but 
in the days of ignorance, when our fore- 
fathers knew not it's particular uſe and 
fitneſs to their country ; that it was not 
brought in by the hand of power, and 
ſupported by authority, but made it's way 
againſt the paſſions, prejudices, intereſts, 
and violence of mankind ; that a refor- 
mation was begun of the abuſes which 
had crept into this ſyſtem, at a moſt cri- 
tical time, and that not from any views 
to public utility, but from agents who 
were doing good jn the dark ; when it is 
con- 


Cray. XIV. EDUCATION. 77 


_ conſidered, that Great Britain by theſe 
means, in her very infancy, and juſt emerg- 
ing out of darkneſs, found herſelf in poſ- 
ſeſſion of a wiſer and better ſyſtem of 
moral laws, than the labour of centuries 
in the moſt poliſhed and intelligent nati- 
ons ever produced; that this ſyſtem was 
not only calculated in the moſt exact man- 
ner for all the purpoſes of ſociety in gene- 
ral, but peculiarly adapted to the particu- 
lar circumſtances of this country above all 
others; when all theſe things are conſi- 
dered, ſure there is not any one of the 
leaſt reflection who muſt not neceſſarily 
| ſee the hand of God throughout. 

That the goſpel ſyſtem is the beſt cal- 
culated for the univerſal good of man- 
kind, and all the uſes of ſociety, is a con- 
feſſion extorted even from the mouths of 
it's greateſt enemies and oppoſers. That 
it is peculiarly adapted to our country and 
conſtitution, may at once be ſeen by any 
one who will take a view of both. That 
one principle chiefly inculcated by it was 
abſolutely neceſſary to a people, whoſe 
flouriſhing ſtate muſt be owing to com- 
mere, I mean that enlarged principle of 

uni- 


78 BRITISH Boon l. 
univerſal benevolence, which extending 
the narrow bounds of our affections be- 
yond the little ſpot in which we caſually 
farſt drew air, teaches us to look on the 
whole world as our country, and to love 
all mankind as our brethren ; that ſuch a 
principle, I ſay, muſt be of the utmoſt uſe 
and benefit to a commercial people, can 
not be denied. If all this be fo, if not 
only the well-being, but the very being 
of our ſtate depends upon the eſtabliſh- 
ment of this ſyſtem as our principle, and 
the eſtabliſhment depends upon the belief 
of it's divine inſtitution, is it our buſineſs 
to be too curiouſly inquiſitive into it's ori- 
vinal ? Shall we not embrace the bleſſings 
which it brings, becauſe we can not be 
certain of the hand from which they 
come ? Would not a man be reckoned an 
ideot who acted fo in the common affairs 
of life? It is ſo much, fo abſolutely. our 
intereſt to believe it, that far from re- 
quiring demonſtration to ſupport it, no- 
thing but the moſt abſolute demonſtration 
of the contrary ought to have the leaſt 
weight with us. Did it contain any thing 
indeed prejudicial to the intereſts of ſociety 
| in 


Cray. XIV. EDUCATION. 79 
in general, or the welfare of it's members 
in particular, it would then be the bufi- 
neſs of all men to examine narrowly into 
its foundation, and it would be their duty 
to refuſe obedience to it, unleſs it were 
unqueſtionably proved to come from God 
himſelf. But if it be allowed to be per- 
fectly calculated for the good of the 
whole, as well as of every individual, as 
it would be the higheſt abſurdity in us 
to refuſe obedience to it without ſuch 
proof, ſo it would be inconſiſtent with the 
wiſdom of that divine nature which does 
nothing in vain, to furniſh us with ſuch 
proof as we ſhould unreaſonably require. 
Demonſtration is ſuperfluous, where pro- 
bability is ſufficient. What ſhall we ſay 
then to a ſet of men who allow the utility 


of the ſyſtem, and yet do their utmoſt to 


deſtroy it's effect? Are they not enemies 
to ſociety, do they not declare themſelves 
ſuch in the very act, who attempt to de- 
ſtroy the force of any principle apparently 
for the good of ſociety? Are they not ene- 
mies to their country who would en- 
deavour to looſen and ſhake the baſis of 
it's conſtitution ? Suppoſe it were in their 

power 


= — — 


1 
1 
15 

** 

1 

Wy 

bl... 
* 

15 

I 1 
0 
4 09 
: | |. 
N 
F \e 
q 
14 
N 

15 

1 
. . g 
? 1 
* by 
. 
iff] 
81 
+. 
1 
1 
146 
.. 
i. 
* 0 
11% 
Lt * 
1 
+ 4 
00 
10 
wi 
fl 
TY 
7 
N 
wg 
WA 
eien 
i 72 
115 
Li 
"4 
0 
Wh 
TH 
$17.1. 
N 
i 
171 
308 
18 
. 11 
* 
FIR 
111% 
1 l 
083 
8 
«TH 
Wis 
: I 1 1 [i 
7 20 
1350 
2M 

18 

. . N A 
er. 

** 

09 

pre 

183 
1 
| , 
LI! w 
Wes. 
"va 
j | 
. 1 
14 
133 
18. 
II. 
„ :Þ 
* n 
4 
* 
1 
1 
14 
I 1 
1 


2 . —— —— 


BER. . nf DES Doe — — Cr" 
—— 
l 


— 


— oO 


— - — — - — . 
woo —— 4— — — —ů —— 2 2 
— 
= b 


— 
— x 
— R_——_—— 


— —_— 
4 -— S x 2 


80 BRITISH Beo J. 


powet to give abſolute demonſtration (im- 
poſſible indeed) that this religion came 
not from God, and by that means they 
ſhould deſtroy the effect of the only prin- 
ciple by which the nobleſt conſtitution 
upon earth could be ſupported, what re- 
ward ſhould theſe men expect? Should it 
not be oppoſite to what the preſervers of 
their country have met with? Should not 
a pillar of infamy be erected to their me- 
mories? It might be doubted whether 
there could be any ſuch men upon earth, 

were there not too many glaring proofs of 
it. The tranſcendent excellence of our 
Holy religion has neceſſarily raiſed enemies 
to it. For as this noble ſyſtem is admi- 
rably framed for the publick benefit, as 
well as the real good of every member, 
ſo is it directly oppoſite to the ſenſual gra- 
tifications and ſelfiſh views of- individuals. 
Whilſt therefore there are ſenſualiſts or 
weak ſelfiſh men, who miſtake their true 
intereſt in the world, they will neceſſarily 
be it's oppoſers and enemies. . Whatever 
ſpecious pretext of liberty or virtue they 
may ſhew forth, ſelfiſhneſs is at the bot- 
tom. Watch their actions, and you will 
| find 


Canary. XV. EDUCATION. 81 
find them felfiſh. Whoever endeavours 
to looſen or break the bonds of ſociety, 
in that inftance ſhews that he prefers his 
individual felf to the whole. Whoever 
contends for a liberty to act againſt the 
good of ſociety, wants to put it in practice. 
Whoever complains of reſtraints upon na- 
tural appetites, wants to gratify-thoſe ap- 
petites, Pity it is that ſuch men were not 
baniſhed together to ſome deſolate iſland, 
where they would foon be convinced by 
experience, of the neceſſity of having re- 
courſe to thoſe very principles, from the 
motive of ſelf-preſervation, which in a 


focial ſtate, from a motive of ſelf- gratifi- 


cation, they would have deſtroyed. 


| CHAP. XV. 

Of the means by which the principle of reli- 

 gton may be ſupported, and the chief cauſe 
of it's decay ſhewyn to ariſe from a ma- 
terial defect in edutation. 
J Aving ſhewn the neceſlity of the 
A principle, it will be now proper to 
conſider the means by which it may be 


ſupported, in it's due vigour. If it be ſaid | 


| that this principle coming from God, muſt 
: G :; of 


770 


82 BRITISH Beoxh 


of neceſſity make it's way in ſpite of all 
oppoſition on the part of man, and fulfil 
the ends of it's inſtitution, the argument 


C. 


+ s E 1 * . * 8 . N : 
* N * A * * a @& A * R — * * oo A „ * 


is fallacious. * « We are not to think, it 
"WP 


15 the work of God, and therefore not to 
be ſeconded by human care. Far other- 
wiſe ; for that very reaſon it claims our 
utmoſt care and diligence, it being the 


indiſpenſible duty of all good men, 


throughout the whole courſe of their 
lives, to cooperate with the deſigns of 
providence. In religion, as in nature, 
God doth ſomewhat, and ſomewhat is to 
be done on the part of man. He caufes 
the earth to bring forth materials for food 
and raiment, but human induſtry muſt 
improve, prepare, and properly apply 
both the one and the other, or mankind 
may periſh with cold and hunger. And 
according to this ſame analogy, the prin- 
ciptes of piety and religion, the things 
that belong to our ſalvation, although 
originally and primarily the work of 
God, yet require the protection of human 


government, as well as the furtherance 


and aid of all wie and good men.“ 


* Biſhop of Cloyne. . 17 „885 
God 


Cn. XIV. EDUCATION. 93 


God has revealed his will, and ſupplied 
the means to put it in execution ; this is 
all that is to be hoped for on his part, to 
make a proper uſe of thoſe means is the 
buſineſs of man. The moral precepts of 
chriſtianity are ſo clear, that to be aſſent- 
ed to, they need only be known. But 
knowlege without practice is uſeleſs. To 
perſuade men to practiſe them, it is neceſ- 
ſary that they ſhould be forcibly inculcat- 
ed, and frequent impreſſions made till 
practice ripens into habit. Even then 
thoſe impreſſions can not be too often re- 
peated, conſidering the frailty of human 
nature, for fear of a relapſe. How admi- 
rably has our conſtitution taken care of this, 
in eſtabliſhing an order of mien ſupported 
by the publick, whoſe whole buſineſs it is 
weekly and daily to attend to this point. 
But the end of their inſtitution can never 
be anſwered without power of ſpeaking, 
and ſkill in oratory. Deprived of theſe the 
pulpit is at beſt uſeleſs, and the preacher a 
cypher. We might as reaſonably expect 
that red coats, and muſkets, without am- 
munition, or military diſcipline in ſoldiers, / 
ſhould preſerve our country againſt the 

G 2 inva- 


84 BRITISH Boox J. 
invaſion of an enemy, as that black gowns, 
and bands, and empty forms, or the 
Shooting calm words folded up in ſmoke' ® 
ſhould be ſufficient weapons in the hands 
of the clergy, to ſupport the church 
againſt the attacks of vice and inh- 
delity. 

There are two ways by which the pu- 
rity of religion, and it's precepts, may be 
defended ; by ſpeaking, and by writing. 
The firſt is the immediate gift of God, who 
has annexed to it (when cultivated by man) 
powers almoſt miraculous, and an energy 
nearly divine. He has given to it tones 
to charm the ear, and penetrate the heart; 
he has joined to it action, and looks, to 
move the inmoſt ſoul. By that, attention 
is kept up without pain, and conviction 
carried to the mind with delight. Perſua- 
ſion is ever it's attendant, and the paſſions 
own it for a maſter. Great as is the force 
of its powers, ſo unbounded is their extent. 
All mankind are capable of it's impreſ- 
fions, the ignorant as well as the wiſe, the 
illiterate as well as the learned. 


* Shakeſpear's king John, 
the 


char. XV. EDUCATION. 85 


The ſecond is the invention of man, a 
mere work of art, and therefore can con- 
tain no natural power. It's uſe is to give 
ſtability to ſound, and permanence to 
thought. To preſerve words that other- 
wiſe might periſh as they are ſpoke; and 
to arreſt ideas that might vaniſh as they 
riſe in the mind. To aſſiſt the memory 
in treaſuring theſe up; and to convey 
knowlege at diſtance thro' the eye, where 
it could find no entrance by the ear. 

The vaſt ſuperiority of the former over 
the latter is obvious enough from this 
view. There is not one. power belonging 
to the latter, which the. former, wherever 
it's influence can be exerted, does not poſ- 
ſeſs in a more eminent degree. Whereas 
there are many powers belonging to the 
former, in which the latter has no ſhare, 
That works by the whole force of artifi- 
_ cial as well as natural means; this by ar- 
tificial means only. None but the learned 
can receive benefit from the one; all man- 
kind from the other. As the bulk of the 
people are illiterate, it's publick utility 
therefore muſt be much greater. The 
one ſhould be confidered as a handmaid 

G 3 to 


86 BRITISH Box I. 
to the other, and employed chiefly in 
ſuch offices as ſhe can not do in her own 
perſon, 

Should therefore our clergy deſert the 
ſtrong natural means given by God him- 
felf to ſupport religion, and morality 
means, the abſolute neceſſity of which is 
daily pointed out to them in every a& of 
office ; ſhould they have recourſe to the 
weak, the artificial, the mere inventions of 
man, is it ſtrange that their holy cauſe 
ſhould ſuffer ? In attempting to ſupport 
it only by polemical writings, have they 
not quitted their proper arms, and faſt- 
neſſes, to engage the enemy at their own 
weapons, and upon their own ground ? 
By the one, they might command the 
paſſions of mankind, and gain them in- 
tirely to their fide. In the other, the paſ- 
ſions, prejudices, and temporal intereſts of 
men, were too much againſt them, to ex- 
pect that they ſhould be impartial judges 
of what was coolly offered to their under- 
ſtanding. It is no eaſy matter to perſuade 
men to employ much labour and pains 
to come at the truth of a thing, which 
they wiſh to be falſe; and a right con- 


cluſion 


Cizay.XV. EDUCATION. 375 


eluſion from long deductions of reaſoning. 
is difficult to be made even by unbiaſſed 
minds, but is hardly ever to be expected 
from ſuch as are prejudiced, unleſs con- 
viction like light be forced upon them. 
In the former, the clergy had the field in- 
tirely to themſelves, no antagoniſt could 
riſe up after them to eraſe whatever im- 
preſſions their oratory had made. In the 
latter, they had as many adverſaries as 
pleaſed to take the field, {killed in all the 
weapons of logick, and armed with the 
full force of ridicule; which was but too 
likely to make ſtrong impreſſions upon 
minds that were before prepoſſeſſed againſt 
them, and their doctrines. How was it 
poſſible therefore, that they ſhould not 
loſe their cauſe, when brought before pre- 
judiced judges? . Or how could they expect 
that truth ſhould prevail, when ridicule, 
not reaſon, was ſet up to be it's teſt? . 
By this method, our divines have not 
only changed their celeſtial armour made: 
by God himſelf, of proof againſt all hu- 
man force, for ſuch as was made by the 
weak hands of imperfect man; their wea- 


pens tempered in pure ætherial fire, for 
G 4 thoſe 


88 BRITISH Book I. 


thoſe of brittle ſteel; they have alſo 
ſwerved from the example, and deſerted 
the method pointed out by their great 
founder. It was by preaching, not writ- 
ing, that our bleſſed Saviour propagated 
his doctrines. His example was followed 
by the apoſtles, who. committed nothing. 
to writing but plain matters of fact, and 
unadorned precepts. It was. the gift of 
the tongues, not the pen, which was 

miraculouſly beſtowed on the apoſtles ; 
and it is to be ſuppoſed when they ad- 
drefled the different nations in their diffe- 
rent languages, that they did it with force 
and energy. The mere utterance of the 
ſounds whereof their language was com- 
poſed, could have but little effect, ex- 
cept the wonder it might occaſion, how. 
illiterate men ſhould be able to acquire 
that art; but when each found himſelf. 
addreſſed not only in the words, but in 
the ſpirit of their ſeveral languages; their 
expreſſions enforced by proper tones and 
cadence ; and the whole delivered with 
ſuch energy as could alone penetrate the 
heart, they at once ſaw and felt, that this 
could beonly the work of God; nor could 


ſuch 


CHAN. XV. EDUCATION, 89 


fach multitudes of converts have been 
made in one day by any other means. In 
what ſort of ſounds, with what kind of 
geſture, muſt St. Paul have ſpoke, when 
Felix trembled ? With what power of 
oratory muſt he have addreſſed the Athe- 
nians, when that poliſhed people looked 
upon him with ſach admiration? And 
what muſt have been the farce of his elo- 
quence when the men of Lyſtta called him 
Mercury, and would have paid him A 
vine honours ?. 
And indeed when the amazing ſtrength, 
and almoſt boundleſs power of oratory is 
conſidered, no other inſtrument could be 
found of ſufficient: force, and ſuitable dig- 
nity, to ſupport the important and glorious 
cauſe of religion. If the eloquence of 
the antients was irrefiſtable upon com- 
mon topicks, where only the temporal in- 
tereſts of men were concerned, how much 
more extenſive mult it's power be, where 
their eternal welfare is it's ſubject? If the 
mere charms of oratory alone, independent 
of the ſubject, could have ſuch effects; 
if the attention of all Greece was taken 
op by a diſpute between two orators, 
about 
6 


— 


90 BRITISH Book I. 
about a trifling reward, an honorary 
crown; how much more intereſted muſt 
each hearer be in a cauſe, whoſe ſubject 
is the higheſt reward to himſelf, that can 
be conceived by man, and a never- fading 
crown of glory, of which he can not be 
deprived ? If Cicero in pleading the cauſe 
of a criminal, could make the blood for- 
ſake the cheeks of a Cæſar, and unnerve 
his arm; why might not the greateſt and 
mightieſt amongſt us be made to tremble 
like Felix, could our preachers, like St. 
Paul, reaſon with force and energy, upon 
righteouſneſs and judgment to come? 
There can be no doubt, but that an equal 
degree of ſkill in that art would have much 
nobler effects amongſti us, and be poſſeſſed 
of a much more extenſive power, than 
amongſt the antients, as it's ſubject would 
be ſo much more important, and the field 
in which it ſhould diſplay itſelf fo much 
enlarged. It muſt alſo have a greater 
command over the paſſions, as the object 
of our hopes and fears is increaſed. Who- 
ever doubts of the truth of this, may ſoon 
be convinced, by examining into the won- 
derful effects which have been produced 

| by 


3 


Cray. XV. EDUCATION. 91 
by the wild uncultivated oratory of our 
methodiſt preachers. 
The ſtudy, or neglect of this art, can not 
poſſibly be a matter of indifference to us. 
It muſt be productive of the beſt, or at- 
tended with the worſt conſequences. It 
muſt either effectually ſupport religion 
againſt all oppoſition, or be the principal 
means of it's deſtruction. - The church 
ſervice, according as it is either well or ill 
adminiſtered, muſt excite great emotions, 
or {ct people to ſleep ; it muſt give delight, 
or occaſion diſguſt; it muſt carry convic- 
tion of truth with it, or appear fictitious. 
And indeed nothing can contribute more 
ſtrongly to make the latter opinion prevail, 
than hearing it's doctrines delivered in tones 
and accents quite foreign from nature and 
truth. In this, as in life, the general max - 
im will hold good, that before you can 
perſuade a man into any opinion, he muſt 
firſt be convinced that you believe it your- 
ſelf. This he can never be, unleſs the tones 
of voice in which you ſpeak come from 
the heart, accompanied by correſponding 
looks, and geſtures, which naturally re- 
ſult from a man who ſpeaks in earneſt. 
And 


98 BRITISH. Bear. 


„ }_"A-OwE£ 4 


which nature has 1 us. to prevent 
our being impoſed upon in our canverſe 
with each other; and indeed, without 
ſame ſuch plain characteriſtical marks, 
truth could not long exiſt upon earth; 
nor could there be any mutual confidence 
amongſt men. For conſidered only as ar- 
tificial ſounds, the words of fatthood are 
as eaſily ſpoke as thoſe of truth; the lips 
and tongue diſcharge their office equally 
well in the one, and the other. But the 
tones that are declarative of truth, muſt 
come from. the heart, which at the ſame 
time ſtrikes other chords; the face, and 
limbs, act as uniſons, and bear teſtimony 
to the truth ſo declared. And tho this 
power may be uſurped, and practiſed by 
art, ſo as to impoſe upon many; yet as it 
requires great pains and ſkill, the examples 
of thoſe who ſucceed in the attempt, are 
not many. And as art, tho it may imitate, 
can never come up to nature; tho it may 
put on her ſemblance, can never be poſ- 
ſeſſed of her energy; it can hardly ever 
impoſe on the judicious, and the obſerving. 
On this account, whenever we ſee thoſe 
ſtrong 


Caae. XVI EDUCATION. 93 
ſtrong ſtamps of truth made in-nature's 
mint, the coin paſſes current, and the 
words are taken for ſterling. Where they 
are not very obvious, we ſuſpect counter- 
feits; and where they are abſent, we ſup- 
poſe the metal is baſe. | 
If this be ſo, what muſt neceſſarily be 
the conſequence of the manner in which 
our church ſervice is generally performed ? 
Muſt not truth itſelf paſs for falſhood, 
when covered all over with her vail? If 
none of the natural criterions by which 
the is diſtinguiſhed appear, muſt not all 
paſs for fictitious? How can a clergyman 
hope to gain belief to what he utters, 
when he utters it not in ſuch a manner as 
if he believed it himſelf? This therefore 
may eaſily be conſidered as the great ſource 
of irreligion; nor would it be a very con- 
fident aſſertion to ſay, that this defect in 
the miniſtry has made more infidels than 
all the arts and ſubtleties of the enemies 
to religion. For as it muſt be allowed 
that the divine ſervice is generally per- 
formed in a flovenly and diſagreeable, or 
elſe in a cold and unaffecting manner; it 
follows, that many of nicer taſte are kept 
0 away 


— 


94 „ BIRIT TFN H Doo I. 
away thro' diſguſt from places of religious 
-worſhip, and they who continue to fre- 
quent them may eaſily be made the worſe 
by it, but can hardly receive any benefit. 
Their devotion can not be raiſed, however 
it may flag, by hearing prayers ill read; 
-nor will the doctrines from the pulpit ac- 
quire new force or credit, by being deli- 
vered in a lifeleſs manner, and in unnatu- 
ral tones. On the contrary, being ac- 
cuſtomed to ſee nothing in the mode but 
what is fictitious, men will habitually come 
to think the thing itſelf ſo; and will be 
inſenſibly led to conſider the whole as a 
matter of form, a mere human inſtitution 
to anſwer the purpoſes of government. The 
experience of mankind may be appealed 
to upon this occaſion, whether it is not 
generally confeſſed in words, as well as 
ſhewn in practice, by thoſe who viſit the 
churches every Sunday, that they perform 
this ceremony more out of decency and 
example, than from any afliſtance they 
find there to deyotion, or any inſtruction 
from the ſermon. And indeed, were they 
not to confeſs it, the general coldneſs and 
inattention, the levity in the behaviour of 
ſome, 


Cnay. XV. EDUCATION. 95 
ſome, and drowſineſs even to profound 
ſleep in others, neceſſarily infuſed by the 
opiate of a dull monotony, would too 
too plainly evince the truth of the obſer- 
vation.“ Ws. 

That contrary effects would follow 
from a contrary method, muſt be ſenſibly 
felt by all who have occaſionally heard the 
ſervice well performed, or a diſcourſe well 
delivered. The different impreſſions 
which they then made upon them muft 
convince them of this truth. And indeed 
it is ſufficiently demonſtrated by the crowds 
which flock to hear a preacher, whoſe 


natural talents for elocution have ſet him 


above the common run. | 

The ingenious author of the Spectator 
has written a paper on the reading of the 
liturgy, in ſo clear and forcible a manner, 
and it is ſo appoſite to the caſe in point, 
that I am tempted to preſent part of it 
immediately to the eyes of my reader, in- 
ſtead of referring him to the book. 


In this caſe, what was before obſerved of the laws 
may be applied to religion. There are two ſorts of cox- 
s ruption, ane when men do not obſerve religion, the other 
« when they are corrupted by religion; an incurable evil, 
« becauſe it is in the very remedy itſelf. 


. The 


+ Spect. vol. ii. No 147. 


8928 


 o © The well reading of the common 
prayer is of ſo great importance, and fo 
much neglected, that I take the liberty 


to offer to your conſideration ſome par- 


ticulars on that ſubject: and what more 
worthy your obſervation than this? A 
thing fo publick, and of ſo high conſe- 
quence. It is indeed wonderful, that 
the frequent exerciſe of it ſhould not 
make the performers of that duty more 
expert in it- This inability, as I con- 
ceive, proceeds from the little care that 
is taken of their reading while boys at 
ſchool ; where when they are got into 
Latin, they are looked upon as above 
Engliſh, the reading of which is wholly 


neglected, or at leaft read to very little 


purpoſe, without any due obſervations 
made to them of the proper accent, and 
manner of reading. By this means they 
have acquired ſuch ill habits as will not 
eaſily be removed. The only way that 
I know of to remedy this, is to propoſe 
ſome perſon of great ability that way, 


as a pattern for them; example being 


moſt 


nA. XV. EDUCATION. 97 


C 


FF ( ͤ Wy oy . Te 9 Wo. os Yo WR os ou 9D 


moſt effectual to convince the learned, 
as well as to inſtruct the ignorant. 
© You muſt know, fir, I have been a 


conſtant frequenter of the ſervice of the 
church of England for above theſe four 


years laſt paſt, and till Sunday was ſeven- 
night never diſcovered to ſo great a de- 
gree, the excellency of the common 
prayer. When being at St. James's' 
Garlick-hill church, I heard the ſervice: 


read fo diſtinctly, ſo emphatically, and 


lo fervently, that it was next to an im- 


- poſſibility to be unattentive. My eyes 


and my thoughts could not wander as 
uſual, but were confined to my prayers : 
I then conſidered I addreſſed myſelf 
to the Almighty, and not to a beauti- 
ful face. And when I reflected on my 
former performances of that duty, I 
found I had run it over as a matter of 


form, in compariſon to the manner in 


which I then diſcharged it. My mind 
was really affected, and fervent wiſhes 
accompanied my words. The confeſſion 
was read with ſuch a reſigned humility, 
the abſolution with ſuch a comfortable 


- authority, the thankſgiving with ſuch a 


reli- 


”. 


98 BRITISH. Boox I. 


FART 3 % ̃⅛ ik-'¼p. eg OY YO % . ,, «ô7 


religious joy, as made me feel thoſe af- 


fections of the mind in a manner I never 


did before, To remedy therefore the 
grievance above complained of, I hum 


bly propoſe, that this excellent reader, 


- upon the next, and every annual affem- 


bly of the clergy of Sion-College, and 


all other conventions, ſhould read prayers 
before them. For then thoſe that are 


afraid of ſtretching their mouths, and 
ſpoiling their ſoft voice, willlearn toread 
with clearneſs, loudneſs, and ſtrength. 
Others that affect a rakiſh negligent air, 
by folding their arms, and lolling on 


their book, will be taught a decent be- 


haviour, and comely erection of body. 
Thoſe that read ſo faſt as if impatient 
of their work, may learn to ſpeak de- 


liberately. There is another ſort of per- 


ſons, whom I call Pindarick readers, as 
being confined to no ſet meaſure ; theſe. 
pronounce five or ſix words with great 
deliberation, and the five or fix ſubſequent 


ones with as great celerity: the firſt 


part of a ſentence with a very exalted 
voice, and the latter part with a ſub- 


miſſive one: ſome time again with one 


* ſort 


Cnay. XV. EDUCATION. 99 
* ſort of tone, and immediately after with 
© a very different one. Theſe gentlemen 
© will learn of my admired reader an even- 
* neſs of voice and delivery. And all who 
* are innocent of theſe affeQations, but 
© read with ſuch an indifference as if 
they did not underſtand the language, 
may then be informed of the art of read- 
© ing movingly, and fervently ; how to 
place the emphaſis, and give the propet 
© accent to each word, and how to vary 
© the voice according to the nature of the 
* ſentence.” 
There can be no doubt that if ji 
were always read in the moving and fer- 
vent manner above deſcribed, there would 
be much ſtronger inducements to go to 
church, and devotion would be much pro- 
moted by it. But it is in his other office 
of preaching, that the clergyman will 
find the greateſt occaſion for {kill in ora- 
tory. Here the whole field of morality, 
as well as religion, is opened to him to 
diſplay his talents. The important truths 
of both are to be made plain by him, and 
enforted. In this point of view, were 
he equal to the taſk, he muſt be confidered 
H 2 « as 


896 BRITISH Book J. 


as a member of the moſt uſeful and moſt 
honourable order that ever exiſted upon 
earth. What advantage, were he but equal 
in accompliſhments, would he have over 
the orators of old (who were always con- 
fidered as of the firſt rank in the ſtate) in 
point of dignity of ſubject, power of mov- 
ing the paſſions, and general utility. If 
the art of perſuaſion be allowed to be of 
more force, than either wit or knowlege, 
in acquiring a ſuperiority over others, and 
at the ſame time to conciliate their eſteem 
and love, in what a rank of pre-eminence 
might not this .body of men have ſtood 
cover all other profeſſions, had they only 
applied themſelves to the ſtudy of that art. 
Whilſt the neglect of it has probably been 
one of the main cauſes of the contempt 
into which the order is fallen. Nor is it 
hard to account for this: for what can 
be a greater ſubject of ridicule than to ſee 
men daily. attempting what they are not 
able to execute? Or what can poſſeſs one 
more ſtrongly that an art (however en- 
titled) f is merely mechanical, than when 
it is every day ſeen, performed i in a me- 
chanical manner: and it is obvious enough 

that 


8 1 


Cnae.XV. EDUCATION. 101 
that if the profeſſion of holy orders comes 
once to be conſidered as a mechanical art, 
it will of courſe be conſidered as s below all 
others. 

How far the extraordinary abilities, and 
perfection of {kill in the artiſts may raiſe 
even the meaner arts in the eſtimation of 
the world, and how much a deficiency 
of talents, and imperfection in the profeſ- 
ſors, may degrade the nobleſt, is a point 
too obvious to be enlarged upon. The 
common ſenſe of mankind confers rank 
and dignity on the ſeveral arts, and pro- 
feſſions, according as they contribute to 
their benefit or delight. As the mind is 
ſuperior to the body, ſuch as promote the 
advantage of the former are preferred to 
ſuch as have only the latter for their 
object; ſuch as require intellectual pow- 
ers, to ſuch as ſtand in need only of the 
mechanical; and thoſe profeſſions which 
contribute to the uſe and profit of man- 
kind, ſtand before ſuch as only promote 
their pleaſure. But thoſe in which both 
are united, are clearly pre-eminent over 
the reſt, and naturally acquire a ſuperi- 
ority over each other according to the 


1 ſeve- 


— 


102 2 BRITISH Book. I. 


ſeveral degrees of that union. This rule 
is as invariable as that of common ſenſe, 
nor can any of theſe arts and profeſſions 
loſe their natural rank, but in proportion as 
they fail in anſwering their end ; which 
can only happen from the inſufficiency of 
the artiſts, and profeſſors. If we try the 
profeſſion of holy orders by this rule, we 
ſhall find that it is evidently ſuperior to all 
others. It muſt be allowed that the bulk 
of mankind have not leiſure 'to be philo- 
ſophers, or to ſee things in their cauſes. 
And yet the well-being of the ſtate de- 
* upon their actions being regulated 
by the rules of improved reaſon. They 
muſt therefore imbibe all their principles 
of knowlege, as well as conduct in life, 
from thoſe who have opportunity and abi- 
lities to enquire into the ſources of the mo- 
ral duties, and the natural relations of thin 25. 
+ hut if to inform the underſtanding, 
and regulate the will, is the moſt laſting 
and diffuſive benefit, there will not - 
: found ſo uſeful and excellent an inſti- 
« tution as that of the chriſtian prieſt- 
* hood, which i is now become the {corn 
t Guard, Ne 130, 5 
© of 


Cnaye. XV. EDUCATION. 103 


© of fools. That a numerous order of men 
* ſhould be conſecrated to the ſtudy of the 
© moſt ſublime and beneficial truths, with 
a deſign to propagate them by their diſ- 
courſes and writings, to inform their fel- 
lowy- creatures of the being and attributes 
of the deity, to poſſeſs their minds with 
the ſenſe of a future ſtate, and not only 
to explain the nature of every virtue and 
moral duty, but likewiſe to perſuade 
mankind to the practice of them by the 
moſt powerful and engaging motives, ie 
a thing ſo excellent and neceſſary to 
the well-being of the world, that no 
body but a modern free-thinker could 
have the forehead, or folly, to turn it 
into ridicule.* þ 
But neither the ſcorn of fools, nor the 
' ridicule of free-thinkers, could in the 
leaſt affect, or depreciate an inſtitution fo 
excellent in it's nature, ſo abſolutely ne- 
ceſſary to the welfare of mankind, if the 
miniſtry were really equal to the diſcharge 
of their office. Their chief end is to in- 
form the underſtanding, and regulate the 
will of others. The firſt can not be done 
unleis their own ideas are conveyed into 
; H 4 the 


Fe ne To p oy os UW HR WT TL 


— 


ow 


104 BRITISH. Book I. 
the minds of others with perſpicuity and 
force; nor the laſt, unleſs the paſſions of 
men are wrought upon to excite them to 
good works, and deter them from ſuch 
as are evil; in as much as the paſſions are 
known to be the great movers to, or re- 
ſtrainers from action. Neither of which 
can be done without ſkill in oratory. All 
other requiſites to the prieſthood with- 
out that, tho' poſſeſſed in the moſt emi- 
nent degree, are uſeleſs to it's end. This 
is the preacher's inſtrument with which 
he is to work, and without this, his 
knowlege and piety are: of as little uſe 
to the world, as the {kill of a painter 
would be without pencil-or colours, or 
that of a muſician without' the power of 
conveying ſounds. Poſſeſſed of this, no ar- 
tiſt whatever is ſo equal to the completion 
of his deſigns; for tho' the difficulty of 
arriving at the end, be ſuitable to it's uti- 
lity, and grandeur, and conſequently be- 
yond that of all others; yet the means are 
proportioned, and adequate to the mighty 
work. For who upon earth is to be com- 
pared in faculties and powers, to the man, 
in a whom are united the true philoſopher, 


the 


char. XV. EDUCATION. 10g 


the chriſtian hero, and the potent orator ? 
Or how can ſuch precepts fail of having 
their deſired effect, which are founded 
on reaſon, ſupported by revelation, con- 
firmed by the living example of the 
preacher, and impreſſed on the yielding 
mind by the irreſiſtible charms of elo- 
quence? A union fo powerful, that what 
Agamemnon ſaid of the deſtruction of 
Troy, with regard to the wiſe Neſtor, may 
with much more truth and propriety be 


applied i in this caſe; that were there but 


nine ſuch men at the head of the church, 
the bulwarks of vice would foon be de- 
ſtroyed, and the whole ſtate of corrup- 
tion periſh. 

Mr. Addiſon in \ (peaking upon this ſubC- 
je, has the following paſſage. * © The 
light in which theſe points ſhould be 
* expoſed to the view of one who is pre- 
© judiced againſt the names, religion, 
church, prieſt, and the like, is to con- 
* ſider the clergy as ſo many philoſophers, 
© the churches as ſchools, and their ſer- 
© mons as lectures, for the information 
and improvement of the audience. How 
» Guard, Numb, 130, | 


s would 


106 BRITISH Book 1, 


would the heart of Socrates or Tully 
have rejoiced, had they lived in a na- 
tion, where the law had made provifion 
for philoſophers, to read lectures of mo- 
rality and theology eyery ſeventh day, 
in ſeveral thouſands of ſchools erected at 
the publick charge throughout the whole 
country; at which lectures, all ranks, 
and ſexes, without diſtinction, were ob- 
liged to be preſent, for their general im- 
provement ? And what wicked wretches 
would they think thoſe men, who ſhould 
endeavour to defeat the purpoſe of ſa 
divine an inſtitution ?' 

With all due deference to the FOR 
ment of ſo great a man, I think he has 
here miſtaken the point ; and what he has 
advanced would have had much more 
force, had he ſubſtituted the word orators, 
in the room of philoſophers ; and this 
would probably have been the caſe, could 
his aſſertion have been warranted by prac- 
tice. By orators, I mean ſuch as they 
were of old, when none were thought 
worthy of that title but thoſe who were 
at the ſame time philoſophers. For it 
can hardly be expected that philoſophy 

alone 


\ a, , SATA, 27a ,, a @ 


Cray. XV. EDUCATION. 107 


alone could do more with us, than it did 
with the antients. That it ſhould be more 
powerful when ſet to work by mercenary 
views, than when actuated by the nobler 


principle of fame. Or to conſider it in 


regard to the times when it became mer- 
cenary amongſt t them, that it's profeſſors 
ſhould be more excellent with us, where 


their ſtipends are fixed, and ſettled with- 


out any reference to their abilities ; than 


with them, where their whole i income- and 
emoluments depended upon their {kill in 
the art which they profeſſed. 

The ſeparation « of philoſophy from ora- 
tory was the main cauſe that both were in 
a ſhort time deſtroyed. The union of the 
ſoul and body are not more neceſſary for 
any uſeful purpoſe in life, than the union 
of oratory ang e for their . 


timate connection there was between N 
and words; without a right uſe of which, 
they could neither make any ſure progreſs | 
themſelves in ſcience, nor juſtly commu- 


nicate their thoughts to others. Accord- 
ingly. 


108 BRITISH Book I. 


ingly we find that after the ſeparation, an 
infinite variety of ſects aroſe, each of which 
vain- gloriouſly boaſted that they were poſ- 
ſeſſed of the only true philoſophy ; whilſt 
in fact almoſt all their diſputes were 
merely about words + ; nor was the con- 
fuſion at Babel greater, occaſioned by the 
variety of tongues; than was the confuſion 
of knowlege amongſt theſe different ſets, 
thro' their want of preciſion in language. 

Oratory and philoſophy when united, like 
bullion ſtamped in the mint, occaſioned a 
briſk and free circulation thro' the whole 
commonwealth of ſcience ; when ſepa- 
rated, they were to be conſidered as coin 
hoarded by miſers, or melted down into 
pieces of ornamental plate. However rich 
private perſons might think themſelves in 
compariſon of others, yet whilſt the ſtate 
was poor, there could be but little ſecurity 
for the preſervation of the wealth amaſſed 
by individuals, as the members muſt ne- 
ceflarily be involved i in the deſtruction of 


the whole. 


+ Verbi enim controverſia jam diu torquet 8 


bomines contentionis cupidiores quam veritatis, | 
Cie. de orat. L 1 


This 


CAP. XV. EDUCATION. 109 


This ſeparation was no leſs hurtful to 
the ſtate itſelf, than to knowlege. The 
natural conſequence of it was, that their 
wiſe men were no longer orators, their 
orators were no longer wiſe. When men 
of the greateſt abilities, and integrity, 
who were the beſt qualified to ſupport 
and invigorate the ſtate, retired from pub- 
lick buſineſs, and paſſed their lives in the 
ſnades of privacy and contemplation; their 
place was of courſe ſupplied by thoſe of 


meaner talents and worſe diſpoſitions. As 


theſe had not virtue for their end, there 
was no occaſion for wiſdom as the means. 
Their ends being altogether ſelfiſh, cun- 
ning and the art of humouring and flat- 
tering the capricious multitude, were the 
ſureſt means to attain them. Thus cor- 
ruption and folly eaſily carried all before 
them, when wiſdom and virtue had quit- 
ted the field. The ſoul of oratory was 
gone, and only the uſeleſs corple remain- 
ed, preſerved and embalmed like the 
Egyptian mummies, by the care of rhe- 
toricians, Nor. could philoſophy long 
ſurvive it; for how could ſhe hope to 
keep her 3 when ſhe had parted 

with 

3 


2 ; 
* 
—— — — — - is 
_ . = 8 — — — 
a * 5 — 2 
HS << WE 22 —— 8 
Eta — 
r A Os . Boe Ben ee rt — = 
= — — ” . ® = _ * * CE us 
A » Go, TINY RY 27 2 ow, + N 0 * A. * hgh a—y, * by 
— ve 8 ad G 1 5 Þ — —— 2 7 33 - __ ” 
—_— 75 3 2 2 — / er — = 


— 


= 
p + Ss — — * 
— A. — 8 a — — 
e — —ͤ— ear en es 2 —ů — 
a * * 1488.2 — 
7 88 r 2 r n 


110 BRITISH Box l. 
with her arms of defence, and pulled 
down her own eticloſures. Whilſt ſhe 
was united with eloquence, a ſenſe of 
ſhame kept out all pretenders, and none 
but ſuch as ſpoke with ſkill, with accura- 
cy, clearneſs and elegance, could be heard 
without marks of ſcorn and contempt, 
upon any of the topicks of philoſophy. 
But when philoſophy grew ambitious, 
when ſhe claimed an independent throne, 
and diſdained all alliance with oratory, ſhe 
indeed greatly increaſed the number of 
her ſubjects, but they were ſuch as were 
far from adding to her power. When 
eloquence was deſpiſed, all men were 
at iderty to ſpeak their thoughts pub- 
lickly in idle own manner + ; this 
Schl the moutlis of multitudes of fools, 
who all thought they had an equal right, 
as rational beings, to harangue upon the 
ſubjects of right reaſon, and true philo- 
pt. Nor could their pretenſions to 
theſe be eaſily ſet aſide, when the bulk 


wy Nunc autem quiz velut propria philofophiz aſſe- 
runtur paſſim tractamus omnes. Quis enim non de juſto, 
æquo, ac bono, modo non & vir peſſimus loquitur? Quis 
non etiam ruſticorum aliqua de cauſis naturalibus querit ? 
ey 
| of 


Cruae, XV. EDUCATION, 111 
of mankind were to be their judges; 
equally ignorant with themſelves, - and 
equally interefted in the claim. Beſides; 
their pretenſions to philoſophy could only 
be determined in this caſe by the intel- 
lectual faculty, which is far from being 
predominant in the multitude ; whereas 
the ſenſes bore great ſway in judging 
abouteloquence, and conſequently all man- 
kind were capable of pronouncing with 
tolerable exactneſs about the metit of it's 
profeſſors T. Whilſt therefore philoſophy 
was guarded (if I may be allowed the ex- 
preflion) by the prieſthood of oratory, the 
profane and the vulgar were kept out of 
her ſanctuary. Her doctrines were ex- 
plained only by ſuch as had ſtudied and 
underſtood them; knowlege in thoſe be- 
ing as neceſſary to the orator as ſkill in 
ſpeaking ; for the latter would be vain 
and uſeleſs without the former 4. She 
was therefore always ſhewn in her true 
light, 
+ Nunquam de bono oratore, aut pon bono, doctis 
hominibus cum populo diſſentio fuit. Cie. in Brot. 
1 t Ein ex rerum coguĩtione effloreſcat, & redundet 


oportet oratio ; quæ niſi ſubeſt res ab oratore percepts, 
cognita, inanem quandam habet elocutionem, & pene 


puerilem. 
8 4 


112 BRITISH Book I. 
light,- and all appeared regular and beau- 
tiful. But when this order was aboliſhed, 
all men laid claim to the diſcharge of 
the ſacred office; the ignorant and vain, 
the loud and the pretending, were the 
foremoſt in aſſuming the title. Her fences 
were deſtroyed by the multitude of pre- 
tenders, and her holy ground trampled 
by unhallowed feet. Her mazes and la- 
byrinths were broken down by ſuch as 
had not the clue to guide them thro' the 
regular confuſion, and in a ſhort time all 
was reduced to anarchy and chaos. Her 
doctrines, formerly ſo clear and beautiful 
when ſhewn by wiſdom in the light of 
truth, were now darkened by ignorance 
and diſtorted by falſhood. The words of 
knowlege were contaminated by the 
mouths of fools, and the precepts of vir- 
tue corrupted by the tongues of the vi- 
cious. Meanneſs joined with arrogance, 
and vanity with weakneſs in the profeſſors, 
ſoon brought the profeſſion itſe]f into 
puerilem. Dicendi enim virtus, nifi ei qui dicit, ea de 
quibus dicit, percepta ſint, extare non poteſt. 

Hzc autem oratio, fi res non ſubeſt ab oratore percepta 


& —— aut nulla fit neceſſe eſt, aut omnium irri- 
ſione ludatur. Cic. de orat. lib. 1. | 


CON= 


Car. XV. EDUCATION. 113 
contempt. Appearance with them ſup- 
plied the place of roy and form of ſub- 
ſtanee. | 
For it was not by the means of 5 vir 
© tue, or knowlege, that they laboured to 
be thought philoſophers, but they made 
© uſe of a folemn ſeverity of countenance, 
* anda dreſs different from the reſt of the 
*- world, as coverings to the vileſt morals.” 
If therefore oratory was ſo neceſſary to 
the ſupport of philoſophy, how much 
more mult it be to that of religion? To 
enter into a minute diſquiſition of this 
point would take up too much time, and 
perhaps unneceſſarily. It will be ſuffici- 
ent to conſider the nature of the ends pro- 
poſed by the two, and the neceſſity as well 
as proportion of the means will appear of 
courſe; The end of the antient philoſo- 
pher was, to inform the underſtanding. 
The end of the chriſtian philoſopher. is, 
not only to inform the underſtanding, but 
to purge and rectify the heart, and by | 
means of the emotions and feelings of that, 
to regulate the will. Hence it is manifeſt, 
that in the object common to philoſophy, 
and religion, the neceſſity and uſe of ora- 


I14 BRITISH Book I. 


tory is the ſame; but in regard to the 
other object of religion diſtinct from phi- 
loſophy, it has alſo a diſtinct neceſſity for, 
and a different uſe of, that art. To the 
firſt, only a partial application of it is re- 
quired, whilſt the laſt demands it's full 
powers in their largeſt extent. Where 
the underſtanding alone is the object, 
Quinctilian does not heſitate to give the 
firſt place to oratory. * If it be a perſon's 
province frequently to ſpeak upon the 
ſubjects of juſtice, fortitude, temperance, 
and the other moral virtues, [and there 
can ſcarce be a cauſe found in which 
ſome queſtions relative to theſe does not 
ariſe] if all theſe are to be laid open, 
and diſplayed only by invention and elo- 
cution, ſhall it be doubted wherever the 
ſtrength of genius, and fluency of ſpeech 
are neceſſary, whether the qualifications 
of an orator are there the principal? But 
where the queſtion is about moving the 
heart, and exciting the paſſions, there he 
ſhews that oratory reigns alone, and that 
there the moſt vigorous of her powers are 
to be exerted. * In publick orations elo- 
* cution has a wonderful power and ef- 


* ficacy. 


j a» YT A EO 


o 


c 


c 


Onap. XV. EDUCATION. 1175 


ficacy. For the quality of our compo- 


fitions is not of ſo great moment, as the 


manner in which they are delivered ; 
becauſe every hearer is affected accord- 
ing to his own ſenſations. On which 
account, the ſtrongeſt argument that an 
orator can produce, will loſe it's effect, if 


not ſupported by an emphatical delivery. 


For all the paſſions neceſſarily droop, if 
they are not inflamed by the tone of 
voice, the turn of countenance; and in- 
deed the carriage of the whole body. 
And happy are we when we have accom- 
pliſhed all this, if even then our judge 
ſhall catch our warmth; by no means, 
can we affect him with a careleſs indiffe- 
rence, but he muſt neceſſarily fink and 
be diſſolved in our drowſineſs, Even the 
actors upon the ſtage afford an excellent 


example of this, who add ſo much grace 


to the productions of our beſt poets, that 
in the hearing, they give us infinitely 
greater pleaſure than in the reading; 
and gain our attention even to the vileſt 
ſcribblers : fo that thoſe pieces ſhall fre- 
quently bring acrowded audience, which 
are not allowed a place in a library. 
5 * But 


be. 


116 | BRITISH Book I. 


* But if in caſes which we know to be 
feigned, and without foundation, elo- 
* cution alone is of ſuch efficacy, as to ex- 
* cite anger, fears, anxiety ; how greatly 
* muſt it's power be increaſed, when we 
© believe it to be founded in truth? I ſhall, 
indeed, make no ſcruple to affirm, that 

but a very moderate oration recom- 


© mended by the powers of action, will be 


of greater weight, than the beſt compo- 
* fition without it. On which account 
* Demoſthenes being aſked, what in the 
* whole field of oratory deſerved the firſt 
place, gave it to + elocution ; as alſo the 
* ſecond, and the third, till the enquiry 
© ceaſed. By which he gave us to under- 
© ſtand, that he judged this not to be the 
principal but the only requiſite.” 

If the appearance of being firmly per- 
ſuaded themſelves of the truth of the opi- 
nions which they endeavoured to propa- 
gate, was thought ſo neceſſary to the hea- 


then, how much more muſt it be to the 


| + The meaning of this word is thus defined by Cicero, 
Pronunciatio eſt vocis, & vultus, & geſtus moderatio cum 
venuſtate, That is, Elocution is the graceful manage- 


chriſ- 


ment of the voice, countenance, and geſture. 


8 


Cray, XV. EDUCATION. 117 


chriſtian philoſophers, when the leaſt ſuſ- 
picion induced of the truth of their doc- 
trines, muſt not only deſtroy their force, 
but produce effects directly oppoſite to 
their intent. The antients were ſo con- 
vinced of this, that they preſerved the ap- 
pearance of truth, when the reality was 
gone, and the form remained long after 
the ſubſtance had periſhed. What ſhall 
we ſay then to our modern ſect, who far 
from attempting to keep up this neceſſary 
ſemblance, are contented to deliver the 
fublimeſt truths in a fictitious manner? 
Or ſhall we wonder, when we confider 
that it is by appearance the judgements 
of the world are moſt influenced, that 
the ſhew and ſemblance of truth ſhould 
in one caſe make proſelytes to falſehood ; 
and in the other, that the ſhew and ſem- 
blance of fiction ſhould make apoſtates 
from truth ? 

If the powers of eloquence, and action, 
were ſo abſolutely neceſſary to the hea- 
then orator, to accompliſh his point in civil 
matters, it would be only a waſte of time, 
and a fruitleſs repetition, to prove how 
much more neceflary it is to a chriſtian 

2 ; ora- 


WOO 3 — wrTgy Or” 


118 BRITISH Book I. 
orator, to bring about the great ends of re- 
ligion. What Cicero ſays of the requi- 
ſites to the diſcharge of that office, is ex- 
actly deſcriptive of the function of a cler- 
gyman. Io inſtruct is his duty, to 
delight does him honour, and to move 


© the paſſions is neceſſary. And his ſhort 


definition of the beſt and worſt orator, 
will ſhew us to which claſs ours are to be 
referred. He is the beſt orator, who 
by the powers of. elocution both inſtructs, 
and delights, and moves his auditory. 
From whence it is plain, that he who is 
* moſt unlike the beſt, is the worſt.” 

But however near by nature the alli- 
ance between oratory and philoſophy 
might be, yet it depended intirely upon 
man to fix, or deſtroy their union. As 
the maintaining ſuch a union required 
great pains, labour, and attention, and as 
there was no particular profeſſion of men 
to whom it was abſolutely neceſſary, it is 
eaſy to ſee, that to ſeparate them was no 
difficult taſk. Ambition, and a ſpirit of 
rivalſhip, might ſoon engage the profeſſors 
of the two arts in diſputes about priority. 
The philoſopher, who enjoyed the mental 


POW. 


powers in a more perfect degree than 
uſual, and who might be endowed with 
an uncommon depth of penetration in his 
purſuits after knowlege and truth, though 
perhaps without any of the natural requi- 
ſites to make him ſhine as an orator, 
would of courſe affect to deſpiſe talents 
which he did not poſſeſs, and depreciate 
an art which he looked upon as much in- 
ferior to his own, and which yet had ra- 
ther a ſuperior rank in the eſtimation of 
the world. The example of the chief 
would ſoon be followed by all his diſciples. 
Whilſt on the other fide, the orator, fur- 
niſhed by the liberal hand of nature with 
uncommon powers of perſuaſion, and hav- 
ing improved theſe by the rules of his own 
art, would find nothing wanting to ac- 
eompliſh his ends; and therefore would 
gladly decry the painful and laborious diſ- 
quiſitions of philoſophy, and deſpiſe it's 
contemplative votaries as unfit for action, 
and as uſeleſs drones in ſociety, The war 
once declared between the chiefs, it would 
be too much the intereſt of the partiſans 
ſtill to keep it a-foot, and blow up the 
coals of diſcord, ever to ſuffer a reconcile- 

| I 4 ment. 


Cut. XV. EDUCATION. 119 


— . — — ** l 
rr Sr 
1 — * 
——— N — —B — * 
het T 4 e 
a 04 = . 
— 


1 
7 
4 
2 
*4 
1 
1 
i 
* 
Fa. 
1 y 
145 
; 139 
FI 
1 In 
1 
3 
1 
78 
FP 
"= 
l MA 
4 U 
F 
. 
t 1 
15 
| A 
: 1 1 
is 
' 8 
1 a" 
3 
1 * 
oF? 
7 
E 
a * 
1 
"* 
1 
1 
I 
Per 
4 
5-4 
4 
Ti 
4 
, m4 
* 
. 4 
0 * 
s 4 
4 
\ 
14 
n 
1 
* 
* 
Pali * 
4 
, } 
& » 
4K 
x 
> 
1 
J 
1 
4 
A 
{ 
£ 
; 
,—- 
5 
. 
, bb) h 
HE1 
1 by 
pp 4 
= 
: 1. = 
We! 
. 1 
4. 
1 
98 
1. 
5 * « 
+ ? 
74 
* 
| (hat 
: X 
L290 4 
ot 1. 
I. 
HH l 
2397 
55 
4 
. = 


— 
5 Fr 
— DN n= 


oro 
— DSL 


120 BRITISH BooxT, 


ment. Of this Cicero gives the following 

account. The antients down to — 
time of Socrates always joined a perfect 
* knowlege of morality, of all that be- 
* longed to the conduct of private life, as 
* well as the management of, publick af- 
fairs, to ſkill in oratory. But at that 
time, the eloquent and the learned being 
divided into different ſects by Socrates, 
* and this diſtinction being afterwards kept 
up by all his diſciples, the philoſophers 
* and orators held each other in mutual 
* contempt.” And this war was ever after 
carried on with great obſtinacy and ani- 
molity on either ſide, till it ended in the 
ruin of both parties, How unnatural and 
impolitick the rupture was, the event 
ſhewed. And the neceſſity of the union 
of theſe two arts for their common ſup- 
port, could not be proved more clearly 
than by the very manner in which the 
conteſt was managed. The orator and 
philoſopher were mutually obliged to have 
recourſe to each other's arms, both for de- 
tence and annoyance. It was whimſical 
enough to ſee one ſide uſing all the figures 
of rhetorick in order to depreciate ora- 


forys 


Cent. XV, EDUCATION. rgar 
tory, and the other employing maxims 
taken from the deepeſt reſearches into 
truth, to run down philoſophy. How- 
ever, the pride, the paſſions, and inte- 
reſted views of the mercenary profeſ- 
ſors of each art became ſo far engaged 
in the diſpute, that the breach was daily 
widened; and tho' a few were wiſe 
enough to keep clear of the quarrel, and 
borrow freely from both ſides, yet this 
was only uniting the two arts in their own 
perſons, and to ſerve their own purpoſes ; 
but a general reunion was rendered im- 
practicable. Nothing contributed ſo much 
to this, ' as a want of ſome profeſſion 
amongſt the antients, to which a union 
of theſe was abſolutely neceſſary, But if 
we look into the preſent times, we ſhall 
quickly ſee that the caſe is different. The 
profeſſion amongſt us which is foremoſt in 
point of rank, utility, and number, evi- 
dently requires it. It would be hard to 
ſay, whether philoſophy or oratory be 
moſt neceſſary to our prieſthood, as the 
one would be uſeleſs without the other. 
Without knowlege, eloquence would be 
hut an empty ſound ; without cloquence, 

| know- 


| 
j 
| 
1 
/ 


122 BRITISH Book I. 


knowlege can never be ſhewn in it's 
true light. The long diſpute between 
theſe two, was well determined by Ci- 
cero in the following manner. When 
6. there | is occaſion, (as it often happens) 
to ſpeak concerning the immortal gods, 
© to treat of piety, of concord, of friend- 
« ſhip; of the common rights of citi- 
s zens, of men, and nations; of equity, 
a temperance, magnanimity, and every 
kind of virtue: I ſuppoſe all the aca- 
« demies and ſchools of philoſophy will 
: cry out, that all ſubjects of this kind 


* are their property, and do not at all 


belong to the orator ; to whom when J 
allow, that they ſhall have the liberty 
« of haranguing in every corner, to em- 
« ploy their idle time, yet I ſhall make no 

« ſcruple to determine, that it is peculiarly 
© the orator's province, to explain theſe 
ſubjects with dignity, and pleaſure to his 
© hearers, concerning which thoſe men 
hold formal diſputations in a lean and 
* lifeleſs diſcourſe.” Can there be a more 
accurate deſcription of the perfect diſ- 
charge of the function of the chriſtian 
prieſthood ? To this order of men there- 
fore, 


| 


Cuay, XV. EDUCATION. 123 


fore, a re-union of theſe arts is not only 
neceſſary, but there are the ſtrongeſt mo- 
tives to encourage the attempt. All'the 
means requiſite to carry oratory to it's 
higheſt pitch, are furniſhed to them in a 
more liberal manner than they ever were 
to any other profeſſion. Let us ſee what 
the moſt eminent writers upon the ſubject 
required to conſtitute their perfect orators, 
and we ſhall find them all included in the 
qualifications neceſſary to holy orders. 


One of the firſt requilites laid down by 


Cicero is, that he ſhould be a good man. 


pr, 


And Quinctilian does not ſcruple to ſay,” 


that none but a good man can be a per- 
fect orator. This opinion is founded in 
the reaſon and nature of things. For as 
no one can deſerve the name of an orator 


who does not uſe his talents in the cauſe 


of virtue, and as the perfection of elo- 
quence conſiſts in ſpeaking from the heart, 
none but a good man can ſpeak feelingly 
about that which is good. In whom 
therefore is this qualification ſo likely to 
be found, as in that claſs of men, whoſe 
ſacred order obliges them to a greater pu- 
rity of e and ſanctity of life, than 


the 


7 
. 

| | 
4 

1 
1 
| 


124 BRITISH Book I. 


the reſt of mankind? The next things 
required are, wiſdom, and knowlege, in 
all affairs divine and human. To whom 
are theſe ſo eſſentially neceſſary, as to thoſe 
whoſe office it is to inſtruct mankind in 
their duty towards God, and towards man? 
The power of perſuaſion and moving the 

aſſions, is the next talent required, 


without which all others are vain. And 


who can have more occaſion for this, than 
he, whoſe buſineſs it is to prevail upon 


ſenſual men not to indulge themſelves in 


ſenſual gratifications; and to perſuade the 
eager and ſhort- ſighted, to forego a pre- 
ſent and near advantage for one which is 
at a diſtance and out of their fight? Or 
how can he diſcharge his duty of regulat- 
ing the paſſions, without having a power 
and command over thoſe paſſions? In ſhort, 
every thing which regards either the end 
or the means, the office or the talents, of 
a perfect orator, will be found in the moſt 
exact and circumſtantial manner to be in- 
cluded in the proper diſcharge of the pro- 
feſſion of holy orders. Let the following 


paſſages be applied to that, and ſee how 


perfectly they are ſuited to it. 
4 «Tis 


Cray. XV. EDUCATION. 1325 

Tis the orator's part to give advice 
upon the moſt important affairs, and to 
deliver his ſentiments with clearneſs and 
dignity. Tis his to rouſe people from 
* languor, and to reſtrain the impetuous 
* within due bounds. *Tis his to paſs ſen- 
* tence of deſtruction on falſhood, and of 
«* ſafety on truth. Who with more ardour 
* than he can inflame men to virtue; who 
© with more force can recall them from 
vice? Who has more power to brand 
* thewicked with diſgrace; who can better 
* adorn the good with praiſe? Who has 
more {kill in curbing headſtrong defire ; 
* who can more gently adminiſter the 
© balm of comfort to the afflicted ? 

* © Eloquence treats of the duties of life. 
Every one applies to himſelf what he 
© hears, and our minds attend with moſt 
« cafe to points in which they have ſome 
concern. 

+ It is the peculiar property of an ora- 
« tor to be maſter of a grave and poliſhed 


® Omnis eloquentia circa opera vitæ eſt, ad ſe refert 
quiſque quz audit, id facilime accipiunt animi quod ag- 
noſcunt. Quinct. I. 8. de orat. I. 1. 

+ Hoc enim eſt proprium oratoris, quod ſæpe jam Uixi, 
oratio gravis, & ornata, & hominum ſenſibus, ac menti- 
bus accommodata. : 

6 
ſtyle 


W 8 en N 


126 BRITISH BSE I. 
© ſtyle, adapted to the ſenſes and under- 
© ſtandings of his hearers. 

Would not one imagine that this pic- 
ture was drawn from the pulpit, and could 
belong to nothing but the 3 of a good 
preacher. 

Theſe deſcriptions of tht oratory 
were not drawn from the life, or what 
really did exiſt, but from an image formed 
in the minds of the writers, and which 
might exiſt. That it might exiſt, Cicero 
ſeems tobe clearly of opinion, when he 
puts a reaſon into the mouth of Antonius 
why it had not then appeared. If that 
© be difficult for us to obtain, becauſe 
before we are well inſtructed in the art 
of ſpeaking, we are ſpurred on by an 
« eager ambition of appearing in publick, 
it has notwithſtanding a foundation in 
the nature of things.” But Cicero him- 
ſelf attributes the want of perfection in 
oratory entirely to it's ſeparation from 
philoſophy. *«* What ſhall I ſay of the 
* knowlege of nature, an acquaintance 
* with which, ſupplies large ſtores to ora- 
« tory, in treating of the duties of life, of 
c virtue, of morals, that it can be either 


* deſcribed or underſtood without a great 
| deal 


CAT. XV. EDUCATION. 127 


deal of inſtruction in thoſe very points ? 
* To theſe qualifications of ſuch great 
conſequence, are to be added numberleſs 
other accompliſhments, which were for- 
merly taught only by thoſe who were 
* reckoned maſters of the art of ſpeaking: 
So that no one can now attain that true 
and perfect eloquence, becauſe the ſchools 
of philoſophy are ſeparated from the 
* ſchools of oratory ; and becauſe a know- 
lege of things is taught by one, of lan- 
* guage by another.” Vet however diffi- 
cult it might be-rendered on this account, 
he did not doubt but that where great ta- 
lents and great application were met in 
the ſame perſon, a complete orator might 
ariſe. To this effect he has given a ſpeech 
to Antonius, that has ſomewhat the air 
of prophecy, and in which he ſeems to 
have ſhadowed out himſelf. As far as 
] can conjecture from the genius of our 
* countrymen, I do not deſpair but that 
* ſome time or other a perſon. may ariſe, 
* who with more intenſe ſtudy, with 
greater leiſure, and brighter faculties 
© than ours for learning, and alſo with 
* more laborious induſtry, after applying 


« him» 


123 BRITISH Book 1. 
© himſelf entirely to hearing, reading, and 
compoſition, may prove ſuch a kind of 
© orator as we are in ſearch of : one who 
may with juſtice be called not only a 
© good ſpeaker, but a man of accompliſh= 
© ed eloquence. Here it is obſervable, 
that he was ſo far from thinking that ſuch 
perfection in oratory ſhould either become 
common or ſrequent, that he conſiders it 
only as a rare avis, and ſeems to confine 
the ſpecies, like that of the phoenix, to 
an individual. But Quinctilian is more 
enlarged in his notions ; for in ſpeaking 
on this ſubject, when he wiſhes that ora- 
tory may regain it's priſtine dignity and 
power, by being reſtored to it's poſſeſſions 
in philoſophy, tho' he alſo ſpeaks in the 
fingular number, yet it is clear he means 
that he wiſhes ſome ſuperior order might 
hereafter be eſtabliſhed, with whom ora- 
tory being moſt neceſſary, ſhould hold the 
firſt rank, and philoſophy be conſidered 
only as her handmaid. That by the au- 
thority of this order their ſeveral claims 
| ſhould be adjuſted, and the odious di- 
ſtinction of names be deſtroyed. That 
neither ſhould any longer IP to the 


ſoye= 


Cnar. XV. EDUCATION. 129 


ſovereign authority, but both in due ſub- 
ordination ſerve one common maſter. 
How would it rejoice the heart of Quinc- 
tilian could he have ſeen his wiſh accom- 
pliſhed in the eſtabliſhment of an order 
of men, to whom a perfect knowledge of all 
things, divine and human, was neceſſary, to 
ſhine forth, not only in their words, but in 
their lives? An order, ſuch as no antiquity 
ever beheld; which uniting in itſelf the 
full powers of oratory and. philoſophy in 
their largeſt extent, ſhould enable men to 
communicate tbe moſt perfect knowlege in 
the moſt perfeft manner. With what rap- 
ture muſt he have beheld oratory raiſed to 
a higher office, and a more exalted rank, 
than ever it could even claim before ; no 
longer miniſtring to the purpoſes of 
mere mortal and earthly maſters, but 
immediately employed in the fervice of 
the Moſt High, of God himſelf? Whilft 
philoſophy, humbled from her proud 
pretenſions, ſhould be content to miniſ- 
ter to her former rival. Such an office 
for oratory could never have entered into 
the thoughts of a heathen, as the groſs 
abſurdities of their religion, and ridi- 

wy culous 


130 BRITISH Book I. 
culous ideas of their gods, required the 
. obſcurity of myſtery, and dark veil of 
ſuperſtition, but would by no means bear 
the light. So that however philoſophy, 
of the pretended kind at leaſt, might by 
colluſion be employed in the ſervice © 
religion, as by it's own darkneſs it might 
caſt a deeper ſhade over the other, oratory 
muſt neceſſarily be baniſhed from it's mi- 
niſtry, whoſe office it is to throw a ſtrong 
light upon all which it handles. How 
would the auguſt union of eloquence and 
philoſophy with the ſacred office, have 
ſtruck the antients with admiration and 
aſtoniſhment ? And conſidering the great- 
+ neſs of their powers when ſeparate, what 
glorious effects would they not expect 
from the- joint endeavours of religion, 
oratory, and philoſophy, all mutually fup- 
porting and aſſiſting each other in bring- 
ing about the nobleſt ends, the general 
good of ſociety, and happineſs of each 
individual? How much higher muſt their 
expectations be raiſed, when they ſhould 
conſider the purity of our religion, the 
unearthly and exalted notions which we 
entertain of the Deity, and the falutary 
ſyſtem 


Cnar. XV. EDUCATION. 14t 
ſyſtem of laws for his conduct in life, pro- 
mulgated to man by his great Author and 
Creator ? Would not Plato triumph to'ſee 
the day when his prediction was verifyed, 
* that it was rather the work of God, than 
* of human legiſlators, to provide a ſyſtem 
© of laws relative to thoſe great duties, 
© .which mens appetites and paſſions ren- 
© der difficult ? And when he contem- 
plated not only the fitneſs of the ſyſtem to 
anſwer the end, but likewiſe the fitneſs 
of the means to ſupport the ſyſtem, 
would he not cry out, that what was hi- 
therto beyond the utmoſt reach of human 
thought, and was hid from the reſearches 
of the wiſeſt men, could come from God 
alone ? Would not Socrates himſelf think 
philoſophy raiſed and dignified beyond 
his utmoſt conception, when miniſtring 
to oratory in ſuch glorious purpoſes? How 
great muſt Cicero ſuppoſe the virtue of 
ſuch a people to be, to the ſupport of 
which he thought the belief of a future 
ſtate abſolutely neceſſary, when he ſhould 
find that beliefeſtabliſhed, not in theminds 
of a few, but univerſally thro” a whole 
ſtate ; not. founded on the weak baſis of 
K 2 rea- 


— 


132 BRITISH Book I. 
reaſon only, but on the immoveable rock 
of revelation ? Would they not all join 
with one voice to felicitate ſuch a people, 
and fay, O happy nation! to whom 


« 
c 
. 
6 
c 
6 
6“ 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
* 
6 
c 
« 
* 
6 
6 
c 
6 


the nobleſt and moſt important truths, 
which were darkly ſeen, and as thro' a 
miſt, by only a few, and thoſe the wiſeſt 
of the heathen world, are revealed in full 
meridian light, and like the ſun viſible 


to all eyes? Like that luminary commu- 


nicating light and heat to all, to the low 
as well as the high, to the weak in un- 
derſtanding, as well as to thoſe of the 


moſt improved capacities. Who need no 


longer be diſtracted with doubts, and 
waſte your time in fruitleſs debates; to 
whom the laws of right and wrong are 
clearly laid open, and whoſe happineſs 
depends only upon the conformity of your 
actions to thoſe laws. Who may ſafely 


attend your labours in your ſeveral voca- 


tions, to obtain what is needful for the 
comforts and the enjoyments of life, and 
when you reſt from thoſe neceſſary toils, 
receive inſtruction with delight, in all 
that is needful for the diſcharge of your 
ſeveral duties. Happy people! who 

| need 


1 / . ᷣ «2a 40C4 44 SAS IIs. 4 4 1 


CnAr. XV. EDUCATION. 133 


need no longer be confined by the fetters 
of ignorance, or hoodwinked by ſuper- 


ſlition, who may be allowed the free 


uſe of your reaſon in religious as well as 
wordly matters, ſince there is no danger 
of your miſtaking the road, when you 
have ſuch knowing and unerring guides. 


And you, ye holy men! highly favoured 


of heaven above all others, in whoſe di- 
vine inſtitution are united all the greateſt 
powers which God has given to man, 
and which alone could make you worthy 
of his ſervice, let us with love and admi- 
ration contemplate the beauty of your ſa- 
cred function, and with wonder and de- 


light examine it's ſtupendous frame 


Happy men, whoſe order muſt command 
reſpect and reverence to your perſons; 
whoſe talents muſt conciliate to you the 
eſteem and love of mankind! Employed 
from your earlieſt days in treaſuring up 
knowlege and wiſdom, not to lie con- 
cealed like the miſer's hoard, but to be 
diſplayed to the eyes of men, enriching 


the beholders, without impoveriſhing 


yourſelves, and by the very act of com 
munication increaſing, not diminiſhing, 
| K 3 your 


— 


- 


6 


. 
6 
c 
c 
. 
0 
. 
. 
e 
6 
* 
6 
s 
. 
c 
6 
6 
6 
6 


134 BRITISH Book I. 


your ſtore. Free from the anxious pur- 
ſuits of life, and ſupported by the labour 
of others, your whole time may be em- 
ployed in miniſtring to the glory of 
him whoſe ſervice is perfect freedom, 
and in promoting the welfare of your 
fellow creatures, in eſtabliſning peace 
and good-will amongſt men. Thrice 
happy orators, who enjoy all the delight, 
the praiſe, the perfection of your art, 
without the difficulties, the labours, the 
dangers that attended it of old! You 
need no pains to procure filence, no arts 
to engage attention; the ſanctity of the 
temple enfures the one, the import- 
ance and intereſting nature of the ſub- 
ject to all hearers commands the other. 
Secure in your celeſtial armour, tho' 
you attack the wicked with force and 
might, you need fear no enemies; and 
the Philips and Anthonies of the world 
may be laſhed by you without danger, 
Confined to labour on no barren or un- 
important ſubjects, you have the whole 
univerſe for your theme, whatever be- 
longs to divine or human nature, to ſpi- 
ritual or material exiſtence. In treat- 

« ing 


CAP. XV. EDUCATION. 135 


ing of theſe, the paſt becomes as the 
preſent, and the future is anticipated. 

Your anceſtors ſupply you with know- 
lege, poſterity with arguments ;, the col- 
lected wiſdom of ages is your magazine, 
and all nature your ſtore-houſe. But 
more particularly for your uſe was that 
book of light ſent into the world, where- 
in the Godhead has diſplayed himſelf 
in as ample a manner as could be com- 
prehended by mortal capacities. Nor 


were leſs ſupplies neceſſary to treat on 


ſuch ſubjects, as the wonderful attri- 
butes of the Deity, the ſocial duties of 
man, and the glorious proſpect of a fu- 
ture ſtate of exiſtence. How muſt the 
hearts of your hearers glow within them, 


when the whole force of knowlege and 


eloquence : are united upon ſuch impor- 


tant topicks ; and how muſt their love, 


admiration, and gratitude burn towards 
youtheir teachers and benefactors, whoſe 
whole labours are employed to their 
profit and delight ? Equal to us in all 
the arts of captivating the ſenſes, how 
much more lordly is your ſway over the 
imagination, and the paſſions ? What 
K 4 vigor- 


r rr E. 1 * RY —— Py ©» — . rt "Wo: ' - 
.. A ...... ̃]⅛—⅝⅜di........ ̃ ᷑̃ ͤ ̃ͤ Se Er wAQQ2A—A ³ mw ¾ ] y w-elwrow. ——y cu wwraww our: : r 


136 BRITISH Boon I. 


vigorous flights may you not lead fancy, 
when freed from the fetters of matter, 
through ſpiritual regions, and a hound- 
leſs eternity, till this world ſhall appear 
but as a ſpeck, and it's duration but as a 
point of time? How infinitely more 
powerful muſt the exertions of hope and 
fear be, in proportion to the immenſity 
of their object? What were the con- 
queſts of Alexander or Cæſar compared 
to yours? Theirs were over men, over 
their brethren: yours are over the ene- 
mies to human nature, over ſin, and 
over death.” 

But ſhould theſe ſages of antiquity be 
informed that things were quite other- 
wile ; that vice and libertiniſm were never 
known to have arrived at a greater pitch 
in any country; that virtue was neglected 
or ridiculed, and religion, far from anſwer- 
ing it's end, was together with the prieſt- 
hood held in contempt ; muſt they not 
either conclude, that the people were the 
moſt ſtupid and hardened in the world, 
or that they who were dedicated to the 
ſervice of the church, were not quali- 
hed to diſcharge their office. When they 
ſhould 


9 a EE oY a 7 Oo, A AR a AT M3, 


cnar. XV. EDUCATION. 137 


ſhould be told, that no order ever pro- 
duced ſuch numbers of men diſtinguiſhed 
for. knowlege and wiſdom, remarkable 
for purity of morals, and ſanctity of life; 
that their diſcourſes in the cauſe of vir- 
tue and religion, were the nobleſt pro- 
ductions that ever came from the wit of 
man; they would be apt to ſuffer the 
former opinion to take place. But ſhould 
they be informed, that in the education 
of theſe men, great care was taken to 
inſtru them in philoſophy, and to ſtore 
their minds with all forts of knowlege, 
but none at all about the art of commu- 
nicating theſe to others by ſpeech ; that 
ſo far from training them in the ſtudy 
and practice of oratory, their very firſt 
principles of ſpeaking were corrupted by 
the moſt ignorant teachers, and that this 
error was never afterwards amended ; 
that in conſequence of this. they deli- 
vered the words of truth in the tones of 
fiction, and were ſo far from delighting, 
that they diſguſted their hearers; the 
whole wonder would at once vaniſh. 
They would then ſee that the prieſthood 
was no longer that powerful order which 


they 


138 BRITISH Boox I. 


they had imagined, and would conſider 
it in the ſame ſituation as a man whoſe 
intellects were ſound, and outward form of 
body perfect, but who being deprived of 
the uſe of his limbs, was incapable of ſerv- 
ing himſelf or others. 

Indeed it is fo evident that the proper 
arms for the uſe of the members of the 
church militant here on earth, for the 
foldiers in Chriſt, can be drawn from no 
ſtores but thoſe of oratory, that it is aſto- 
niſhing how it could poſſibly be fo entirely 
neglected. Nor can this fault be at all 
imputed to the clergy, but to their edu- 
cation. We may as well blame the Chi- 
neſe women for want of the perfect uſe 
of their limbs in walking, as thoſe for 
want of power in ſpeaking. When they 
enter upon the diſcharge of their duty, 
they may be ſenſible of the defect, but can 
find no remedy. The bad habits they 
have acquired can not be removed, but by 
the diligent aſſiſtance of {kilful perſons, 
and none ſuch are to be found. This was 
the true reaſon why ſo many eminent di- 
vines were obliged to have recourle to 
arms, in the exerciſe of which they had 

been 


CuAr. XVI. EDUCATION. 129 


been trained, and to defert thoſe whoſe 
uſe they had never been taught; and it 
was neceſſity which reduced them to em- 
ploy the weaker means of writing, to 
ſupport their cauſe, inſtead of the more 
powerful aſſiſtance of oratory. 


C H A „ 


Ill conſequences of this defect both to church 
and ſtate, and the great advantages which 


would reſult to both from the uch of 
oratory. 


HIS defect in the education of 
thoſe deſtined to holy orders, was 

a fundamental error at the reformation ; 
and from that fatal overſight, and an un- 
happy miſtake in the eſtabliſhment for 


the ſupport of the clergy, may be dated 
the downfall- of religion, and decay of 


chriſtian piety. When the exorbitant 
wealth and temporal power of the church, 
together with a tyrannical authority ex- 
erciſed over the minds of men, called 
aloud for a reformation, great care ſhould 
have been taken not to have carried mat- 


ters 


_ a * A ITED 4 _ IC. * — — 
3 — 2 1 — 5 — — 
— . c 


140 BRITISH Boon l. 


ters into extremes. Tho' it was right to 
ſtrip her of her ſuperfluities, and her al- 


moſt princely territories, yet it was ne- 


ceſſary ſhe ſhould have a competency, and 
that her income ſhould be independent. 
And in proportion as ſhe was deprived 
of that power, which abſurdly demanded 
a blind obedience to her will, ſhe ought 
to have been furniſhed with all the arts 
of perſuaſion, without which ſhe could 
no longer be of uſe. What project of 


Satan's could have more effectually ſown 


the ſeeds of perpetual diſcord between the 
clergy and laity, than giving the former 
an annual claim upon the latter of a tenth 
part of their ſubſtance? And with what 


reluctance muſt they who earn their bread 


with the ſweat of their brow, part with 
ſo much of the fruit of their toils, for 
what they think ſo little value received? 
For, being no longer hoodwinked by ſu- 
perſtition, but ſeeing thro' the clear light 
of reaſon, they would find that the ob- 
ſervation of a few forms and ceremonies, 
was all that they generally got for their 
money, and their very religion pointed 


out to them to ſet little value upon thoſe. 
They 


nA. XVI, EDUCATION. 147 


They would often have occaſion to ob- 
ſerve, that theſe forms and ceremonies 
were mechanically gone thro' by a poor 
drudge at thirty or forty pounds per ann. 
and ſometimes at leſs, and conſequently 
would look upon what was given over 
and above as ſuperfluous ; not as given 
to the holy office, but to ſupport the 
pride and luxury of mere temporal men. 
In this view it is no wonder that the pro- 
feſſion itſelf ſhould come to be hated, and 
that the bulk of mankind ſhould conſider 
it as a burthen. The ſame cauſe would 
naturally produce the ſame effect in re- 
gard to any other profeſſion. For let us 
ſuppoſe, that people were obliged to con- 
tribute a certain proportion of their in- 
come to the ſupport of lawyers, and phy- 
ſicians, for the preſervation of their pro- 
perties, and their healths ; and this was 
to be levied on all without diſtinction; on 
thoſe whoſe titles to their eſtates were 
clear and uncontroverted, and on ſuch as 
enjoyed a perfect ſtate of health, as well 
as on thoſe whoſe right was diſputable, 
and ſuch as laboured under diforders ; 
and that men were not at liberty to chuſe 

their 


=, 


142 BRITISH Bek 1. 
their own lawyer, or phyſician, but to 
make uſe of ſuch as were appointed for 
them, whether fkilful or not; what an 
outcry muſt not of courſe be raiſed againſt 
thoſe profeſſions, and how unreaſonable 
would men think the burthen impoſed on 
them ? This argument will hold equally 
ſtrong in regard to thoſe who look upon 
the ck only as a civil inſtitution. And 
nothing but a perfect diſcharge of their 
duty in the clergy, can make the bulk of 
mankind conſider it in any other light. 
-As therefore a diſlike and hatred of the 
"whole order were deeply rooted in is 
ſelf-intereſt of mankind, and a ſtrong pre- 
Judice againſt the doctrines they preached, 
in their pathons ; what could poſſibly en- 
able the prieſthood to ſupport their holy 
cauſe, but the-powers of perſuaſion, and 
the talents of conciliating men's love and 
gratitude to them, from the delight and 
profit which they ſhould receive from 
their labours ? Or how could they expect to 
prevail upon their hearers to embrace doe- 
trines ſo oppoſite to their paſſtons, and re- 
duce them to practice, umleſs they O_ 


"IO power-to controul thoſe 3 
to 


— I 


— % -— —— 


— 
o 


—U]— — — — 
* — 3 
— 


— 


Cray. XVI. EDUCATION. 43 
to intereſt ſuch as ate moſt powerful over 
the mind on their fide? This ought there» 
fore to have been chiefly attended to dt 
the reformation, and a new method 6f 
education eſtabliſhed for ſuch as were to 
be guardians to the new chiirch ; where- 
in the practice and exerciſe of the only 
weapons which could poflibly defend it, 
| ſhould have chiefly employed their time. 
But in changes it ſeldom happens that a 
due medium is obſerved; the paſſions be= 
ing generally more concerned in bringing 
them about than reaſon ; men in avotd- 
ing one extreme for the moſt part run into 
another. So fared it in regard to the 
church at the time of the reformation. 
They were ſo buſy and eager to deſtroy her 
exorbitant power, that they reduced her 
to a deplorable ſtate of weakneſs. 
were ſo jealous of the former uſurped 
authority of the prieſts, that they did 
not care to truſt them with any at all. 
And indeed there was hardly any thing 
left to the function but e, and in 
general a poor ſubſiſtence gradgingly Paid, 
the ſource of perpetual ill-will from thoſe 
Who parted with it. They were not con- 
2246 Sik tent 


= o — — 


Po e —— — — 
£4: 4 --&. — FFF 
— 


r EEE ods ee rr 
neee r A PEE wt | 
a * «+ S - . 


& 
y 25 
1 1 ** 
i 
{BY 


144 BRI T IS H Book l. 
tent with deſtroying her lofty citadel and 
high towers of ſtrength, they likewiſe 
Tazed her walls, and left her open and 
naked to the world, appointing only a few 
watchmen for her protection without 
arms, or diſcipline; who retaining nothing 
but the odious name of her former mi- 
niſters, without their power, were more 
likely to invite than to repel an attack. Is 
it any wonder that thus circumſtanced her 
deſtruction ſhould ſoon be accompliſhed ? 
Accordingly we find that it was brought 
about in a ſhort ſpace of time. It is well 
worth obſerving what means and inſtru- 
ments were employed on this occaſion. 
The appearance of religion was aſſumed to 
deſtroy the reality; and the weapons which 
ought to have been employed in defence of 
the church, were made uſe of with ſucceſs 
in pulling it down. Political ſects aroſe, 
under the name and colour of religious, 
who had recourſe to the arms of oratory, 
neglected and diſuſed by the eſtabliſhed 
miniſtry. Tis true, they handled them 
unſkilfully, with relation to their true uſe, 
but with art enough to anſwer their own 
ends. As truth was not in their cauſe, 

neither 


Cray, XVI. EDUCATION. 145 
neither was it in their eloquence. Their 
buſineſs was not to apply to the under- 
ſtanding, or to the paſſions, thro the heart, 
which could be only done by rational and 
natural means; but to work upon the fancy 
and imagination, by the enthuſſaſtic no- 
tions of the operations of the ſpirit. To 
anſwer this end, canting and frantick geſ- 
tures might be more forcible than the beſt 
regulated oratory; for the leſs natural the 
tones, and the leſs human the looks and 
geſtures might appear, the more in the 
eyes of a fanatick multitude would they 
ſeem to be divine inſpirations, and the 
workings of the ſpirit. This was only a 
revival of the artifice of thoſe prieſts 'who 
delivered the oracles of old. However 
unnatural this mode of eloquetite' might 
be, yet it was much more forcible than 
that dull inſipid one adopted by the eſta- 
bliſhed miniſtry, as it at leaſt rouzed the 
attention, and kept the ſenſes awake. And 
the emotions with which their diſcourſes 
were delivered, had alſo this effect on vul- 
gar hearers, of making them think the 
preachers in earneſt; a point of all others 
the moſt likely to give them weight. It 


146. BRITISH Box I. 


is no wonder therefore, that the very form 
itſelf ſhould daily make proſelytes to their 
worſhip, Gince-it may be doubted whether 
all the paſſions together have greater 
power over the mind of man than en- 
thuſiaſm alone. The leaders of ſuch a ſe& 
living in a conſtant habit of diſſimulation, 
muſt of courſe acquire the art of ſeeming 
| thoroughly poſſeſſed themſelves of the 
opinions which they broached, and con- 
ſequently the greateſt power of perſuad- 
ing others into the ſame. - The abbè Du 
Bos, in his Critical Reflections, &c, has a 
paſſage remarkably applicable to the caſe 
in pound, Of all the talents proper for 

* raiſing man to a ſtate of empire and com- 
mand, a ſuperiority of wit and know- 
lege is not the moſt effectual; tis the art 
« of. moving men as one pleaſes; an art 
* that. is acquired principally by a perſon's 

« ſeeming to be moved, and penetrated 
< with. thoſe very ſentiments he intends to 
* inſpire. Tis the art of being like Cati- 
© line, cujuſſibet rei fimulator, which you 
© may call if you pleaſe, the art of being a 
complete actor. Thoſe amongſt the 
* Engliſh that are beſt acquainted with 1 

8 


Cnxr. XV. EDUCATION. 147 
© hiſtory of their own country, do not 


mention the name of Oliver Cromwell 
* with the ſame admiration, as the gene- 
© rality of that nation; they are far from 
* allowing him that extenſive, penetrating, 
* ſuperior genius, with which ſo many are 
© pleaſed to honour him. They reduce 
therefore his whole merit to his bravery, 
© as a ſoldier, and to a peculiar talent of 
< ſeeming penetrated with the fentiments 
© which he had a mind to feign, and ap- 
© pearing moved with thoſe paſſions he 
* defired to infpire, as if he had really fekt 
them himſelf. Thurtoe, they fay, in- 
* ſtructed him occafionally what per- 
© ſons he was to prevail upon in order 
to make his project ſucceed, and in what 
manner it was proper to attack them; 
* juſt as one would tutor a woman that is 
to be employed in acting ſome character 
of importance. Oliver ſpoke to them 
afterwards in ſo pathetic a manner, as 
* to bring them over to his party.. 
Here we may ſee that the moſt forcible 
part of oratory was employed in the de- 


. of the church and ftato, and con- 
L 2 R 


148 BRITISH Boox I. 
ſequently may judge how neceſſary it is 
for their ſupport. 

St. Auſtin, in his fourth book on the 
chriſtian doctrine, recommends and en- 
forces the ſtudy and practice of it to all 
in holy orders by the ſtrongeſt arguments. 


Since it is by the art of rhetorick that 


people are enabled to eſtabliſh true and 


c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
c 
( 
c 
c 
« 
c 
c 
c 
c 
6 


falſe opinions, who ſhall dare to ſay that 
truth ſhould be without arms in the 
perſons of thoſe who are to defend it 


© againſt falſhood ? Can it be believed that 
thoſe who endeavour to enforce a falſe 


doctrine ſhould be ſkilled in the art of 


conciliating to themſelves the good will 


and attention of their hearers by their 


addreſs, and that thoſe who ſupport the 
cauſe of truth ſhould not be poſſeſſed of 
this ſkill? That the one ſhould ſpeak of 
©, what is falſe with brevity and veriſimili- 
tude, and the other ſhall diſcourſe of 
* what is true, in ſo tedious, diſguſting, 


and unnatural a manner, as to give pain 


to their hearers, and make them think 
their doctrines not credible; that thoſe 
« ould combat truth with falſe: argu- 


© ments, 


Car. XVI. EDUCATION. 149 


* 


« 
c 
c 
c 


6 


ments, and eſtabliſn their falſe opinions; 
and that theſe ſnould neither be capable 


of defending what is true, nor of con- 


futing what is falſe; that the former 
ſhould have ſuch power over the minds 
of their hearers as to lead them whither 
they pleaſe; that they ſhould excite in 
them aſtoniſhment, ſadneſs, or joy; that 
they ſhould animate, move, and turn them 


as they think proper; and that the lat- 


ter ſhould remain cold, unaffecting, and 
without power? Who can be ſo abſurd 


as to admit ſo extravagant a thought? 
| Since therefore eloquence, which has a 
prodigious power in perſuading people 


either to falſe or true N lies open 
to all who are inclined to make uſe of it, 


: what can be the reaſon that the good do 
not employ themſelves in acquiring an 


art ſo neceſſary for the defence of truth? 


Eſpecially when tis conſidered that the 
wicked uſe it with ſucceſs in defending 


injuſtice, in eſtabliſhing error, and in 


accompliſhing their e _ | 


Hans? © 20697 


Here it may be. Add that there is 
no argument urged to enforce the ſtudy 


L 3 | of 


- > RD INS £ - — — — — - 
— — , — e $ . — AI OF 2 — un wh — 
— — mt oe — 4 w ado _ — — . 
— , —— Co = 1 _ run, 6 = — + _ — 
— — — 2 n 4 — — —— — = — — A — - — — — = 
—ꝛů— — < 5 —.— — — —— CAFE ET — — —.— — ͤ— = === 

— - * 2 U * 8 - 3 — —— — — 2 — — — — — — 

— — — — — > ” — 7 — — rn = > — 2 — 2 r 2 oy 
- .... IEG . Em nr ye oo = — — = _ — - 
— =D - — : — . = a 2 - — - = = — — — —— — . — —— — — — — — 
— 1 = — 5 
: E — — — — = S 


—— 
— — 
—— — — 
8 SIEM + _—_— 
et, 1 E 5 
4 8 bs) 
- 1 
N. 8 


tit th 


* 1 - 0 "ne : 1 7 — - . : _ Y N 
9 =nrr tare: : . ä nn ns ns 2 | 
* 83 5 l - — — } 7 8 % . 3 . / — n a AY Y 
Hem” * 8 . 3 n Ky Nn 7 * WA" 7 1 4 4 7 "on 1 r _ * I 5 p : P 
I OTE: — ? - : : 20 2 N * ren r . 1 ** r vis Eve ay — * 
2 — * - \ ed r 5 A - 0 4 "os br <p FIST . 
.* 


150 BRITISH HBoor I. 
of eloquence for the uſe of the pulpit, 
which is not equally cogent in regard. to 
the ſenate-houſe, and the bar. 
Indeed the neceſſity of it to all three is 
10 very manifeſt to any one, who reflects 
ever ſo little upon the point, that it might 
be judged a waſte of time to have dwelt 
ſo long upon this topick, did not the total 
neglect of it, and a general deficiency, 
conſequential from that, warrant an api- 
nion, that it has either not been conſider- 
ed ſufficiently by thoſe whoſe bulinels it 
is, or that it has not appeared to them to 
be of ſo important a nature as is here _ 
tended. 
But it may be aſked, nde the great 
uſe, importance, and neceflity of this art 
were eſtabliſhed in their utmoſt extent, 
beyond all poſſibility of doubt or cavil, it 
may be aſked, I ſay, how is it to be ac- 
quired? The Romans have pointed qut 
the way, and their example is a ſufficient 
light to guide us. Cicero when he gives 
a definition of this art, in the ſame fen- 
tence points out the means to attain it. 
« Elocution is a graceful management of 
N . the voice, countenance, and 0 
8 


CAT. XVI. EDUCATION. 157 
It is to be acquired, as all other arts are, 
by precept, by example, by practice. 
Till theſe means were tried, we find that 
oratory was at a very low ebb in Rome. 
It had only a comparative excellence ariſ- 
ing from the different degrees of the na- 
tural requiſites in the ſpeakers. We find 
Antonius, who immediately preceded Ci- 
cero, peremptorily pronouncing, that tho 
he knew fome who were good ſpeakers, 
he knew not one worthy of the name of 


orator. His 'teſtimony is the more to be 


relied on, as he was himſelf efteemed 
one of the firſt orators of the age. 1 
* was of that opinion, when I ſaid in a 
* book which 1 publiſhed, that I had 
* known ſome good ſpeakers, but no good 
© orator: for I called him a good ſpeaker, 
« who had ingenuity and clearneſs of ex- 


* preflion, ſufficient to paſs well amongſt 


men of moderate judgment ; but would 
© allow none to be a good orator, but ſuch 
a one alone who ſhould be able in an ad- 
mirable and exalted manner to amplify 


and enrich his ſubject: who had ſtored | 


0 " underſtanding and his memory with 
L4 all 


1 
lt 
| q 
1h | 
1 13 
1 " 
" 
I 


„ SOT 


n 


n 251 Park tv coat: 


— 2 = = : 
— — — 2 — Co. : ” = 4 — _ 
— — —— . — Bn eng — — 
— —— I, > nt LADS — — — - — 
= - RY _ — — — * 
— lf m 
—̃ ̃ U— — —— — 
* : Wl — — 
> 


„* 3p" 1 5 p27 a7 L 


2 ww 
n 


152 BRITISH Book I. 


all the treaſures belonging to a perfect 
* ſpeaker.” In this repreſentation, our 
times may be looked upon as exactly ſi- 
milar to the days of Antonius, and it will 
be our own fault if the riſing generation 
do not ſee an age like that which luceeed- 
ed at Rome. 

The ſame cauſe would infallibly — 
the ſame effect. A man of theſe times and 
of this country, may without any impu- 
tation of vanity, or pretence to prophe- 
cy. ſay of our countrymen, what Anto- 
nius did of his in a paſſage above cited. 

The means by which oratory had riſen 
to 0 uch a pitch of perfection in his days, | 
are clearly and conciſely laid down by 
Cicero. * After the eſtabliſhment of our 
c univerſal empire, when the long con- 
* tinuance of peace afforded leiſure time, 
there was ſcarce any young man deſirous 
of glory, who did not apply himſelf 
with all his might to the ſtudy of elo- 
* quence. But at firſt being ignorant of 
* all principles of the art, of the mighty 
force of practice, and not thinking that 
c there were any certain rules, to guide 
| F them, 


a a 


Cnae: XVI. EDUCATION. 133 


them, they each of them made what 


* advances they could by the ſtrength of 
* their own genius only, and reflection. 


But afterwards, when they had heard 
the Greek orators, were made acquainted . 
* with their learning, and attended the 
lectures of their rhetoricians, -it is incre- 
* dible with what an ardent deſire of the 


* 


A 


| ſtudy of eloquence our people were in- 


* 


tages, if our youth were trained up un- 
der maſters equally ſkilful with the Greek 


rhetoricians, in the principles of the art, 


equally qualified to inſtruct them by pre- 
cept and example, and to perfect them 
by practice, ſhall it be doubted whether 
the Britiſh oratory would arrive at as 
great a pitch of perfection as the Roman? 
Britons, will hardly, yield the palm either 
to Greece or Rome, in point of talents 


or induſtry; nor have they ever failed to 
accompliſh their ends in whatever they 
undertook equally well with them, where 
their means were /of equal force. Shall 
any one now living; ſuppoſe, that Britain 


and ſtrong natural powers for oratory, 
im who 


— —— — —— 
— = 2 = — 
— — — 


ao 2. 2 „ & eh = 

— — 1 —— 3 — 
— 

2. 8 rr 


— 2 I _— — - — - — — - = _—_ - 
— - *. — mT — — — — $a wen — - — —— = — — 
— ey — — — — ci —— IC _ 
— — — ——— ———— — — — —— aA ee. — bs - — . — — ——— — — — — a 
— — — 2 > * — LASERS — = 2 12 — - — — — by — = = 2 — — - - -£ * 
- — — - = 2 - ws — — — — — 2 — = 1 n 2 
- n " 4 n n _ . 
P _ -_ * n ? 7 2 oo rey — ITO TY —— . — - 
CO SCH * „ 7 - 4 4 - = "46" 2 . 8 7 - 
a — 1 a . * * I 7 N py 7 d 1 8 . e = . 4 = 3 * 
N 1 rect greg at „ : un S ˙ WA n n — Sr 8 
. — 2 n * n . 2 1 > * 7 bs D 


134 BRITISH Boox I. 
who has heard a Walpole, a Pultney, a 
Cheſterfield, a Granville, a Pitt, a Mur- 
ray, and many others ? or can they con- 
ceive that equal talents cultivated with 
equal pains, would not produce equal 
perfection ? Are our motives to the ſtudy 
and practice of this art, or the opportuni- 

ties of diſplaying it, inferior to theirs? 
We may ſoon ſee by examining them. 
They were ſpurred on by the import- 
< "ance, variety, and multitude of cauſes of 
all kinds, to perfect the knowlege which 
F each had acquired in his courſe of ſtudy, 
by conſtant practice, far ſuperior to 
© precept. There were alſo at that time, 
* as now, the higheſt rewards attending 
this ſtudy, in point of reputation, of 
* riches, and of honours.” May we not 
with equal truth and as little appear- 
ance of vain- glory ſay of our country- 
men what Cicero ſaid of his; The ge- 
* nius of our people (as may be jadged 
from many inſtances) far excelled that of 
* all other nations.” And conclude as he 
does, It is therefore very ſurprifing that 


in the hiſtory of paſt times we find fo 
* fmall a number of good orators.” His 
Woh | man- 


cn. XVI. EDUCATION. 1753 


manner of anſwering this queſtion ſavours 
more of yanity than truth, and ſeems 
rather calculated to enhance his own me- 
rit, than to give à juſt account of the 
thing. But there is ſamething more 
in this than people are aware of ; and 


it ariſes from an acquaintance with a 


greater number of arts and more various 
* ſtudies than is imagined. For when 
* we conſider the crawds' of pupils and 
« preceptars, the many inſtances of ex- 
* traordinary genius, the infinite variety 
* of cauſes, the noble rewards attendant 
on eloquence, what cauſe can be aſſigned 
« for the great ſcarcity of orators, but the 
« incredible weight and difficulty of tho 
* art itſelf? For tho we ſhould allow 
him the full extent of his argument, and 
acknowlege all that prodigious difficulty 
in the art which he afterwards diſplays 


with ſuch eloquence, yet it is evident from 


fact, that the ſcarcity of orators in Rome 
previous to his time, can not be accounted 
for on that principle. It could be owing 


to nothing but their want of ſtudying it 


methodically as an art, of which the fol- 
lowing is a ftrong preſumptive proof; 
that ſaon after it came to be. ſtudicd in that 

— man- 


- — = 
— 
— 


5 * 
o 
16 
* 1 
14 
- 
1 
77 
1 
218: 
* 
1 U 
: i? 
F: 
mts 
1 4 j 
4 * 
+3 
= 
th f 
= 3 
1 
i 
: 
: 
} ' 
7 > 
1. 
f 
|. 3 
'” Tn 
. 4 * 
1 1 
. 
1 1 
Tx 
uy : 
: 1 4 
: di * 
: 17 C E 
jt . 3, 
#1) 17 7 
jt © bd 
1 4 
Wis. 3 
: \ 
10 
1 
1 1 
J 14 
17 - 
"in ths 
1! IF 
. 17 
. 19 2 
: il PA” 
1 
"oa I 
. 0 a 
1 
1 2 
. j 2 
oy | 5 
+ 44 
' 4 344 
14 7 ** 
4 i q 
J 
r 
, 3 
1 
5 . 
bi + 
{+48 T8 
: ip * 
þ {in 4 * 
1 
j ar 
if 2 
; r 
4 TN. 
1 1 
1 : ny 
. 
{ "* 
Wi: Is 
I by 3 
2 K 1 
3 i +5 
"n . 
" <= 
. 4 
1 
„ 
. f * 
1 
. 3 
8 14 
[43 
9 . 
1 
. 1 % 
: th 1 
| 
1 | 
4 LY 
F* * N 
118 
1 
e 
N 4 
3: * 2 
14 o i 
14 1 
! ti! ** 
[ 2 
1 77 
1 
1 
1 #4 
1 
4 
5 
$21 
%Y 
* 
b i 1 
i $18 
* v 1 
. 3 
1 * 
: 1 * N 
1 9 
j B 
5 4 
l 79 *. 
n 114 
”* f RB 
* 
1 "2 
1 15 85 
. © i 
' $3 #1 
7 18 
$5 | 
f 2 
1 0 
7 
2.5 
TE 
- 
$ , 
: 
4 7 


156; BRITISH Boo I. 


manner, and made part of the diſcipline 
of youth, there aroſe-a great number of 
excellent orators, in vhm were united 
all thoſe. perfections, the want of which 
made them refuſe the name to their pre- 
deceſſors, whoſe natural abilities they had 
no reaſon : to judge were at all inferior, 
but whoſe acquired ſkill Was leſs. To 
corroborate this proof it may be obſerved, 
that Athens, where this art was made the 
ehief ſtudy, abounded in excellent orators, 
tho' the other ſtates of Greece, which neg- 
lected it, produeed none of any name. 
And that Rome never produced one wor- 
thy to be handed down to poſterity by 
that name, till this method of ſtudy was 
introduced. The writers upon this ſub- 
ject do not even except P. Craſſus, Sci- 
pio, Lælius, and the Gracchi. In ſpeaking 
to this point, Velleius Paterculus ſays, 
But oratory in all it's branches, and the 
perfection of proſe- writing, if we may 
except Cato (with all due reſpe& to P. 
Craſſus, Scipio, Lælius, the Gracchi, 
Fannius and Ser. Galba be it ſpoken) 
b blazed out in ſuch luſtre in the time of 
that prince of orarors, Cicero, that we 
can * pleaſed with the works of but 
: very 


'/Cnay, XVI. EDUCATION. 137 
very few before his days, but can admire 
none which were not produced by per- 
© ſons whom he had ſeen, or who had ſeen 
him.“ So that the age of Cicero may be 
conſidered as the only period of time in 
which oratory flouriſhed at Rome, and this 
was the age in which it was firſt taught 
there as an art. That alone is ſufficient to 
account ſor it's never having flouriſhed there 
before; and that it immediately afterwards 
fell into decay and ruin, was owing to the 
change in their conſtitution. It muſt be 
obvious enough to the moſt common re- 
flection, that oratory could no longer dwell 
in a place, from which an had been 
baniſhed. | 

That a proper method of. infiraRion' is 
neceſſary to bring oratory to any degree 
of perfection, may be eaſily ſeen by com- 
paring it with any of the arts ſo taught. 
Suppoſe a man of the greateſt genius for 
muſick or painting, ſhould ſet out upon 
his own ſtrength, without precept or ex- 
ample, to acquire {kill and execution in 
either of thoſe arts, would not a whole 


life ſpent in the: purſuit make a ſmaller 


progreſs than a ſingle year under a- gond 
anaſter 7 And ſhall ———— adyance: he 


CX= 


——— EE “! (ͥ . ⅛ Ä —ͤ—ͤũ ̃ )) 


— 


+ — 


n 


W SL 


— — bh hee ade 
—̃ UA— — — 
— — 
— —e I* 


_— 


__ 


— 


at Re 28 
"W s P — I * 
—_— — — 2 — = P 4 = — 
—＋ — — — 


— —  — — — — —ä— ——ñ5 j — - — © - 
De e e ˙—T ng —— — — — — 2 WP U — 2 — * — — 
h — — — — — - - 2 — - — = — 4%. 7 nay et —- 


— — - a- 
- — — 
Pry 


— 


— 
muy _ — 2 — 
= & Io — VIE” 2 
2 g 
— 
wg" 4 * 2 T4 
+ n 
r 1 


— COTS Eo INI 234 


— — — —— — ——ͤä — CT -——yL( 
* W PX * 


N 


8 


— AY 7 


Wer ne at 


2 — 222 — 


— — 
_— rr 
K IE OS. 4t 


_—_ — 


x58 BRITISH Book I. 
expected from a man's own labour in an 
art infinitely more complicated in it's 
principles, and difficult in it's execution ? 
This is the manner in which Cicero has 
accounted for it's low ſtate in the time 
of his predeceſſors : or have we reaſon to 
ſuppoſe, that if proper maſters wete pro- 

vided to inſtruct them by precept, to 
model them by example, and perfect 
them by practice, that the Britiſh youth 
would not burn with as ardent a deſire as 
the Roman, to furniſh themſelves with 
ſo neceſſary an accompliſhment ? This is 
the more likely, as it might be proved 
from the nature of the Britiſh conftitu- 
tion, that their toil and labour in arriving 
at a ſufficient degree of perfection in this 
art, would not be in any fort of propor- 
tion to thofe of the antients ; that the op- 
portunities of diſplaying it would be more 
frequent, and upon ſubjects of more im- 
portance ; and that the rewards, whether 
of- honour or profit, would be as great 
and certain, Can it be believed in ſuch 
a cafe, that the young nobleman, born 
to be one of tho legiſlature, or the com- 
moner who may hope to be elected into 
2 or the lawyer who is to plead 


at 


Cnar. XVI. EDUCATION. 159 
at the bar, would not each apply himſelf 
to the ſtudy of an art, attended with ſuch 
pleaſure to themſelves as well as to their 
hearers; and productive of ſuch honour 
and profit to them in the reſt of their 
lives? Is it to be thought (ſetting aſide 
all other conſiderations) that ſelf-intereſt 
alone would not incite every perſon de- 


ſtined for holy orders, to procure @ ta- 


lent which he ſhould have as many op- 
portunities of diſplaying, as he performs 
acts of duty? Would not this be the 
means of making many of them- con- 
ſpicuous in life, who now paſs their days 
in obſcurity, or contempt ? Might not 
ſuch as had abilities to diſtinguiſh them- 
ſelves by writing, by the ſtudy of this 
art, ſtill make their writings more po- 
liſhed and agreeable to the preſent age, 
as well as more worthy to be tranſmitted 
to poſterity! And would they not thus 
be doubly armed in defence of their cauſe? 
Might not others unpoſſeſſed of ſufficient 


talents to make themſelves conſpicuous 


by writing, fill be diſtinguiſhed by the 
powers of oratory alone, enjoying atleaſt a 
preſent fame, and doing great ſervice: to 
the preſent generation? Might not powers 


— in 


160 BRITISH Book 1. 
in preaching be a ſurer means of gaining 
preferment than talents in writing? And 
whilſt each received a particular benefit 
and advantage to himſelf, what luſtre 
would not their endeavours reflect upon 
their whole order? And how would the 
common cauſe be ſupported by their joint 
labours ? If Cicero's opinion be juſt, how 
many ornaments might they not add to 
the whole ſtate? If he thought a ſingle 
orator of excellence was of ſuch mo- 
ment to the welfare of the community, 
how much more benefit to the publick 
might be derived from the united force of 
a number all aiming at the ſame end? 
How applicable to them would his ſen- 
tence be, where he ſays, * I lay it down as 
a maxim, that on the ſkill and wiſdom 
of a complete orator, not only his own 
« perſonal dignity, but the welfare of 
* many individuals, and the ſafety of the 
* whole ſtate, ina great meaſure depend.” 
Or if this were applied to ſuch as are in 
the legiſlature, would it not be equally 
juſt ? The uſe and neceſſity of it to the 
ſtate in the members of that body are ſo 
apparent, that they need ſcarce be men- 
tioned. They are the grand council of 
| the 


Cn. XVI, EDUCATION. 161 


the nation, and in a multitude of counſel- 


lors, it is ſaid, there is ſafety. To be a coun- 
ſellor, it is neceſſary that a man ſhould be 


able to give counſel ; if this be effential, 
how much is the number of ours diminiſh 
ed? How many men'of wiſdom and virtue 


have fate in that afſembly, who from this 


incapacity todiſcharge their office, were of 
no more benefit to the publick than the 


meaneſt members in it? How many ſhin- 


ing talents have been there buried in 
ſilence, like thoſe of Mr. Addiſon, thro' 
a falſe ſhame, ariſing from the want of 
knowlege and practice in the art of ſpeak- 
ing in publick? How many perſons of 
the higheſt abilities, capable of drawing 
ſenates after them, and giving a turn to 
debates, have been there hid in the crowd, 
thro' this defect, and reduced only to the 
power of a ſingle voice ? Reduced to a 
ſingle unit, when by the addition of the 
oratorial powers they might ariſe to an 
indefinite value. If in the multitude of 
counſellors there be ſafety, will not the 
ſtate be in danger, in proportion as their 


number is reduced? Would it not be ea- 


ſier for wicked and deſigning men to ac- 
compliſh their ends in that caſe? And 


1 when 


160 BRITISH Boo 1. 
in preaching be a ſurer means of gaining 
preferment than talents in writing? And 
whilſt each received a particular benefit 
and advantage to himſelf, what luſtre 
would not their endeavours reflect upon 
their whole order? And how would the 
common cauſe be ſupported by their joint 
labours ? If Cicero's opinion be juſt, how 
many ornaments might they not add to 

the whole ſtate? If he thought a ſingle 
orator of excellence was of ſuch mo- 
ment to the welfare of the community, 
how much more benefit to the publick 
might be derived from the united force of 
a number all aiming at the ſame end? 
How applicable to them would his ſen- 
tence be, where he ſays, © I lay it down as 
© .a maxim, that on the ſkill and wiſdom 
of a complete orator, not only his own 
« perſonal dignity, but the welfare of 
many individuals, and the ſafety of the 
* whole ſtate, in a great meaſure depend.” 
Or if this were applied to ſuch as are in 
the legiſlature, 'would it not be equally 
juſt ? The uſe and neceſſity of it to the 
ſtate in the members of that body are ſo 
apparent, that they need ſcarce be men- 
_ tioned. They are the grand council of 
| the 


Cnae, XVI. EDUCATION. 161 


the nation, and in a multitude of counſel- 
lors, it is ſaid, there is ſafety. To be a coun- 
ſellor, it is neceſſary that a man ſhould be 
able to give counſel; if this be effential, 
how much is the number of ours diminiſh 
ed? How many men of wiſdom and virtue 
have ſate in that aſſembly, who from this 
incapacity todiſcharge their office, were of 
no more benefit to the publick than the 
meaneſt members in it? How many ſhin-. 
ing talents have been there buried in 
filence, like thoſe of Mr. Addiſon, thro' 
a falſe ſhame, ariſing from the want of 
knowlege and practice in the art of ſpeak- 
ing in publick? How many perſons of 
the higheſt abilities, capable of drawing 
ſenates after them, and giving a turn to 
debates, have been there hid in the crowd, 
thro' this defect, and reduced only to the 
power of a ſingle voice? Reduced to a 
ſingle unit, when by the addition of the 
oratorial powers they might ariſe to an 
indefinite value. If in the multitude of 
counſellors there be ſafety, will not the 
ſtate be in danger, in proportion as their 
number is reduced? Would it not be ea- 
ſier for wicked and deſigning men to ac- 
compliſh their ends in that caſe ? And 

HO when 


162 BRITISH - BooxT. 
when the counſellors of weight and 
power are but few, might not a confede- 
racy amongſt them eaſily ruin the ſtate ? 
Is it not to be ſuppoſed, that ſelfiſh men 
who have views oppoſite to the publick 
geod, will labour with all their might to 
acquire the management of a weapon, by 
which alone they can carry their points, 
and ſhall the guardians of the publick have 
no arms to oppoſe them ? Should we not 
in this caſe ſay with St. Auſtin, * Since 
therefore eloquence, which has a prodi- 
gious power in perſuading people either 
to true or falſe opinions, lies open to all 
* who are inclined to make uſe of it, what 
can be the reaſon that the good do not 
employ themſelves in acquiring an art 
ſo neceſſary for the defence of truth? 
Eſpecially when it is conſidered, that the 
wicked ule it with ſucceſs, in defending 
injuſtice, in eſtabliſhing error, and in 
accompliſhing their pernicious deſigns. 
Upon the whole, when it is conſidered 
that the members of the two moſt neceſ- 
ſary profeſſions to ſociety, the church and 
the law, to whoſe care all the fpiritual and 
temporal concerns of mankind are com- 
mitted ; and that they who compoſe the 
grand. 


a 


CAP. XVI. EDUCATION. 163 
grand council of the nation, upon whom 
the welfare and ſafety of the ſtate depend, 
can not poſſibly diſcharge their duty with- 
out ſkill in ſpeaking, it may be mat- 
ter of the higheſt aſtoniſhment that this 
art has never hitherto been ſtudied in 
Great Britain. Should we hear of any 
country where the profeſſors of muſick, 
or painting, never conſider the principles 
of their arts, or reduce their practice to 
rule, but are content to follow ſuch mo- 
dels and patterns as chance has thrown in 
their way, how ſhould we pity their ig- 
norance, and laugh at their abſurdity ? 
And yet this practice is not ſo contrary 
to common ſenſe as ours, inaſmuch as 
the art of which we are ſpeaking, is of all 
others the moſt difficult to be attained 
without rules; and inaſmuch as the want 
of ſkill in it is attended with the worſt con- 
ſequences, and greateſt dangers to the ſtate. 
Let us now take a ſhort ſurvey of what 
has hitherto been done. The principal 
point in view was to prove, that ſome of 
the greateſt evils in the ſtate aroſe from a 
defective education : In order to do this 
it has been laid down as a maxim, that 
no ſtate can thrive unleſs the education of 


M 2 youth 


364 BRITISH Bookl. 
youth be. ſuited to it's principle. It has 
been proved, that no principle could poſ- 
fibly ſupport our conſtitution but that of 
religion ; -and it has been ſhewn, that re- 
ligion can not be upheld without ſkill in 
oratory, in it's miniſters. It has been 
ſhewyn alſo, that the knowlege of that art 
is equally neceſſary in thoſe whe compoſe 
the legiſlative. body, and are conſequently 
the guardians of the ſtate. So far there- 
fore as the ſupport of it's principle is ne- 
ceſſary to the preſervation of the ſtate, 
and ſo far as a proper diſcharge of their 
duty in it's guardians is neceſſary to it's 
ſafety, ſo far is the ſtudy of oratory eſſen- 
tial to the very being of the Britiſh conſti- 
tution. Let us now conſider how far it 
may contribute to it's well-being, and to 
it's flouriſhing condition. In order to do 
this, I ſhall in the next place endeavour 
to ſhew it's uſe in regard to language, and 
conſequently to knowlege ; and afterwards 
conſider how far it may contribute to the 
improvement of the liberal arts, and con- 
ſequently to politeneſs. 


END of the FIRST Book 


BRITISH 


EDUCATION, &c. 


BOOK II. CHAP. I. 


Of the excellence and uſe of the Greek and 
Roman languages, 


T was to the care taken in the cultiva- 

tion of their languages, that Greece, 
and Rome, owed that ſplendor, which 
eclipſed all the other nations of the world. 
By that, they have triumphed over time 
and oblivion, and ſtill maintain a ſuperi- 
ority over all ages, either before or ſince. 
Other countries may have produced even 
greater law-givers, commanders, and phi- 


1 whoſe inſtitutions, actions and 
M 3 Eknow- 


* 


D * 


166 BRITISH Book II. 


knowlege, might be far ſuperior to theirs; 
but they alone had the art of diſplaying 
' thoſe in the beſt light to the world, and 
of perpetuating them to the end of time. 
The conqueſts of Ninus, Seſoſtris, Cyrus, 
and many more, might have far exceed- 
ed thoſe of their greateſt heroes; and yet 
is it not owing to the Greek language that 
any traces of them remain, or that even 
their names are handed down to us ? 

In the latter ages, what mighty heroes 
have ariſen, whoſe actions may in them- 
ſelves be far ſuperior to any of antiquity ? 
And yet are the great exploits of Odin, 
Tamerlane, and Almanzor, as well known 
to the world as thoſe of Alexander and 
Cæſar? What ſhining and remarkable ex- 
amples of heroick virtue have not the an- 
nals of our chriſtian potentates afforded ? 
Such as Scanderbeg, Henry the fourth 
of France, Guſtavus Adolphus of Sweden, 
the Black Prince, and Henry the fifth of 
our own country, William prince of 
Orange, founder of the Belgick ſtate, and 
our ever memorable K. William the third, 
the preſerver of the liberties of Europe; 
with many more, who upon a fair compa- 

rifon 


CAP. I, EDUCATION. 167 


riſon would not yield to the greateſt names 
of antiquity. And yet are theſe ranked in 
the world in the ſame claſs with Leonidas, 
Epaminondas, Scipio, Cato, and the army 
of patriots which the antient writers have 
drawn out? On the contrary, how little do 
we know in general, of the hiſtory of our 
own times, tho' that be moſt what im- 
ports us, or of the exploits of thoſe to 
whom we are moſt indebted for the 
worldly bleſſings we enjoy; whilſt the 
names and actions even of thoſe who lived 


in the dark and fabulous ages of the Greek 


and Roman ſtory, are familiar to the 
mouths of all men? Who is there that 


can not ſpeak of Hercules, Theſeus, Ro- 


mulus, the Horatii, Cocles, and a thou- 
ſand others, whoſe actions as referred to 
them may not only be doubted, but the 
very exiſtence of many of the perſons, as 


in the heroes of the lliad ? Yet theſe are 


all conſigned to immortality, only by be- 
ing recorded in thoſe ever living languages, 
as if their writers had the power of Midas, 
of turning all they touched into gold. 

It is well known that Greece borrowed 


all ber civil and political inſtitutions, her 
M 4 know- 


168 BRITISH Book II. 


knowlege in philoſophy, and the ſciences, 
from other countries; particularly Ægypt 
and Phœnicia. And yet what authors of 
thoſe countries have come down to us 
containing their ſtores of knowlege ? 
Would they not have been entirely loft 
to us, ſhould we even know that they had 
ever flouriſhed there, had it not been for 
the Greek language? Was it not by 
means of that alone that Greece enriched 
herſelf with the ſpoils of all nations, pre- 
ſerved the collected treaſures of ages from 
corruption, and decay; and handed down 
the rich bequeſt to lateſt poſterity ? 

Sir William Temple, in his Eſſay on 
antient and modern learning, does not 
ſeruple to affirm, that it is to the two 
languages of Greece and Rome we are in- 
debted for all we have of learning, or an- 
tient records in the world; and that with- 
out them, the world in all theſe weſtern 
parts would hardly have been known to 
have been above five or ſix hundred years 
old, nor any certainty remain of what 
paſſed in it before that time. 

Muſt not the antients therefore have 
looked upon their language as their great- 

I eſt 


Cray. I. EDUCATION. 169 
eſt treaſure, which enabled them to hand 
down ſuch bleſſings together with their 
own memories, to the end of time; which 
at once furniſhed them with the means 
of acquiring and preſerving knowlege, 
and of diſplaying it in the moſt beautiful 
and laſting colours ; which was the ſource 
of ſome of their higheſt delights and en- 
joyments, and one of the greateſt excite- 
ments to virtue and praiſe-worthy deeds ? 
For what could more powerfully inflame 
men with the deſire of performing glo- 
rious actions, than the certainty of the 
gratification of one of the ſtrongeſt paſ- 
ſions, the love of fame; of having thoſe 
actions blazoned to the world not only 
in their own times, but through all fu- 
ture generations? And would not the mo- 
tives be equally ſtrong in the poets and 
hiſtorians, to record thoſe actions? Thus 
the hero, and the writer, mutually aſſiſt- 
ed each other in their flights ; not like the 
twin brothers, dividing their immortality, 
but always ſhining together, and mutually 
reflecting luſtre on each other. What in- 
ducement could be ſo ſtrong to writers 
upon any ſubject to labour at perfection, 
5 or 


170 BRITISH Book II. 


or what could ſo effectually flatter and 
encourage them in their toilſome taſk, as 
the conſideration that the materials with 
which they wrought were as durable as the 
world itſelf; which neither the ruſt of 
time could devour, nor the force of arms 
deſtroy ? It was this which made Horace 
exultingly ſay, 

__ © Exegi monumentum re perennius.“ 

And Ovid in the ſame ſtrain, 


* Jamque opus exegi, quod nec Jovis ira, 
nec ignis, 

Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere 
vetuſtas. 


On the contrary, what diſcouragements 
muſt thoſe writers lie under, who have 
only changeable and periſhable materials 
to work upon ? Whoſe fame is circum- 
ſcribed as much in ſpace as in time ; con- 
fined to two iſlands in the one, to a cen- 
tury, or little more, in the other, Can we 
ſuppoſe that artiſts would take the ſame 
pains to finiſh carvings in wood, as in braſs 
or marble ? What Dr. Swift has ſaid of 
our hiſtorians may be applied to our wri- 
ters in general. 
© How 


CnAP. I. EDUCATION. 171 


* How ſhall any man, who hath a ge- 
* nius for hiſtory, equal to the beſt of the 
* antients, be able to undertake ſuch a 
work with ſpirit and chearfulneſs, when 
c he conſiders, that he will be read with 
* pleaſure but a very few years, and in an 
age or two ſhall hardly be underſtood 
* without an interpreter ? This is like em- 
* ploying an excellent ſtatuary to work 
upon mouldring ſtone. Thoſe who ap- 
s ply their ſtudies to preſerve the memory 
of others, will always have ſome concern 
* for their own. And I believe it is for this 
* reaſon, that ſo few writers among us, 
of any diſlinction, have turned their 
* thoughts to ſuch a diſcouraging employ- 
ment; for the beſt Engliſh hiſtorian 
# muſt lie under this mortification, that 
* when his ſtile grows antiquated, he will 
be only conſidered as a tedious relater of 
facts; and perhaps conſulted in his turn, 
among other neglected authors, to fur- 
* niſh materials for ſome future collector.” 

It was not then to ſuperior knowlege, 
{kill in ſciences, or pre-eminence in virtue, 
that the Greeks and Romans owed the 
diſtinguiſhed rank which they had ever 


7 held 


1 BRITISH Boox II. 


held above all other mortals; it was to 
their language alone, without which the 
higheſt degree of wiſdom and virtue, are 
as evaneſcent as their poſſeſſors. It is by 
that only the ſouls of men acquire an im- 
mortality even in this world, as by that 
their ideas appear for ever in equal freſh- 
neſs, and operate with equal force, when 
their bodies are mixed with the common 
maſs of matter. All other arts of per- 
* petuating our ideas continue but a ſhort 
time: ſtatues can laſt but a few thou- 
ſands of years, edifices fewer, and colours 
ſtill fewer than edifices. Michael An- 
gelo, Fontana, and Raphael, will here- 
after be what Phidias, Vitruvius, and 
Apelles are at preſent, the names of 
great ſtatuaries, architects, and painters, 
whoſe works are loſt, The circum- 
ſtance which gives authors an advantage 
above all theſe great maſters, is this, that 
they can multiply their originals ; or ra- 
ther can make copies of their works to 
what number they pleaſe, which ſhall 
be as valuable as the orjginals them- 
* ſelves.” 


+ Spec, No 166. 


S020 4 —f— 4 a 


The 


CAP. I. EDUCATION. 173 
The ingenious author of the above paſ- 
ſage has put this matter into the following 
ien light. Ariſtotle tells us, that 
the world is a copy or tranſcript of thoſe 
ideas which are in the mind of the 
« firſt Being; and that thoſe ideas which 
are in the mind of man, are a tranſcript 
* of the world: to this we may add, 
* that words are the tranſcript of thoſe 
ideas which are in the mind of man, and 
that writing or Printing are the tran- 
* ſcript of words. 
As the ſupreme Being has expreied, 
and as it were printed his ideas in the 
© creation, men expreſs their ideas in 
books, which by this great invention of 
* theſe latter ages, may laſt as long as the 
© ſun, and moon, and periſh only in the 
0 general wreck of nature. Thus Cowley 
in his poem on the reſurrection, men- 
« tioning the deſtruction of the univerſe, 
* has thoſe admirable lines : 
No all the wide extended ſky, 
And all th' harmonious worlds on high, 
© And Virgil's ſacred work ſhall die. 
Ought it not therefore to be the firſt 
care of a nation that is ambitious to diſtin- 


guiſh 


- 
. nee rr ⁵——J— ˙ ee o mm: 


174 BRITISH Book II. 
guiſh itſelf in the world, to cultivate and 


refine their language, and reduce it to a 
certain ſtandard ; by which alone a per- 
fect tranſcript of all the great geniuſes born 


"amongſt them can be preſerved, to be a 


perpetual ornament and ſupport to the 
ſtate, to furniſh precepts and models to all 


future generations ? It is true, that there 
are but few countries in the world, how- 


ever they may be deſirous of it, or what- 
ever pains they may take to compaſs it, 
which can attain this ineſtimable bleſſing. 
The original conſtruction of their language 
often renders it impracticable, and where 
this is not the caſe, other cauſes interfere. 
The diamond alone will bear that high 
poliſh which gives it it's ſuperlative luſtre, 
and extraordinary value; and yet before 
the art of poliſhing it was diſcovered, the 
diamond itſelf was of no higher eſtimation 
than common pebbles: It is certain, that 
out of the great variety of languages ſpoken 
by the infinite number of nations with 
which this globe has been peopled, only 
two have arrived at ſuch a pitch of per- 
fection, as to ſurvive thoſe who ſpoke 
them, ſo as to be a neceſſary part of the 

ſtudy 


CuAP. I. EDUCATION. 175 
ſtudy of all ſuch as had leiſure to apply 
themſelves to books, and would gain the 
reputation of being learned. To the per- 
fection of theſe languages there was a con- 
currence of cauſes, which perhaps had ne- 
ver met before or ſince in any age, or coun- 
try, Great Britain alone excepted. If there- 
fore it can be ſhewn, that all the favour- 
able circumſtances which conſpired to the 
refinement and eſtabliſhment of theirs, are 
rather moreſtrong with us; thatthe means 
are equally in our power of rendering it 
as perfect, as extenſive, and as durable as 
theirs ; would it not be the greateſt ab- 
ſurdity in us to forego a point thro' want 
of a little pains, which would be attended 
with ſuch immediate advantage and plea- 
ſure to us? And would it not be an un- 
pardonable omiſſion i in us to neglect tranſ- 
mitting to our ſueceſſors the nobleſt le- 
gacy we could bequeath ? 

Let us examine therefore by what 
means thoſe two languages arrived at 


their high degree of perfection, and ſee 


whether thoſe means are not equally in 
our power, and would not in all r 
_ be equally effectual with us. 


CHAP. 


. 


_— — — ————— —————— —— 


Cn EN ee 
X . 


a - 
1 
— . ů A ⁶ DAI . —— VS - 
* 


* 
— res 2 I. Gone Ce — — — 
* DDr enn * . be * — 
— — — » —_——— r GOL - 8 — . 


176 BRITISH Boox II. 


CHAP. II. 


That the perfection of the Greek and Ro- 
nan languages was chiefly owing to the 
- Aug and Frans of oratory. 


\HERE cannot be a ranger pre- 
1 ſumptive proof of this, than is at 
e to our view, when we con- 
ſider that theſe were the only nations upon 
earth who ever ſtudied oratory as an art, 
and that theſe were the only two who 


brought their language to perfection. But 
in regard to the Roman language we 


can give a more abſolute proof, as the re- 
finement of that can be aſſigned to no 
other cauſe. From the time of Romulus to 
the days of Scipio, it was perpetually va- 
rying, as much as the Engliſh has done in 
an equal ſpace; ſo that at any given period, 
the language written two centuries before 
was not intelligible but to antiquarians, 
till after the Greek rhetoricians had intro- 
duced the ſtudy of eloquence. At that 


time their language was ſtill rude, un- 


cultivated, and barbarous ; yet in leſs than 
four- 


Cup. H. EDUCATION. 177 
fourſcore years from the introduction of 
that ſtudy, it arrived at the pitch of per- 
_ tection in which we find it in the Cice- 
ronian age ; and which was perhaps in- 
capable of improvement, The Greek in- 


deed is harder to be traced to it's ſource, 


as neither books nor hiſtory afford us ſuf- 
ficient lights into the times previous to it's 
perfection; the oldeſt authentick book 
handed down to us being that of Homer ; 
ſo that we can form no judgement how 
long the language had been poliſhed be- 


fore his time. But even from his writ- 


ings we may eaſily ſee, that oratory had 


flouriſhed long before his days, and may 


therefore with the higheſt probability 
aſſign it to the ſame cauſe. Cicero ſays, 
Homer would not have beſtowed ſuch 
« praiſes upon Ulyſſes and Neſtor for their 
* eloquence, even at the time of the Tro- 
jan war, one of whom he deſcribes as 
© a nervous, the other as a perſuaſive 
'* ſpeaker, if eloquence had not even at 
that time been in high repute. Nor 
could the poet himſelf otherwiſe have 
produced ſuch finiſhed ſpeeches, and 
«© appeared fo plainly the orator. 
N | 


=, 


When = 


—— 
8 =] 


— ted 
— —— — 


B —— . REY 


178 BRITISH Book II. 


When it is conſidered that the ſtates of 
Greece conſiſted for the moſt part of re- 


publicks, who were led and governed by 


the publick ſpeakers, it muſt be allowed 


that the practice of oratory was almoſt 


coeval with the ſtates, and conſequently 
that it muſt have been the chief means of 


refining their language. Language being 
the principal weapon of the orator, it was 
more immediately his concern that it 


ſhould be well tempered and poliſhed, 


and made fit for uſe. This will be made 
more evident upon a view. of the points 
which are eſſential to it's perfection. When 
language is conſidered as the tranſcript of 


our ideas, the more perfect a language is, 


the more exact will the tranſcript be. 


Language is compoſed of words. In words 


two things are to be conſidered, ſenſe and 
ſound. The ſenſe regards the intellectual 


faculty only, as they are arbitrary marks 
by which the ideas of one mind are com- 
municated to another. Their ſound re- 
gards alone the ſenſitive faculty of hearing, 
thro' which they are communicated. The 


ſenſe may therefore be conſidered as the 
ſoul of words, the ſound as the body. And 


as 


CuAr. II. EDUCATION. 179 
as in life to make a perfect man, there 
muſt be the. Mens ſana” in corpore ſano, 
the ſame is alſo requiſite to the perfection 
of language. In both caſes the ſtrong 
and graceful ſtructure of the body, the 
perfect uſe of the members, and the ap- 
titude and vigour of the organs, are ne- 
ceſſary to diſplay the intellect in it's full 
force and beauty. When language is con- 
ſidered in regard to the ſenſe of words, 
two points are neceſſary; preciſion, and 
copiouſneſs. Preciſion, that the fame 
words may raife the ſame ideas in the 
minds of the hearers, as are in that of the 
ſpeaker, otherwiſe he would not be un- 
derſtood. Copiouineſs, that every idea 
of the mind may have it's mark, otherwiſe 
a perfect tranſcript of it could not be 
made. Conſidered in regard to ſound, 
there are alſo two points of chief moment, 
diſtinction, and agreeableneſs. Diſtinc- 
tion, that one word thro' a ſimilitude of 
ſound may not be miſtaken for another, 
which would confound the ſenſe; agree 
ableneſs, that attention may be kept up 
I the pleaſure of hearing, which other 


N 2, wiſe 


ſ 
1 
| 
| 
* 


g a 
— — * 


| what time he pleaſes: to fnd out his mean- 


180 BRITISH Boox II. 


wiſe, might grow weary, and in any length 
of time be diſguſted, as the operation in 
itſelf is painful. When language is con- 
fidered i in this light, to whom are all theſe 
points ſo. neceſſary as to the orator ? To 


be well: underſtood, and heard with de- 


light, are eſſential to him. This could not 


be unleſs the words he uſed excited the 


ſame ideas in the minds of his hearers, 
and unleſs the ſounds of which they were 
compoſed, were agreeable to the ear, Per- 
haps it may. be ſaid, that theſe are as ne- 
ceſſary to the poets and other writers, as 


to the orators. To ſuch as recited their 


works I grant it would, for in that inſtance 
they apply to the art of oratory, But in 
regard to ſuch whoſe works are ſubmitted 
to the eyes of readers, the argument 
will not hold good. To prove which, 
amongſt many others that. might be of> 
fered, the following plain reaſons will 
be ſufficient. In the firſt place, clear- 


neſs is not ſo abſolutely neceſſary to the 


writer; for let his language be ever ſo ob- 
ſcure, his reader may ſtop, and take 


ing ; 


nr. II. EDUCATION. 181 

ing; whereas it is neceſſary to the orator 
that his hearer ſhould be able to accom- 
pany him, and that what he ſays ſhould 
be underſtood in the ſame ſpace of time 
that it is uttered. Nor is agreeableneſs 
of ſound ſo neceſſary to the writer as to 
the ſpeaker, as that is generally ſubmitted 
to à ſenſe which cannot judge of it. The 
eye can look without pain at many hard 
uncouth combinations of ſyllables and 
words, which, the tongue could not pro- 
nounce without difficulty, and which 
would conſequently be diſagreeable to the 
ear. As therefore we mult ſuppoſe that 
all the men of the greateſt genius and 
abilities which Greece produced, were 
neceſſarily intereſted, and employed, in 
improving, refining, and eſtabliſhing their 
language, we need not wonder that it 
was ſoon brought to perfection, and that 
it laſted with hardly any variation for 
more than a thouſand years, from Homer 
to Plutarch, and how long before we 
know not. One argument to prove the 
point ſet forth in the head of this chap- 
ter ought not to be omitted, that in A- 


thens, where eloquence and oratory were 
N 3 molt 


——— — 1 2 


CT —— 


182 BRITISH Book II. 


moſt ſtudied, they were allowed alſo to 


ſpeak the pureſt and correQeſt language 
al all ere, 


c H A P. III. 


7! at the Greek and N languages owed 
their flability and permanence to oratory. 
With ſome animadverſions upon the neglect 


Yy Pudying the Engh iſh language. 


HE ſame means which brought 

theſe languages to a ſtate of per- 
fection, were alſo neceſſary to preſerve 
them in that ſtate. As the practice of 
orators had introduced the ſtudy of lan- 
guage, which was the cauſe of i it's refine- 
ment, ſo when it was refined to the ut- 
moſt, the neceſlity of continuing the 
ſtudy of language was greater than be- 
fore. For the taſte of the people being 
now much improved, by conſtantly hear- 
ing ſuch as ſpoke in the moſt pure and 
perfect manner, would immediately be 
ſenſible of the leaſt deviation from what 
was right, and be offended at any impro- 
per tone, or uſe of words in their met 

lic 


Cup. III. EDUCATION. 183 


lick ſpeakers. There are many inſtances 
recorded of their great delicacy in this 
reſpect. The ſtory of the old Athenian 
herb- woman and Theophraſtus is well 
known. That old woman called Theo- 
phraſtus (a man in general remarkable 
for elocution) a ſtranger, only on ac- 

count of obſerving in him too nice an 
exactneſs in the pronunciation of a ſingle 

word; and being aſked her reaſon, ſaid 

ſhe had no other, but that he ſpoke too 
Attically.* Cicero ſays of the Athenians 

in general, Atticorum aures teretes & re- 
ligioſc. He ſhews alſo that the Ro- 
mans in his time were as nice, when he 
ſays, that in the repetition of a verſe 
© the whole theatre was in an uproar, if 
* there was one ſyllable too many or too 
few in it. Not that the crowd was at all 
* acquainted with the quantity of poetick 
feet, or had any notion of numbers; 
nor could they tell what it was which 
gave them offence, or why, or in what 
reſpect it was a fault.“ Whence could 
this ariſe but from that general good taſte 
infuſed into them by being habituated to 
hear nothing but what was pure and cor- 
N 4 rect ? 


* * = * 


184 BRITISH Boon II. 
rect? and how much pains muſt have 

been taken by ſuch as intended to ſpeak in 

publick, with reſpect to pronunciation, 

when the leaſt deviation from propriety 

would be perceived by the meaneſt of the 
people ? Accordingly we find, that after 
the care of their morals, this was the 

principal object of attention in the educa- 
tion of youth, whoſe chief employment 
was the ſtudy of their own language. 

The Greeks ſtudied only their own, and 
conſequently had much labour faved. 
The Romans ſtudied the Greek, but it 
was chiefly with a view to improvement in 
the knowlege of their own, which had 
ever the preference with them, and em- 
ployed the greateſt partof their time. They 
took ſuch care with reſpe& to pronuncia- 
tion that it extended even to their choice' 
of nurſes and ſervants, who were to be 
about them in their infantage, What ſhall 
we ſay then to our practice, ſo contrary to 
that of thoſe poliſhed nations, which we 
admire ſo much, and pretend to emulate ; 
who take great pains in ſtudying all lan- 
guages but our own ? Who are very nice: 
and curious in our choice of preceptors for 


the 


7 


Cu ar. III. EDUCATION: 18 5 


the antient and modern tongues, yet ſuf- 
fer our children to be vitiated in the very 
firſt principles of our own, by commit- 
ting them to the care of ſome of the moſt 
ignorant and Joweſt of mankind. Is it be- 
cauſe that the knowlege of our language is' 
ſo eaſily acquired, that it can ſcarce be 
miſſed ? This ſurely can not be ſaid, when 
it is univerſally allowed, that there are 
hardly any who ſpeak or write it correctly. 

Is it becauſe we have leſs uſe for it than 
any other? Can that be ſuppoſed, when 
it is the only one uſed upon all important 
as well as common occaſions of life ? 
When we conſider that after the Greek 
and Roman languages were brought to a 
ſtandard of perfection, when their youth 
had the advantage of eſtabliſhed invariable 
rules upon which to found their know- 
lege; offable preceptors to inſtruct and 
guide them; of the nobleſt examples and 
moſt perfect patterns for their imitation ; 
that with all theſe aids they ſtill found it 
neceſſary to apply a great portion of their 
time in their more adult years, to make 
themſelves maſters of it; ſhall we who 
have none of theſe advantages, without 


any 


— 


186 BRITISH Book II. 
any pains or application expect to have a 
competent knowlege of one, which in it's 
preſent ſtate is far more difficult to be learn- 
ed than theirs ? This omiſſion in our edu- 
cation is the more wonderful, whether we 
conſider the great importance of the point 
to the ſtate in general, or it's univerſal uſe 
to all the individuals who compoſe it. 
Mr. Locke has repreſented and complain- 
ed of this defect in the ſtrongeſt terms. 
To write and ſpeak correctly, gives a 
grace, and gains a favourable attention 
© to what one has to ſay : and fince tis 
* Engliſh that an Engliſh gentleman will 
have conſtant uſe of, that is the lan- 
«* guage he ſhould chiefly cultivate, ' and 
£ wherein moſt care ſhould be taken to 
« poliſh and perfect his ſtile. To ſpeak 
© or, write better Latin than Engliſh, may 
© make a man be talked of, but he will 
© find it more to his purpoſe, to expreſs 
. himſelf well in his own tongue, that 
he uſes every moment, than to have the 
vain commendation of others for a very 
ingnificant quality. This I find uni- 
verſally neglected, nor no care taken 
1 | * any 


* * a <©& 


Cxar. Ill. EDUCATION. 19% 


0 
0 
c 
c 
c 
0 
c 
c 
c 
c 
0 
c 
6 
c 
c 
c 
C. 
c 
c 
6 
. 
c 
c 
7 
E.; 
6 


any where to improve young men in 


their own language, that they may tho- 
"OY underſtand and- be maſters of 
It any one among us have a faci- 


a lit or purity: more than ordinary 1 in his 


mother tongue, it is owing to chance, 
or his genius, or any thing, rather than 
his education, or any care of his teacher. 
To mind what Engliſh his pupil ſpeaks 
or writes, is below the dignity of one 
| bred up amongſt Greek and Latin, tho 
he have but little of them himſelf. 
Theſe are the learned languages fit only 
for learned men to meddle with and 
teach; Epgliſh is the language of illi- 
terate vulgar: tho' yet we ſee the po- 
lity of ſome of our neighbours hath not 
thought it beneath the publick care to 
promote and reward the improvement 
of their own language. Poliſhing and 
enriching their tongue is no ſmall buſi- 
neſs amongſt them ; it hath colleges and 
ſtipends appointed it, and there is raiſed 
amongſt them a great am bition and emu- 
lation of writing correctly: and we ſee 
what they are come to by it, and how 
far 


188 BRITISH Boos II. 


far they have ſpread one of the worſt 
languages poſſibly in this part of the 
* world, if we look upon it as it was in 
ſome few reigns backwards, whatever 
* it be now. The great men among the 
Romans were daily exercifing them- 
_ © ſelvesin theirown language; and we find 
« yet upon. record, the names of orators, 
* who taught ſome of their emperors La- 
tin, tho' it were their mother tongue. 

Tis plain the Greeks were yet more 
© nice in theirs ; all other ſpeech was bar- 
* barous to them but their own, and no 
foreign language appears to have been 
« ſtudied or valued amongſt that learned 
and acute people; tho' it be paſt doubt 
© that they borrowed their —_— and 

* philoſophy from abroad. 

Jam not here ſpeaking againſt Greek 
and Latin; I think they ought to be 
© ſtudied, and the Latin at leaſt under- 
* ſtood well by every gentleman. But 
* whatever foreign languages a young man 
* meddles with (and the more he knows 
* the better) that which he ſhould criti- 
* cally ſtudy, and labour to get a facility, 
* clearneſs, and elegancy to expreſs ** 

«Jed 


.Cnae. III. EDUCATION. 189 


« ſelf in, ſhould be his own, and to this 
* purpoſe he ſhould ay be exerciſed 
in it. 
In another es So Gates There; can 
ſcarce be a greater defect in a gentleman, 
than not to expreſs himſelf well either in 
writing or ſpeaking. But yet I think, I 
may aſk my reader, whether he doth not 
* know a great many, who live upon their 


A 


© eſtates, and ſo, with the name, ſhould 


have the qualities of gentlemen, who 
can not ſo much as tell a ſtory as they 
* ſhould, much leſs ſpeak clearly, and 
« perſualively in any buſineſs. This [ 
think not to be ſo much their fault as 
© the fault of their education; for I mult 
© without partiality do my countrymen 
this right, that where they apply them- 
© ſelves, I ſee none of their neighbours 
© outgo them. They have been taught the- 
«© torick, but yet never taught how to ex- 
« preſs themſelves handſomely with their 
«* tongues or pens in the language they are 
always to uſe; as if the names of the fi- 
« gures that embelliſhed the diſcourſes of 
© thoſe who underſtood the artof ſpeaking, 
were the very art and ſkill of ſpeaking 


well. 


- 2 — — = — — * 
*. 1 1 "= 7 2” 
* <A — ind tt ae, . I 
by _— - bs a o 
- 4» af 
7 8 5 


„ — 
. to wad — 2 
— . — ns 
2 P — I'S — — — 
I" — ID 2 % £9 - a - N 
n . 2 8 8 ed > - o as W — * Fi 
> * oa. { Fn D 2 1 
$79 N Ii eee * 1 n 
POSTS, a = = 2 - P * * Tx 


7 


* Ok — 
— 2 . 58 Lhd 
© Bf, oo Sonny 


„ 
- 2 


190 BRITISH Boo II. 


* well. This, as all other things of prac- 
« tice, is to be learned not by a few or a 
great many rules given, but by exerciſe, 
and application, according to good rules, 
or rather patterns, till habits are got, 
and-a facility of doing it well.” | 
Mr. Addiſon has many paſſages where- 
in he lays open, and laments this defect; 
and it is one of biſhop Berkley's quære's, 
Whether half the learning and ſtudy of 
* theſe kingdoms is not uſeleſs, for want 
of a proper delivery, and pronunciation, 
being taught in our ſchools and colleges?” 
Indeed there is not any one of the leaſt 
underſtanding, who has either wrote or 
ſpoke upon this ſubje&, that has not al- 
lowed this ſhameful neglect of our own 
language to be one of the greateſt of our 
national evils. Is it not therefore aſto- 
niſhing that no remedy has hitherto been 
thought of? Would it be credited, were 
it not warranted by fact, that a poliſhed 
and rational people ſhould be at great ex- 
pence of labour, time, and money, to have 
their children inſtructed in languages 
which never can be of any uſe to them in 
| oe, and ſeldom even contribute to their 
plea- 


* * a 


Caay. III. EDUCATION. 191 


pleaſure; whilſt they neglect entirely to 
have them inſtructed in one which would 
be of perpetual uſe or ornament to them, 
in whatever rank or ſtation they were 
placed, upon matters of the higheſt im- 
portance, as well as the common occur- 
rences of life; and which might be a 
principal means of procuring them profit 
and promotion? It may be ſaid by ſome, 
that being our mother tongue, we have 
no occaſion to learn it by rule, and that 
without ſtudy, we ſhall of courſe acquire 
a ſufficient knowlege of it. But is this aſ- 
ſertion warranted by experience ? If the 
contrary be true; if it mult be allowed 
that people are almoſt univerſally defici- 
ent both in underſtanding and ſpeaking it, 
the argument for ſtudying it will be fo 
much the ſtronger on account of it's being 
a mother tongue. Becauſe if it be gene- 
rally ill ſpuken, it will not be poſſible but 
that boys in their childhood, and youths 
as they go more abroad into the world, 
muſt habitually fall into errors, and con- 
tract bad cuſtoms, which can be reme- 
died by nothing but ſtudy and application. 
Whereas there is no ſuch danger in any 


of 


SEE — — 
2 * _— 


\ 7 
1 
* ' J 
* 
3 
. 
=. 
Te it! 
4 br 
4 1 
1 
” r 
[ 
"23: , 
* T1 
- 15 
1 
'f 
N. 
1 
: * 
5 7 
. 
amb 
4K 
N 1178 
{ Þ 1; 
245 54. - 
. W 
KF 1 
1 } 1 
wel. i! 
__ 
FEM 
WONG 
. 1 
16% 
: . 1 
: 161 
1 
t 
WR 
. : " 
11. 
4. 
; * 
Nh. 
% 
. 
$% 
00 
: — 
1 
{i 
. 
: : 
* 
wy 
3 1 
F 
4 


- — 


+ - — — 
5 — — ko rn" 7 

- 7 wet Bro W on Lon reboot Song een nc - => 

— "Shit IRATES ̃ĩ I ES 8 : 4 
, | = r 
— - — — — 2 W W2=z 

— = BER ES 

— Mg 4" — _ 


. 2 — 1 
— ou; ooo < - 04 we __ + 
—— — —— — — 
— — 2 
k * 3 


— — 


192 BRIT IS H Book II. 


of the other languages, when learned 
from the mouth of a judicious and ſkilful 
. maſter. There are few ſchools in theſe 
realms which may not bear teſtimony to 
the truth of this; for in thoſe it is a com- 
- mon obſervation, that boys are often able 
to write exerciſes in pure and correct La- 
tin, who at the ſame time can not expreſs 
their thoughts with the leaſt grace or pro- 
-priety in their own language. 5 | 
Indeed it mightaſtoniſh any one to think, 
that we ſhould ſtill perſiſt in ſo groſs an 
error, who has not ſufficiently weighed 


the force of faſhion, or conſidered the 


difficulty of making any alteration in na- 
tional cuſtoms “ when they have been 
once eſtabliſhed. It may therefore be 
worth while to trace this defect to it's 
original, by which we may perceive, that 
tho' our anceſtors were wiſe in chuſing the 
method of education which they eſta- 
bliſhed in their days, as beſt ſuited to the 
circumſtances of the times, yet we are very 


* Whoever has a mind to ſee the power of cuſtom fully 
difplayed, and the fatal conſequences reſulting from it, in 
our preſent method of education, may turn to a beautiful 
poem on that ſubjeQ, written by Gilbert Weſt, Eſq; and 
to be found in the 4th vol. of Dodſley's Collection. 


unwiſe 


Cab. IV. EDUCATION. 193 
unwiſe in perſevering in the ſame ſyſtem 
without variation, when times and circum- 
ſtances are ſo much changed. The true 
way of imitating the wiſdom of our fore- 
fathers is, not to tread exactly in their 
ſteps, and to do the ſame things in the 
ſame manner; but to act in ſuch a way as 
we might with reaſon ſuppoſe they would, 
did they live in theſe days. and things were 
fo ſituated as they are at preſent. 


c H A P. IV. 


Cauſes of the neglef hitherto of ſtudying the 
Engliſb language. 


HE time of eſtabliſhing a general 
ſyſtem of education in England, was 

not till the reformation was firſt begun. 
Previous to that, our ſchools and colleges 
were chiefly for the uſe of thoſe deſtined 
to the function of the prieſthood, and what 
little knowlege and learning were in the 
kingdom, ſeem to have been pretty much 
monopolized by that order. The laity 
were in general ſo illiterate, that many 
7 0 even 


. 


* * * - - 2 — — 
£ - = 7 > * _ 2 
r &- 2 7 — — —— 2 IF = LID * 8 it, 
— 92 . reer — S — — 


Rx — ot 2 
99 wo 


- —- — 


— — . — — — = 
...... ͤ ˙ ˙ 133 ⁵— a 25 
— — 


— — Mono —— exten van” we — — —— 2 * 2 — 
3 Reid» os — — — ——— rt wot : ——— — 
- — £ 5 — — : -—_— 
ERC. E—_ = 
— er — 5 


LICE 


3 


— 
— — p 
2 


- Wes ̃ — ow. rage 5k > fc 
. . 3 
— — — pn 
— 27% 
— ez 12 — 
y — 2 
FE = 


194 BRITISH Bock II. 


even of the nobility and gentry could 
neither read nor write. The language 
was then ſo rude and barbarous, that few 
books were written init which were either 
fit for entertainment or uſe ; conſequently 
there could be no inducements to the 
ſtudy of it. At the ſame time it was ſo 
ſubject to change, that what was ſpoke in 
one century could not be underſtood in 
another. Inſomuch that the hiſtory of 
perſons and times muſt have come down 
to us in a very maimed and imperfect 
manner, had not the records been pre- 
ſerved in the Latin of the monks; which 
however mangled and deformed it might 
be when compared with it's beautiful ori- 
ginal, yet had ſtill the advantage over the 
modern tongues, of ſtability; and was of 
courſe fitter for preſerving and tranſmitting 
events to poſterity. It muſt be remem- 
bered that not long previous to this period 
of time, the arts and ſciences had revived 
in Europe, and the Greek and Roman 
languages began to be taught in their pu- 
rity. This was owing to the inundation 
ef Barbarians, and Turks, which had 
overrun Greece, whoſe 9 inhabit- 

ants 


Cray. IV. EDUCATION. © 195 
ants furniſhed all the countries in Europe 
with maſters. The liberal arts, and the 
two learned languages, were welcomed in 
all places as illuſtrious ſtrangers ; they were 
treated at courts with high marks of di- 
ſtinction, and the pope, Francis the 
firſt, Charles the fifth, and Henry the 
eighth, vied with each other in the en- 
couragement which they gave them. As 
theſe languages were the repoſitaries of 


all the knowlege and wiſdom of anti- 


quity, no wonder they were made the 
chief object of education. It was by the 
ſtudy of theſe alone, that knowlege could 
then be acquired. There were as yet 
few or no tranſlations into our language 
of the Greek and Roman authors ; and 
indeed it was fo very defective, that it was 
not capable of giving any juſt or ſatisfac- 
tory. idea of them. Beſide this, there 
were at that time many other motives 
and inducements to the general ſtudy of 
thoſe languages, both of neceſſity and 
uſe, which do not hold now. After the 
writings of Luther and Calvin had ap- 
peared, all Europe was embroiled in reli- 
bios diſputes, in which we were neceſ- 

15 .0 2 ſarily 


* . 


N 
* 4 7 
N . 
: * 
f 7 
N 14 
41 
1 
ö # 
UI 1 
* 
44 , 
i! bl 
es 
1 
pF: 34 
I! 1 
215 
A 
+ 
' # 
(ER 
. 
&F q! 
1391. 
ö , 
' 1 
147 
N 15 
: * 
141 5 
3 
pl a 
== 
89 
9 
N 
\ 
| 
94 11 1 
N ? 
23? 
t 4101 
iN 4 
* 
; * 
i 3 
7 1 
l 
4 1 
1 
$1196 
i 
l 
17 
15 41 
p = 
Ni 
1 
T8 4:1 
. 4 
IU 
"If 
1 
REM 3 
* 17 
" 1015 
II 
g * Nan 
n 1 
l 
SE 
1 
17 
In. 
{ 0 
. 4 
* 


— + 
_ 4 N 2 
— "Ix. 2 * i ” — 
8 * 1 L , . - O99; FR _— "poo — n 2 2 
- 2 * 0 Tb" 4 — 1 
K . „ 2 
= 2 n 


196 B RIT IS H Book II. 


ſarily involved by our ſeceſſion from the 
church of Roms. None of the modern 
languages were ſufficiently refined or fixed 
to become of general uſe. As it was neceſ- 
ſary to the ſeveral combatants of the diffe- 
rent nations, that ſome one language un- 
derſtood by all ſhould be pitched upon, in 
which they ſhould manage their diſputes, 
the Latin was choſen by common conſent, 
and obtained a general currency. On this 
account that language was then ſpoke 
and written by all the learned in Europe, 
with as much fluency and facility as the 
polite now ſpeak or write French. A 
knowlege of the Greek was alſo neceſſary, 
as the new teſtament, which contained the 
ſubjects of controverſy, and furniſhed 
them chiefly with materials to ſupport it, 
was written in that language. As the in- 
tereſts and paſſions of princes and of par- 
ties mingled themſelves in theſe conteſts, 
men of the greateſt abilities and moſl diſ- 
tinguiſhed talents, were of courſe favoured 
and encouraged by them to be champions 
in the cauſe which they eſpouſed. The 
roads to the temples of fame and fortune 
were not paſſable then, without firſt going 
- thro! 


CAP. IV. EDUCATION. 197 


thro' Greek and Latin; fo that all who 


had either in view, muſt neceſſarily paſ; 


thro' thoſe, whatever expence of time or 
Jabour it might coſt them. As theſe re- 
ligious controverſies were the main objects 
of view in the ſtate at that time, ſo in th: 
mode of education they ſeem to have beea 
chiefly conſidered. After the two lan- 
guages, logick and metaphyſicks were the 
principal ſtudies, to make them able diſ- 
putants, to aſſiſt them in unravelling fal- 


lacies, or in perplexing and confounding 


their opponents. The laity being juſt 
freed from the tyrannical power exerciſed 
over their minds by the clergy, which 
was chiefly ſupported by an opinion of 


ſuperior knowlege and learning in that 


order, were now reſolved not to be be- 
hind-hand with them in thoſe points, and 


therefore greedily embraced the ſame 


method of education. Thus it happened 
that all perſons whatever, defigned for 
profeſſions ever fo different, eccleſiaſtical, 


civil, or military, the pulpit, ſenate-houſe, 


bar, phyſick, or army, were all trained ex- 
actly in one and the ſame way. To under- 


ſtand, ſpeak, and write Latin well, as the 


O 3 lan- 


ul 4 
4 
83 
% 3 
4 
* 
14 
"ay 
5 Ws 
b\ 
NR -x 
* 
4 
a 
* 
= 
* 
4 
SA 
— A 
12 
4 
1 
40¹ 
, 
, 


ren _— . "9 Pn” 
4 > IG — . " K * 
— — > ̃ — o * 
_ ” 22A © r ̃ —— p77—³ -U ot oo roenmnges es of — 
V » A N 5 
— * RS * p 
4 * WW kn ITS 


198 BRITISH Boar II. 
language by which they could acquire 
moſt knowlege, and which would be of 
the greateſt uſe to them in life, was of 
cpurle the univerſal ſtudy ; whilſt their 
own, Which on account of it's poverty 
could only ſerve them in common offices, 
was little regarded. This general atten- 
tion to Greek and Latin, as it was found- 
ed on reaſon and the neceſlity of the times, 
ſo was it alſo productive of the beſt con- 
Tequences in regard to the Engliſh lan- 
guage ; for without having that particular 
point in view, all the learned were daily 
and imperceptibly improving and enrich- 
ing their own by words and phraſes bor- 
rowed from thoſe two excellent lan- 
guages, and habitually made that which 
was before wild and anomalous, conform 
to the regularity and order of thoſe, as 
much as it's genius and particular con- 
ſtruction would admit. What a mighty 
progreſs was made in this reſpect during 
the reign of queen Elizabeth, may be 
ſeen by comparing the authors of that 
time with thoſe who preceded them. 
That this was entirely owing to their {kill 
in the learned languages, may be ſhewn 


by 


Cup. IV. EDUCATION. 199 
by obſerving that there are no traces of 
the Engliſh having been particularly ſtu- 
died, or made partof education during her 
reign. Nor was there any ſociety of men 
either. of publick or private inſtitution, 
whoſe office it might be to examine and 
fix rules to our language. That wile prin- 
ceſs knew that the time was not yet come 
for ſuch a work. It had not yet arrived 
at it's maturity; and to attempt before 
that, to fix it to a ſtandard, might effec- 
tually ſtop it's growth. She therefore ju- 
diciouſly choſe to give all manner of en- 
couragement to the ſtudy of the learned 
languages, by which it was nouriſhed and 
ſupported, and daily grew in ſize and 
ſtrength. Had her ſucceſſors taken as 
much pains to give ſtability to our lan- 
guage, as ſhe did to bring it to perfection, 
it might at this day even vie with thoſe 
of antiquity, and far excel any now 
fpoke in the world. For want of this, 
it is the opinion of one + whoſe authority 
muſt be of great weight, (as no man hath 
perhaps more cloſely ſtudied the point, 
none certainly hath written more correct- 


t Dr, Swift's letter to the lord high treaſurer, 


O 4 ly) 


200 BRITISH Bock IF, 
ly) that our language has ſuffered as 


many corruptions fince her time, as it has 
received improvement. The paſſage being 
curious and to the point, I ſhall here ſet 
it down, The period wherein the 
« Engliſh tongue received moſt improve- 
ment, I take to commence with the be- 
* ginning of queen Elizabeth's reign, and 
to conclude with the great rebellion in 
«* forty-two. It is true, there was a very 
ill taſte both of ſtyle and wit, which 
« prevailed under king James the firſt ;” 
© but that ſeems to have been corrected 
in the firſt years of his ſucceſſor ; who, 
* among many other qualifications of an 
* excellent prince, was a great patron of 
learning. From that great rebellion to 
* this preſent time, I am apt to doubt 
* whether the corruptions in our language 
* have not, at leaſt, equalled the refine- 
* ments of it, and theſe corruptions very 
few of the beſt authors in our age have 
wholly eſcaped. During the uſurpa- 
tion, ſuch an infuſion of enthuſtaſtick 
jargon prevailed in every writing, as was 
not ſhaken off in many years after. To 
this ſucceeded that licentiouſneſs which 
entered 


KA 


R aA 2 


Cray. IV. EDUCATION. 201 


centered with the reſtoration ; and from 


* infecting our religion and morals, fell 


to corrupt our language: which laſt 
* was not like to be much improved by 
* thoſe, who at that time made up the 
* court of king Charles the ſecond ; ei- 
* ther ſuch who had followed him in his 
* baniſhment, or who had been altoge- 
© ther converſant in the diale& of thoſe 
fanatick times ; or young men, who had 
been educated in the ſame company; 
+ ſo that the court, which uſed to be the 


« ſtandard of propriety, and correctneſs of 


* ſpeech, was then, and I think hath ever 
ſince continued, the worſt ſchool in 
England for that accompliſhment ; and 
ſo will remain, until better care. be 
taken in the education of our young 
nobility.” | 

It may be matter of wonder, that whilſt 


„ K „ 


the other countries in Europe, the French, 


Italians, Spaniards, &c. &c. in proportion 
to their progreſs in learning, after having 
enriched and illuſtrated their ſeveral lan- 
guages by the aids and lights borrowed 
from the Greek and Roman, were em- 
ployed with the utmoſt induſtry, to refine, 

| cor- 


— 


5 - — — _ _ * * * — We _ . 
. arree Ina ro oy watr> nt Py rn a Ie iron - C — 
. F : Mah > 4 - 
* 4 
* 2 Wr " k 


202 BRITISH Book II. 


correct, and aſcertain them by fixed and 
ſtated rules, the Engliſh alone left theirs 
to the power of chance and caprice ; in- 
ſomuch that it is but within a few months 
that even a dictionary has been produced 
here. Whilſt in all the others, many 
excellent grammars and dictionaries have 
long fince been publiſhed, the labours of 
publick ſocieties, as well as of private 
perſons. - This is the more aſtoniſhing, 
when it is confidered that ſuch a work 
ſeemed to be of more abſolute neceſſity 
to us, than to any other nation, and that 
on many accounts. In the firſt place, 
after the feparation from the church of 
| Rome, our own language alone was uſed 
in all acts of publick worſhip ; whereas 
in the Roman Catholick countries, all 
prayers and religious ceremonies were in 
Latin. From the nature of our confti- 
tation we had more conſtant occaſion for 
the publick uſe of it in debates, and con- 
ſequently ſtronger inducements. to the 
ſtudy of it. Add to this, that there were 
three different nations, the Scotch, Iriſh, 
and Welch, who made up a conſiderable 


part of the Britiſh dominions, both in 
power 


Snap. IV. EDUCATION, 203 


power and extent, who ſpoke in tongues 
different from the Engliſh, and who were 
far from being firmly united with them 
in inclinations, and of courſe were pur- 
ſuing different intereſts. To accomplith 
an entire union with theſe people, was 
of the utmoſt importance to them, to 
which nothing could have more effectu- 
ally contributed, than the univerſality of 
one common language. And it is obvi- 
ous enough that this could not be brought 
about, unleſs the language were eſta- 
bliſhed upon certain principles, and made 
capable of being taught by rule. Add 
to this, that even in England itſelf, for 
want of ſuch a method, there were ſuch 
various dialects ſpoke, that perſons born 
and bred in different and diſtant ſhires, 
could ſcarce any more underſtand each 
others ſpeech, than they could that of a 
foreigner, which is notorious even now. 
It may therefore be worth while to en- 
quire how a point of ſuch importance, 
contrary to the practice of the antient, 
and example of modern nations, came 


to be ſo wholly neglected by us even to 
this day. | 


As 


204 BRITISH Boon II. 


As this work was not begun in the 
reign of Q. Elizabeth, when the language 
had made the moſt vigorous ſhoots, it was 
hardly a thing to be wiſhed in the time 
of her ſucceſſor, as the taint of pedantry 
had infected every thing which regard- 
ed knowlege, or diſcourſe. The violent 
commotions and civil wars, which raged 
during the greateſt part of the reign of 
Charles the firſt, rendered all attempts 
that way impracticable; tho' otherwiſe 
that would have been the moſt auſpicious 
æra for ſetting about ſuch a taſk, as that 
prince was a great encourager of the arts 
and ſciences. During the uſurpation, ſuch 
an inundation of cant and jargon had 
overwhelmed our language, as gave but 
little proſpect of it's riſing again. On 
the reſtoration however, all might have 
been amended; but from the diſſolute 
manners and univerſal corruption in the 
reign of Charles the ſecond, there could 
be no expectation that any uſeful ſcheme 
for the publick benefit ſhould take place. 
The ſhort period of his ſucceſſor's govern- 
ment was too full of troubles and commo- 
tions; and at the time of the revolution, 


and 


cnar. IV. EDUCATION. aog 
and during king William's reign, the 
minds of men were too much taken up in 
eſtabliſhing our noble conſtitution, and 


their attention too much engaged by the 


wars waged for the preſervation of the 
liberties of Europe, to give heed to any 
other matters, however importantin them- 
ſelves. The firſt propoſal, that we know 
of, for an attempt of that kind, was made 
by Dr. Swift, towards the latter end of 
queen Anne's reign, in a letter to the 
lord high treaſurer. And it is generally 
thought that the ſcheme would certainly 
have been reduced to practice, had it not 
been for the ſudden death of that prin- 
ceſs, ſoon. after the publication of that 
piece. Let others enquire into the cauſes 
why it has ever fince lain dormant ; it is 
ſufficient to my purpoſe to ſay, that hither- 
to no attempt has been made towards the 
regulation of our language, which like 
our commons is ſuffered to lie deſolate, 
uncultivated, and waſte, to the great pre- 
judice, in point of wealth, as well as or- 


24 


nament, of this fair iſland, IN FH88 


206 OTE TEM: Book f. 


CHAP. 877 


7 bat theſs dais no 4 8 operate, wor art 


of any force. The great neceſſity 9. ſtudy» 
ing our WN N N 


I E motives which induced our 
anceſtors, upon the firſt eſtabliſh- 
ment of a general ſyſtem of education, to 
lay ſuch a ſtreſs upon the ſtudy of Latin 
and Greek, and to dedicate ſuch a vaſt 
portion of time to the acquiſition of {kill 
in thoſe languages, are no longer of any 
force. There is neither the ſame neceſ- 
ſity to ſpur us now, nor the ſame adyan- 
tages to induce us to ſuch aicloſe appli- 
cation to. thoſe, whether we conſider: the 
general utility reſulting from them to the 
publick, or the private emoluments to 
individuals. The learned languages are 
no longer the ſole repoſitaries of knows 
lege; on the contrary, the Engliſh is 
become a univerſal magazine not only of 
antient, but of all modern wiſdom. All 
the great authors of antiquity, as well 
as of the preſent times, of whatever na- 
| | tion, 


CnAr. IV. EDUCATION. 20 


tion, or in whatever language, may now 
be read in Engliſh ; tho not perhaps with 
equal delight, yet with equal advantage 
in point of knowlege. So that the laity 
need no longer be afraid of the clergy in 
that reſpect, even tho' they were entirely 
to give up to them the ſuperior toil and 
labour of reading the originals. Add to 
this, that we have had ſince thoſe days, 
many excellent writers of our own, upon 
ſubjects of much more importance to us 
than any that have been handed down to 
us in the books of antiquity, and which 
were untouched by them. Not to mention 
that even in regard to thoſe works calculat- 
ed to give delight, and from which they 
claim their chief pre-eminence, there 
have not been wanting in this country, 
men of perhaps as great reach of fancy, 
and genius, whoſe writings, if they were 
as much ſtudied, and whoſe beauties 
(paradoxical as the opinion may ſeem) if 
they were as well underſtood, as thoſe of 
the admired antients, might perhaps af- 
ford as much pleaſure, and in no reſpect 
yield the palm to them. The publick 
conteſts in regard to religion, wherein all 

4 the 


288 BRITISH. Book of, 
the able pens of the ſeveral nations of 
Europe were engaged, and in which the 
diſputes were carried on in Latin, have 
long ſince ceaſed; and it is more than a 
century ſince we have been embroiled in 
civil conteſts with various ſects at home, 
wherein the controverſy has been entirely 
managed in Engliſh. So that however 
neceſſary to promotion, and diſtinction, 
fkill in Latin might formerly have been 
to a clergyman, of late years knowlege of 
the Engliſh language would ' be much 
more conducive to thoſe points. Beſides, 
the language itſelf has been ſo much en- 
larged and improved fince thoſe days, 
that it is rendered capable of anſwering 
every end, whether of profit or pleaſure, to 
us at leaſt, better than all the others put 
together, and conſequently is. become 
more worthy: to be ſtudied. © To ſtate the 
account in ſhort between our forefathers 
and us, they ſhewed great wiſdom and 
good ſenſe in making the learned lan- 
guages the chief ſtudy in their days, be- 
cauſe, however round about the way, 
knowlege was then to be acquired in 


none other; and becauſe our own, then 
4 LJ 1 poor 


\ 


CA. V. EDUCATION. 209 
poor and uncultivated, could be no other 
way enriched or refined. Private perſons 
were in the right to labour at perfection in 
thoſe, becauſe, beſide the knowlege which 
they could not otherwiſe have obtained, 
they were ſure of meeting ſuitable rewards 
in point of reputation and fortune. But 
the very ſame motives which urged them 
fo powerfully to apply to Latin and Greek, 
are now more cogent with us to ſtudy 
chiefly our own language. Becauſe a great- 
er quantity of uſeful knowlege can with 
more eaſe and lefs time be acquired in 
that than in any, I had almoſt faid all the 
others: and becauſe the ſoil is now ſo 
tuxuriant that it requires more than ordi- 
nary cultivation and tillage, in order to 
produce uſeful and profitable crops, in- 
ſtead of being over- run with gawdy flow- 
ers, and noxious weeds. And as to indi- 
viduals, it need ſcarce be mentioned that 
no ſkill in other languages cart contribute 
in any degree, either to their fame or pro- 
fit, ſo much as in their own. If theſe points 
are true, what cauſe can be aſſigned that 
we ſtill proceed in the old method? Is it 
2 blind veneration paid to the inſtitotions 
* and 


— 


210 BRITISH Door H. 


and cuſtoms of old? Upon the ſame prin- 
ciple we might juſt as reaſonably meet 
our enemies in the ſame ſort of armour as 
was worn by our countrymen before the 
invention of guns. But cuſtoms, of which 
the immediate abſurdity or detriment are 
at once ſeen and felt, upon change of cir- 
cumſtances, are eaſily and neceſſarily al- 
tered; whereas thoſe, the ill conſequences 
of which lie more remote, and the bad 
effects whereof are not ſenſibly perceived 
'till after a number of years have rolled 
away, are often ſuffered to remain, *till 
time gives them faſt root, and age ſanCtifies 
them. Their duration becomes an argu- 
ment of their goodneſs, and people inſtead 
of weighing their intrinſick merit in the 
ſcale of reaſon, are apt at once to form a 
concluſion that they could not have laſted 
ſo long had they not been right. If it were 
not for this ſort of prepoſſeſſion, how is it 
poſſible to account for the abſurd notions 
of ſo many parents, that Greek and Latin 
are (till the high roads to fortune, becauſe 
they were ſo two centuries ago, notwith- 
ſtanding the many flagrant inſtances to 
the contrary before their eyes? How many 

EX 


Cu Ar. V. EDUCATION. 211 


excellent ſcholars, now pining in want, 
make no other uſe of their Latin, but to 
lament in Virgilian ſtrains, that ever 
they were acquainted with Virgil, or knew 


any other but their mother tongue ? 


With what ſorrow do they look back upon 
their paſt time irretrievably miſpent, tho 
not thro' their own fault, and with it had 


been employed in learning ſome trade by 


which they might be ſure of acquiring a 
comfortable ſubſiſtence ? But indeed in 
many caſes this may not be the effect of 
choice, or. prejudice, but of neceſſity. 
Numbers there are who ſee the abſurdity 
of this conduct, but can find no remedy. 
They have not the means of giving their 
ſons ſuch an education as they could 
wiſh, and therefore are obliged to follow 
the reigning mode. Nor can it be doubt- 
ed, that if the means of acquiring ſkill in 
the Engliſh were as eaſy and common, if 
it could be taught by as certain rules, and 
the preceptors were as knowing in that 
as in the learned languages, infinitely a 
greater number would apply themſelves 
to a critical ſtudy of that, both from 


1 views 


4 [ f * * 
10 


BRITTON Bond 


views of intereſt and i: than to 
the others. 

That I may not be miſunderſtood Vo I 
ſhall ſet down part of a paſſage, tho quoted 
* before, from Mr. Locke, as being at once 
fully expreſſive of, and at the ſame time 
giving a ſanction to my own ſentiments: 

I am not here ſpeaking againſt Greek 
and Latin; I think they ought to be 
© ſtudied, and the Latin, at leaſt, under- 
* ſtood well by every gentleman. But 
© whatever foreign languages a young man 
meddles with (and the more he knows 
the better) that which he ſhould critically 
ſtudy, and labour to get a facility, clear- 
neſs, and elegancy to expreſs himſelf in, 
ſhould be his own, and to this purpoſe 
he ſhould daily be exerciſed in it. 

Far be it from me indeed to depreciate 
the ſtudy of thoſe languages, of the Latin 
at leaſt, which may be of ſignal uſe in 
making us underſtand our own with greater 
accuracy. But the great fault complained 
of is, that this important end ſeems to be 
entirely forgotten, thro' a ſpirit of pedan- 
try in the teachers; by whom inſtructions 

i | in 


N f 3 


Crap, V. EDUCATION. 213 
in Greek and Latin are given, as if they 


were deſireable only for their own ſakes. 


Whereas, were their uſes conſtantly pointed 


out to them towards illuſtrating their own. 


language, young gentlemen would not 
only go thro' thoſe laborious ſtudies with 
more immediate delight to themſelves, 
but would ever after in life endeayour to 
keep up and improve what ſkill they had 
acquired in thoſe, as greatly contributing 
to ſo uſeful a purpoſe. By a contrary prac- 
tice, it is well known, that very few 
through a diſguſt conceived at what ap- 


pears to them an unprofitable toil, ever 


arrive at ſufficient perfection in thoſe lan- 
guages to read the antient authors with 
eaſe and pleaſure in the original, and there- 
fore when their neceſſary courſe is over, they 
lay ithem totally afide, and in a few years 
entirely forget what little they had acquir- 


ed. If they continue to read, it is only 


in books written in Engliſh, with the prin- 
ciples of which being totally unacquaint- 
ed, they form their notions of ſtyle upon 
ſuch authors as happen to pleaſe them 
moſt. In the choice of which, the mat- 


F 3 ter 


"- 


g y — ES — - — - 
"DET — — Leen — = Sy — 8 2 — ——ñ— 
* = 8 x * 2 * pn 2 — . F _ 
"7 > 1 — a * Cy "Gt - ; T4 YT 1 1 1 4 " "= 
2 8 r r > 8 9 N ** * 4 — 5 > \ . p "4 3 b 265 nh WEL r 2 * 101 
2 = I . . 839 n 2 oben, © > 7 „ 8 e N 1 12 n e. 7 YOUR 2 22 - — 
3 ” 4 ted . 3 — w - — bs * f ©. 4 ' - A po Wit » os Fa *% + 2 4 1 1 C wh 
_ PRAISE > 3 * 3 Ke e BO , 4 —— Mw r . — — I FEE 
| - ws EE 


214 BRITISH Book II. 


ter whereof they treat, not the manner 


in which it is handled, is chiefly conſi- 
dered. * © Too many of this fort paſs upon 


F 


JT T SS % SS >.4 


vulgar readers for great authors and men 


of profound thought, not on account of 


any ſuperiority either in ſenſe or ſtyle, 
both which they poſſeſs in a very mo- 
derate degree, nor of any diſcoveries 
they have made in arts and ſciences, 
which they ſeem to be little acquaint- 
ed with: but purely ' becauſe they 
flatter the paſſions of corrupt men, who 
are pleaſed to have the clamours of 
conſcience filenced, 'and thoſe great 
points of the chriſtian religion made 
ſuſpected, which with-held them from 
many views of pleaſure and intereſt, or 
made them uneaſy in the commiſſion of 
them.“ The ſame argument will hold 


in regard to writings upon any other ſub- 


jects, which flatter the paſſions, pleaſe the 


humours, or fall in with the party-notions 


of men; and this alone is ſufficient to 
account for the general bad taſte which is 


allowed to prevail, as well as the quantity 


* Piſhop of Cloyne, 


of 


Cnay. V. EDUCATION. 215 


of falſe knowledge, far worſe than none; 
for that amazing number of wretched 
pamphlets, written to the times as the 
- phraſe is, which are daily publiſhed, and 
daily find a ſufficient number of as wretched 
readers; in ſhort, for thoſe heaps of traſh 
which are conſtantly expoſed to fale in the 
windows of bookſellers, like unripe fruit 
greedily devoured by green-lickneſs appe- 
tites, and which fill the mind with crudi- 
ties as pernicious to the underſtanding, as 
thoſe of the other are to the body. Of 
the great increaſe of this evil Dr. Swift 
complained many years ago in a letter to 
the author of the Tatler. I can not 
© but obſerve to you, that until of late 
years a Grub-ſtreet book was always 
* bound in ſheep-ſkin, with ſuitable print 
and paper; the price never above a ſhil- 
ling ; and taken off wholly by common 
tradeſmen, or country pedlars. But now 
they appear in all ſizes and ſhapes, and in 
all places: they are handed about from 
* lapfuls in every coffee-houſe to perſons of 
s quality ; are ſhewn in Weſtminſter-hall, 


K * * * 


* 


+ Numb. 230. | 
& | and 


— — 
— — — —-— — 2 PR 
. — — — _ 
— n 3 — —_— 


216 BRITISH Bookll, 


and the court of Requeſts. You may ſee 
them gilt, and in royal paper, of five 
or fix hundred pages, and rated accord- 
ingly. I would engage to furniſh you 
with a catalogue of Engliſh books, pub- 
liſhed within the compaſs of ſeven years 
* paſt, which at the firſt hand would coft 
* you- an hundred pounds, wherein you 
'* ſhall not be able to find ten lines to- 
* gether of common grammar or com- 
mon ſenſe,” It muſt be allowed, that if 
Engliſh were ſtudied, and commonly well 
underſtood, and that conſequently a ge- 
neral good taſte prevailed amongſt readers, 
none of thoſe miſerable productions could 
meet with a ſufficient ſale, and they would 
therefore be ſtifled in their birth. If A 
correct ſtyle ſhould once become a neceſ- 
ſary requiſite to the ſucceſs of any book 
which may be offered to the publick, 

what an army of able-bodied writers muſt 
then be obliged to lay down the pen, 
who inſtead of corrupting the hearts and 
poiſoning the underſtandings of their fel“ 
low ſubjects, would become uſeful mem 
bers of ſociety by carrying muſkets againſt 
the enemies of their country. 


"a oy 


B N 


1 


Cray, V. EDUCATION, 217 


If it be granted that at this day Engliſh 
is the language moſt univerſally read by 
Engliſhmen ; that even by thoſe who 
have made the greateſt progreſs in Latin 
and Greek, the number of books read in 
their own is out of all proportion greater 
than in the learned languages; that the 
principal view in reading thoſe, or other 
authors in foreign tongues, is amuſement, 
whilſt our own are chiefly ſtudied for uſe- 
ful purpoſes ; it muſt he allowed, that no- 
thing can be a greater national concern 
than the care of our language. There is 
ſuch an intimate connection between ideas 
and words, language and knowlege, that 
whatever deficiency, or fault, there may 
be in the one, neceſſarily affects the other. 
Clearneſs, or confuſion of ideas, ariſe from 
obſcurity or precifion in their marks, and 
the quantity, as well as certainty of know- 
lege, depends upon the eaſe and exactneſs 
with which a language is read or under- 
ſtood. If the glaſs be not right, the 
images reflected by it will not be exact. 
If the channel be muddy, the ſtream 
which flows thro' it can not be clear; if 
there lie heaps of rubbiſh in it, the water 


Can 


* 


218 BRITISH Book II. 


can not paſs ſwiftly, or ſmoothly. Should 


it therefore be the cafe of any country, 
that an infinite number of books were 
read there, and very little knowlege ob- 


tained ; that there ſhould be much ſpeak- 


ing, and- little underſtanding ; that diſ- 
putes upon all manner of topicks ſhould 
be carried on both in converſation, and 
writing, without ever coming to an end ; 
it would not follow that the intellectual 
faculties of ſuch a people were inferior to 
others, as the whole might eaſily be ſolved 
by conſidering the ſtate of their language. 


So far as that is obſcure or ill underſtood, 


ſo far muſt the knowlege acquired in it 
be confuſed or erroneous. This is at 
once ſeen by any perſon who reads in a 
foreign language, as he can not pretend 
to underſtand any author in that, without 
firſt knowing the preciſe meaning of his 
words and phraſes; to obtain which, he 
is obliged to cloſe application and ſtudy ; 
wherein he is aſſiſted. by certain and ſtated 
rules. But it has been before obſerved, 
that in a mother tongue, where we have 
no rules to guide us, whoſe uſe and know- 


lege are obtained from the people we 
| uſu- 


A 
* 


A 
- 


Cnay.V. EDUCATION. 219 
uſually converſe with, or the books we 
uſually read, we are much more liable to 
fall into errors than in any other, and con- 
ſequently in that have much more occa- 
fion for ſtudy and application. When it 
is conſidered, that a ſingle term in a pro- 
poſition not underſtood exactly in the ſame 
manner, tho' perhaps very nearly, by two 
different perſons, may furniſh out matter 
of diſpute to run thro' many volumes, and 
to laſt for ages; and when it is conſidered, 
what little care is taken to come at an ac- 
curate knowlege of a language, the moſt 
copious, and on many other accounts the 
moſt difficult to be well underſtood of any 


in the known world; there will be no oc- 


caſion to wonder that we ſhould be the 
moſt unſettled in our notions, and the moſt. 


divided in ouropinions of any people, fince 


the time of the ſeparation of philoſophy 
from the ſtudy of rhetorick, amongſt the 


| Greeks. It is well known, that the de- 
ſtruction of all uſeful knowlege ſoon fol- 


lowed that ſeparation amongſt them, and 


it is to be feared, that the reſtoration of 


it amongſt us can be effected no other 
way than by their reunion, 


Seneca 


a 
1 „44 — . — * 
e rr * 


220 BRITISH Boon II. 


Seneca attributes the corruptions which 
had crept into the ſtyle and language of 
the Romans in his days, to a decay of 
knowlege. May not the converſe propo- 
ſition be true in regard to us, that our 
want of knowlege is chiefly owing to the 
neglect of ſtudying our language? and 
the corruptions of our underſtanding to 
thoſe of our ſtyle? Are not our minds 
chiefly ſtored 'with ideas by words, and 
muſt not clearneſs or obſcurity in the one, 
neceſſarily produce the ſame in the other? 
The only remedy that could be effectual 
in this caſe, he ſaid, was to cure the mind. 
When that was ſound and ſtrong, the diſ- 
courſe would conſequently be ſo too. But 
muſt not the mind be cured, and reaſon 
ſtrengthened by the medium of language? 
It is from the mind, ſays he, that all our 
ſentiments and words proceed. But muſt 
not the ſentiments come out cloathed in 
words according to the conception had of 
them when admitted ? However juſt his 
reaſoning may be in regard to the 


Romans, yet it will not hold in re- 


gard to us, unleſs our lapguage were in 


CHAP. V, EDUCATION. 221 


an equal ſtate of perfection, and eſta- 
bliſhed upon as ſolid principles, as theirs. 
There is a great difference between per- 
ſons who thro' wantonneſs, or caprice, 
wander from the way, yet have always 
the right road open to them whenever 
they recover from their infatuation ; and 
thoſe who may find themſelves in an error, 
and wiſh to correct it, but have no clue to 
guide them to what is right. 

The difficulty of writing with clearneſs 
and accuracy in our language, can appear 
from nothing more ſtrongly than this, 
that it ſeems generally allowed by thoſe of 
the greateſt diſcernment, and who have 
moſt conſidered the point, that out of the 
infinite number who have publiſhed their 
works, we have but very few who have 
written pure and correct Engliſh. And 
they who were well acquainted with Dr. 
Swift, muſt have often heard him ſay, 
that the exactneſs of his ſtyle was the 
chief ſtudy and labour of his life. How 
muſt ſuch difficulty and conſtant attention 
check the progreſs of thoſe poſſeſſed of the 
molt elevated genius, and what noble pro- 
ductions may they not have been the occa- 


ſion 


— 


222 BRITISH Book I. 
ſion of loſing to the world. * The artiſt 
would make but a flow progreſs, were he 
obliged himſelf to provide and prepare all 
his materials; but when they are ready to 
his hand, he can diſpatch a great deal in 
a little time, and with eaſe. Nor is it to 
be doubted, that if they had been early 
trained and inſtructed in their own lan- 
guage, ſo as to acquire a habit of writing 
it with correctneſs and facility, when they 
firſt thought of publiſhing, but that even 
our moſt eminent authors would have left 
behind them works far ſuperior both in 
quantity and quality to what they are at 
preſent... So that we may ſafely ſay with 
Dr. Swift, in his letter to the lord high 
treaſurer, © That nothing would be of 
greater uſe towards the improvement of 
© knowlege and politeneſs, than ſome ef- 
fectual method for correcting, enlarg- 
ing, and aſcertaining our language.“ 

It is certain, that nothing could more 
effectually contribute to the benefit and 


The leſs reſtraint a poet's imagination ſuffers from 
the mechanical part of his work, the more his ſancy is 
capable of taking it's flight. The leſs it is confined, the 
more liberty it has for invention. 

Du Bois, Crit. Ref. vol. i. c. 35. 


8 glory 


cur. V. EDUCATION. 223 


glory of this country, than to bring the 
Engliſh language to as great a degree of 
perfection, ſtability, and general uſe, as 
thoſe of Greece and Rome. In order to 
ſee whether this be practicable or not, I 
ſhall hereafter conſider it with relation to 
the Roman language only, as well to 
avoid fruitleſs repetitions (ſince all argu- 
ments concluſive with reſpect to the one, 
will be equally ſo in regard to the other) 
as becauſe we have a more diſtin know- 
lege of the riſe and progreſs of the Ro- 
man, than of the Greek, as well as the 
means by which it was brought to it's 
maturity. Firſt then, as to it's perfec- 
tion: I ſhall endeavour to ſhew that the 
means to arrive at it are equally in our 
power, that our inducements are ſtronger, 
and that we might in all probability com- 
paſs the end in a ſhorter ſpace of time, 
and with leſs labour than they did. Se- 
condly, as to ſtability : That if our lan- 
guage were once brought to a ſtandard, 
we have more powerful and certain means 
to fix and preſerve it in it's ſtate of per- 
fection than they had. Thirdly, as to 


gene- 


224 BRITISH Boo II. 


general uſe: That we have it more in our 
power than they had to propagate our 
language, and make it univerſal. 


. 


That the means to arrive at perfection in 
our language are equally in our power, 
that our inducements to it are ſtronger, 

and that we might i in all probability com- 
paſs our end in a ſhorter ſpace of time, 
and with leſs labour, than the Romans did. 


T has been already ſhewn, that the 
means by which the Roman language 
was improved, and arrived at it's ſtate of 
perfection, were the ſtudy and practice of 
rhetorick, and oratory, An attention to 
thoſe neceſſarily produced an attention to 
language. The power of words, whether 
in regard to ſenſe or ſound, became a 
point of eſſential conſideration to thoſe 
who were to ſpeak in publick. To aſſiſt 
them in their progreſs, the Romans had 
the benefit of the precepts and example 
of the Greeks, But in this reſpe& we 
have rather the advantage, ſince we have 
theirs 


Char. VI. EDUCATION. 225 


theirs alſo. added to thoſe of Greece: It 


may be preſumed that from the writings 
of Ariſtotle, Plutarch, Longinus, Cicero, 
and Quintilian, a better treatiſe of rheto- 
rick might be compiled now, than any 
which was in uſe amongſt the Romans, 
at leaſt previous to the time that their lan- 
guage had arrived at perfection. It is true, 
that the Greek rhetoricians did not a little 
contribute to the progreſs of their pupils, 
by joining example to precept, in an art 
which above all others requires to be 
learned immediately from the mouth of a 
maſter. But if the ſame encouragement 
were now given, it is not to be doubted 
but that many maſters would ſoon ariſe, 
equally well qualified with them, both as 
inſtructors, and models for imitation, 


That the inducements to the ſtudy of 


oratory, and conſequently of language, 
are more powerful with us than with the 
Romans, may be eaſily ſeen, by conſider- 
ing that there is not a ſingle point in which 
it was uſeful or neceſſary to them, wherein? 
it is not equally ſo to us. But there is one 
article, wherein it's utility is beyond all 
degrees of compariſon greater and more 


20 Q exten= 


— ” —— or _ + —— n - W. — W * — 1 I r a — — 1 — wats * 
— io eto po F d. ny r * Ec AA — MEL 
— — — * oY — - > — — >. — * _ wm mY = a abs — - * — * — — —_ - — — - — 
12 " N = = - : 
. . — £ p 4 

- . * — — 2 — — — — . bo _ 

- — 3 * > A han 3 . _— pl * 

— A þ4 4 a * „ — . bg — — - = 23 „ „% — - 
"at * — d . wa , Prog ar. * — I 1 54 ©. - * 


— —d — * „ 

9 2 

— —— 
42 pa 4 — 13 


226 BRITISH Boox II. 
extenſive than in all the reſt, which is 
peculiar to us, I mean the article of reli- 
ion. 

; That we might in al probability bring 
our language to a ſtate of perfection in a 
much ſhorter ſpace of time, and with leſs 
labour and difficulty, than the Romans did 
theirs, may be judged by a comparative 
view of the ſtate of theirs, at the period 
when the introduction of the ſtudy of 
_ eloquence firſt engaged them in that taſk, 
with ours as it ſtands at preſent. It muſt 
be obſerved, that at that juncture the Ro- 
man language was far from having arrived 
at a ſtate of maturity; it was weak, and 
poor, and was gradually ſtrengthened and 
enriched by what it borrowed by lit- 
tle and little from the Grecian ſtores. 
Whereas ours has long fince arrived at it's 
full ſize, and is copious even to exuberance. 
They were obliged to wait the flow growth 
of the tree; but ours has long ſince borne 
fruit, and is likely to become barren. only 
ahro' the luxuriance of the branches. It 
is apparent enough how much leſs time 
it requires to prune away what is ſuper- 
fluous, than to wait the gradual increaſe 
of 


_ 


Cas. VI. EDUCATION. 227 
of what is uſeful. Beſides; they had then 
no books written in Latin that could be 
of any great affiſtance to them. If the 
judgement” of Horace is tö be relied on, 
even the beſt authors of thoſe times wrote 
in a very coarſe inelegant ftyle. On which 
account ſcarce any of them have been 
handed down to us, except ſome of the 
works of Plaotus. And we know in 
what eſtimation * his writings, as well 
as thoſe of his contemporaries, were held 
in the Auguſtan age. Ennius, Paduviub, 


— 


c. are known to us only by name 
Whereas we have in our language at 
prefent, ſeveral works which may at once 
ſerve as rules to guide us in our enquiries, 
and ſtandards to fix our knowlege when 
attained. The learned and ingenious ad- 
thor of our Engliſh dictionary has deli- 
vered it as his opinion, that + From the 
authors which roſe in the time of Elizas 
© beth; a ſpeech might be formed adequate 
* to all the purpoſes of uſe and elegance. 
At noſtri preavi Plautinos & numeros x -; 
Laudavere ſales, nimium patienter utrumque, 

Ne dicam ſtulte, mirati. Hoxar. 
1 Preface to Johnſon's dictionary. 


7 27 Q 2 c If 


- 
r K III: SD CE EE CENE_—Y = OT SS. 
p * 2 2 — 8 * n 2 r 
„ 1 4 > aw, , — "4 


_ ds * 
— —ͤ—ũ—4ͤ —— — —Uœ—2—ͤ— —— œ— 
n 


—— 
—— — vis ur 
8 r 


— oh ˙1üĩb old 
— ' oth . 
— 3 = 


— — — — wig) —— — * * —_ — 
— 4 — 2 — - — 
err x - vB 


— ä—— > — 


228 BRITISH Book II. 


If the language of theology were ex- 
* tracted from Hooker and the tranſlation 
of the Bible; the terms of natural know- 
lege from Bacon; the phraſes of policy, 
war, and navigation, from Raleigh; the 
dialect of poetry and fiction from Spenſer 
and Sidney; and the diction of common 
© life from Shakeſpear few ideas would 
© be loſt to mankind, for want of Engliſh 
words, in which they might be ex- 

« preſſed.” To this we may add, that as 
models of ſtyle, Milton in. the poetick, 
and Shakeſpear in the dramatick ; Swift, 
Addiſon, Dryden, and Sir William Tem- 

ple (in ſome of his works) in proſe, may 
- conſidered as truly claſſical, as the Vir- 
gil, Cæſar, Tully and Salluſt of the Ro- 
mans; nor is there any reaſon that they 
ſhould not be handed down as ſuch equal- 
ly to the end of time, unleſs by abandon- 
ing our language entirely to the fantaſti- 
cal caprices of novelty, it ſnould come to 
be ſo changed and metamorphoſed, as 
that they ſhall be as little underſtood, and 
read with as little pleaſure, two or three 
centuries hence, as the preceding authors 
of that date are now by us. At which time 


Caay. VI. EDUCATION. 229 
perhaps ſome ſcribbler of the day may be 
employed to modernize them; by paſ- 
ſing thro' whoſe filtring ſtone, they may 
indeed be made more clear, but muſt en- 
tirely loſe their ſpirit. And who knows 
but that if a total ignorance of the force 
and harmony of numbers ſhould be ſuf- 
fered to continue, and the vile Gothick 
taſte for rhime ſhould increaſe, but that 
ſome future verſifier ſhall be rewarded, and 
obtain univerſal praiſe, for chiming the di- 
vine numbers of Paradiſe loſt, and fitting 
them to the vitiated ears of the age. Nor 
will this ſeem an improbable conjecture, 
when we conſider with what pleaſure, at 
this day, the fiery Pegaſus. of Homer is 
beheld in trammels, ambling along -in a 
ſhuffling pace, to the Jingle of his ſilver 
bells. 


235 BRITISH box IL, 


3 


HAP. VII. 


7 bat if our lan: guage were once brought ta 

* fandard, we have more powerful and 

certain means to fix and preſerve it in it's 
Hen, of perfection, than they had. 


HE ſtability of language may = 
conſidered in regard to two points, 
pronunciation, and meaning. To the firſt 
it is neceſſary that the ſame words ſhould 
always be ſounded i in the ſame manner; 
to the laſt, that they ſhould be always un- 
derſtood in the fame ſenſe. The uſe of 
ſpeech is chiefly inſtrumental to the for» 
mer, of books to the latter. The more 
univerſally therefore a language is well 
and uniformly ſpoken by any people, the 
more likely it is to acquire permanence 
as to pronunciation : the greater number 
of correct authors there are in it, who 
agree in the uſe of words, and the more 
generally they are read, the greater proſ- 
pect is there of giving it ſtability as to 
megning. To conſider theſe two points 
ſeparately. Firſt, as to ſound. To make 
a lan» 


CA. VIE-EDUCATION. 231 
a language univerſally and uniformly well 
ſpoken by any people, it is neceſſary that 
the pronunciation ſhould be formed upon 
known invariable rules, and that the cuſ- 
tomary ſpeech ſhould be conformable to 
thoſe rules. For as the bulk of the peo- 
ple cannot be ſuppoſed to be acquainted 
with thoſe, cuſtom muſt in that caſe, as 
well as in moſt others, ſupply in them 
the want of knowlege. Both theſe points 
were admirably provided for amongſt the 
Romans. They did not leave the ſound 
of their language to chance or caprice, 
it was eſtabliſhed upon rational and cer- 
tain rules, to which all their publick 
ſpeakers conformed. This uniformity of 
pronunciation in their orators neceſſarily 
diffuſed a general good taſte through their 
hearers, which ple the place of rules; 
and at the ſame time furniſhed them with 
a ſure criterion, by which they might 
diſcover any impropriety iti the ſound of 
words. For being accuſtomed to hear 
their words always ſounded in the ſame 
manner, they would be immediately ſen- 
ſible of the leaſt alteration, and the be- 
ing new, was a ſufficient mark to them 
Q 4 of 


— 


| 
| 
: 
| 
: 
( 
' 
i 
U 
x 
ig 
þ 
1 
? 
| 


* 


232 BRITISH, Book II. 


of the pronunciation's being vitious, It 


is impoſſible to conceive a more immove- 
able ſtandard to language, conſidered in 
regard to ſound only, or a ſtronger bul- 
wark againſt innovations, than this was. 
For when the laws of pronunciation were 
once eſtabliſhed by the orators, upon cer- 
tain and rational principles, it was no lon- 
ger in their power to break thro' them : 


on the contrary, they were obliged to a 


more ſtrict and exact obſervation of the 
rules than any others, and from thenceforth 
were compelled to follow cuſtom, not 
choice +. For what publick ſpeaker in 
his ſenſes would venture thro' an affec- 
tation of novelty, to expoſe himſelf to the 
cenſure or ridicule of the meaneſt of his 
hearers ? Thus the body of the people 
became the guardians of their language, 
as well as their liberties, and it is obſerv- 
able that they both fell together. Nor 
is this at all wonderful, or without it's 
foundation in reaſon. For tho' the mul- 
titude have not underſtanding to form po- 
| + In dicendo autem vitium vel maximum eſta vulgari 
genere orationis, atque a conſuetudine communis ſenſus 


abborrere, Cie. de Orat, l. l. 


5 ! "Ie. 


 litical 


Cnay. VII. EDUCATION. 233 


litical ſyſtems, or fix rules to languages; 
nay tho' they are incapable of knowing or 
comprehending their fitneſs after they are 
eſtabliſhed, yet they will be always found 
their true and natural ſupports, and it is 
by them alone that either tie one or the 
other can be preſerved, or deſtroyed. 
However ingenuity and deſign may be 
the property of the few, labour and exe- 
cution depend upon the many. Reaſon 
and law may be the province of one, 
but ſtrength and cuſtom belong to the 
other. 

It was tothe frequent opportunities ar 
had of hearing their publick ſpeakers, that 
the Romans were indebted for their gene- 
ral exactneſs of pronunciation; from which 
alſo reſulted it's fixed ſtate. Now if we 
compare our opportunities with theirs, it 
will at once appear, that in this reſpect 
the advantage lies greatly on our (ide. For 
beſide thoſe of the ſenate-houſe, bar, 
&c. which we have in common with 
them, our churches furniſh one of more 
frequent, regular, and general uſe, than 
all the others. Theſe are daily open to 

all ne and orders, and it is part of the 


duty 


234 BRITISH Boon II. 


duty of every perſon in the nation to at- 
tend divine ſervice at leaſt one day in the 
week. If therefore the pronunciation of 
our language were fixed by certain rules, 
and were uniformly and invariably obſery- 
ed by all the clergy ; if they had alſo an 
equal power with the orators of old of 
captivating attention, and charming the 
| ear, is it to be doubted but that a gene- 
ral good taſte, and exactneſs of . ſpeech, 
would be diffuſed thro' the whole peo- 
ple, proportionably ſuperior to the Ro- 
mans, as our advantages and opportuni- 
ties would be greater and more frequent ? 
This muſt be allowed, unleſs the people 
of this country are inferior to them both 
in ſenſitive and intellectual faculties ; a 
point which will hardly be granted. 
No to confider language with reſpect 
to it's meaning. It will not require much 
pains to prove, that we have it in our 
| r to eftabliſh that as certainly, and 
more univerſally than the Romans had. 
Here ĩt is to be obſerved, that the intellec- 
tual faculty is chiefly concerned, whereas 
Pronunciation is obtained only thro the 
leaſe: of hearing. By the invention of 
writ- 


1 8 


Car. VII. EDUCATION. ' . Us 


writing the meaning of words can be con- 
veyed to the mind as perfectly by the eye, 
as thro' the ear. And that method which 
gives the greateſt room and moſt time for 
the underſtanding to exert itſelf, will bid 
the faireſt for procuring the greateſt accu- 
racy in the knowlege of words. There 
can be no douht therefore that this is to 
be acquired more perfectly, and with 
more certainty, by ſtudy, and books, 
than by converſation, and publick ha- 
rangues; for this plain reaſon, that in 
the one caſe a man commands his own 
time, and can appropriate as much of it as 
he thinks proper, to weigh the force of 
every word; in the other, his underſtand- 
ing is obliged to keep pace with the ſpeak- 
er. In this reſpect, the invention of print- 
ing has given us an amazing advantage 
oyer the antients. As their books were all 
tranſcribed, their number of copies could 
not be ſo eafily multiplied, nor conſe- 
quently fall into ſo many hands. And the 
expence of purchaſing thoſe written, copies 
was ſo great, that moſt perſons, exceptthoſe 
of fortune, were in a manner precluded 
Fram the ule of them, Accordingly we = 

that 


— 


236 BRITISH Boox II. 
that the people in general were wholly 
illiterate. Whereas amongſt us, by rr 
of the preſs, and the cheapneſs of books, 
there are hardly any fo low who may not 
acquire knowlege by the eye, as well as 
thro? the car. Hence it is manifeſt that ſkill 
in our own language might eaſily become 
more univerſal now, than it could in their 
days. And that it might in a much ſhorter 
ſpace of time, with more eaſe, and equal 
certainty, be reduced to rules, and fixed 
to a ſtandard, has been already ſhewn. 
It is true that the two great articles, the 
pulpit, and the prefs, which give us ſuch 
a vaſt ſuperiority over the antients, may 
produce effects directly oppofite to what 
we have been ſpeaking of. The pulpit, 
which as it is the moſt general, ought to 
be the moſt fixed ſtandard of pronuncia- 
tion, may be made the chief ſource of 
diverſity and corruption in point of found. 
And the preſs, which might be the grand 
conduit of knowlege and clearneſs, may 
become the main channel of obſcurity and 
confuſion as to meaning. If the clergy, 
being entirely deſtitute of rule, ſhould 


each of them find himſelf obliged to make 
uſe 


Cuar. VII. EDU CAT ION. 237 


uſe of that mode of pronunciation which 
he has accidentally acquired, or which he 
prefers from fancy or caprice, we may 
hear Engliſh ſpoken in the churches in as 
many various dialects as there are ſhires in 
this iſland ; and there may be as many ſin- 
gularities in particular words as there are 
individuals of that order. Nor can their 
example fail to have a ſtrong influence 
upon the generality of their hearers. If 
the preſs ſhould prove to be an caſy paſſ- 
port to authors who do not underſtand the 
janguage they write in, but who from an 
art of flattering the paſſions, and humour- | 
ing the vitious and depraved taſte of the 
age, obtain great vogue, and are generally 
read, it will follow that the mind of the 
reader will neceſſarily be contaminated by 
any taints in the ſtyle of the admired 
writer; and that obſcurity, and want of 
preciſion in the words of the one, will pro- 
duce confuſion and irregularity in the 

ideas of the other. U 

Indeed thoſe two great inſtruments, as 
they are in a perpetual ſtate of activity, 
muſt be continually doing good or harm 
to the ſtate of knowlege. As their power 


CX= 


233 BRTP1SH' Book fl. 
extends itſelf over the whole realm, in- 
 ſomuch that there is not an individual 
who is not in ſome meaſute influenced by 
it, the good or harm muſt be univerſal. 
If their movements were regulated by juft 
and fixed rules, directed to proper etids, 
their operations would be uniform, and 
the beſt effects would follow. If they 
are left to the guidance of blind chance, 
nothing but confuſion and diſorder can 
enſue. ; 185 
The Romans have afforded us a glaring 
example of this truth. For many ages 
was their language in a ſtate of diſorder 
and perpetual change, like ours: but 
when once they applied themſelves to the 
ſtudy of it, and reduced it to rule, it was 
brought by means of it's regularity into 
that fixed ſtate in which we now fee it, 
and by means of which it was that we 
do now ſee it. If we do not apply to the 
ſame method, there can be nothing more 
evident than that ours muſt go on per- 
petually fluQuating, and there is the 
higheſt degree” of probability to ſuppbſe 
that the changes made in it will be conti- 
nually for the worſe. There would be 
| no 


Was n „ d 


CAP. VII. EDUCATION. 239 
no great difficulty in proving, that the 
ſtructure of our language is at this day in 
a worſe condition in regard to ſound, than 
it was even in the time of Chaucer. And 
all who have written upon the point are 
agreed, that in every other reſpect it has 
been declining fince the reign of Charles 
the firſt; Amongſt many others, the 
teſtimony of Mr. Johnſon malt be of al= 
lowed authority on this occaſion. 80 
far have I been from any care to grace 
my pages with modern decorations, that 
I have ſtudiouſſy endeavoured to collect : 
examples and authorities from the vwyri- 
ters before the reſtoration, . whoſe works 
I regard as the wells of Engliſh unde- 
filed, as the pure ſources of genuine 
diction. Our language, for almoſt à 
century, has, by the concurrence of 
many cauſes, been gradually departing 
« from it's original Teutonick character, 
and deviating towards a Gallick ſtructure 
« and phraſeology, from which it ought 
© 'to be our endeavour to recall it, by mak: 
ing our antient volumes the 'ground= 
« work of ſtyle, admitting among the ror 
* r CAFR ; 
20 4 dition 


, 

f 
by 
9 
f 

j 
1 
. 


* 


a © > 2 


- 4 — —— — — — '' — - - — —— — D 
* * _ — — — 
ä — — ͤ — - — —ä———— —2— rot — — 


240 BRITISH Book I. 


dition of later times, only ſuch as may 


ſupply real deficiencies, ſuch as are rea- 
« dily adopted by the genius of our tongue, 
and incorporate eaſily with. our native 
« idioms.” 

Me have. already taken a view of the 


riſe and progreſs of the Roman language 


towards it's perfection; let us now con- 
ſider the cauſes of it's decline and corrup- 
tion. From this enquiry we ſhall evi- 
dently perceive, that the operation of the 
ſame cauſes, . jointly with others more 
powerful of our own, muſt neceſſarily 
make our language grow worſe and worſe, 
and in no very long ſpace of time reduce 
it to an irretrievable ſtate of corruption, 
unleſs ſome meaſures are ſpeedily taken to 


_ eſtabliſh it on a fixed and ſolid foundation. 


And at the ſame time it will appear, that 
if it were once fixed, the means of pre- 


ſerving it in that ſtate are much more 


certain, and powerful, with us, than with 
them, and that it, might laſt with little or 
no variation, at leaſt as long as our con- 
ſtitution. APN 5 N 

Seneca attributes the n of lan- 
guage in his days, to nen, depravity 
110 of 


Cnap. VII. EDUCATION. 241 


of morals, affectation of ſingularity in the 


writers,. prevalence of their example, and 
love of novelty. He has repreſented the 
abuſe in ſuch ſtrong terms, and inveighed 


againſt the innovations introduced at that 
time with ſuch force, that one would 


imagine he himſelf had entirely kept 
clear of them. And yet no one was 4 
more remarkable inſtance of the conta- 
gious power of example, and the irreſiſ- 
tible force of faſhion, than this very man, 


as no one contributed more to alter and 


corrupt the Roman ſtyle than he himſelf. 
Rollin has ſhewn the ſudden and general 


influence of example in the following 


manner. * One ſingle perſon of reputa- 


tion ſometimes, as Seneca obſerves, and 
he himſelf is an inſtance of it, who by 


his eminent qualifications ſhall have ac- 


* quired the efteem of the publick, may 
© ſuffice to introduce this bad taſte, and 
corrupt ſtyle. Whilſt moved by a ſecret 
© ambition, a man of this character ſtrives 


to diſtinguiſh himſelf from the reſt of 


to open a new. path, where he thinks 


r 


R © his 


the orators and writers of his age, and 


it better to march alone at the head of 


1 
— ww eg c — 
5 2 dk =—- 
„ So , \ \ =_ 


- 
FEET " od 2 „ 3 as 


. 


r 3 


[1 
* 
Fl 
4 
; 
3 
o 
i 

12 

* 
1 
Pr. 
48 
[ * 
1 
U \ 
52 
of 
a 
4 
1 
1 

* 
| 
* 
N 
d 
| 
i 
Y 
a 
.* 
1. 
. t, 
70 
4 
f 
| 
1 
= 
= 
ASD 
1 
1. 


8 


242 "BRITISH Boon II. 


his new diſciples, than follow at the 


.* heels of the old maſters ; whilſt he pre- 
8 . the reputation of wit to that of ſo- 
* lidity, purſues what is bright, rather than 
* what is ſound, and ſets the marvellous 
© before the natural and true; whilſt he 
* chuſes rather to apply to the fancy than 
the judgement, to dazzle reaſon than 
* convince. it, to ſurprize the hearer into 
an approbation rather than deſerve it, 
and by a kind of deluſion, and ſoft en- 
chantment, carry off the admiration and 
* applauſes of ſuperficial minds, (and ſuch 
© the multitude always are) other writers 
© ſeduced by the charms of novelty, and 
the hopes of a like ſucceſs, will ſuffer 
© themſelves inſenſibly to be hurried down 
©. the ſtream, and add ſtrength to it by fol- 
© lowing it. And thus the old taſte, tho” 
better in itſelf, ſhall give way to the new 
one Without redreſs, which ſhall pre- 
ſently aſſume the force of a law, and 
draw a whole nation after it. 
But if luxury, ſingularity, novelty, and 
example, had power to change the whole 


2 How very appoſite is the above paragraph to | 
of lord Shaftſbury, and thoſe of paragrs By 


con- 


Car. VIt. EDUCATION, 243 
eonſtitution of the Roman language, tho 
fixed and eſtabliſhed on ſuch folid foun- 
dations, and by ſuch certain rules, what 
havock muſt they not make with ours 
which is deſtitute of both ; left like a 
ſhip without either anchor, or rudder, to 
be toſt about perpetually the ſport of every 
gale from faſhion or caprice ? And how 
much more ſpeedily and univerſally muſt 
all alterations and corruptions, whether in 


ſound, or ſenſe, be propagated by means 


of the pulpit, and the preſs, whoſe powers 
are in a continual ſtate of action, and Per⸗ 
vade the whole land ? 

It may be faid, that if a language 2 
eſtabliſhed, fixed by ſo perfect a ſtandard, 


replete with ſuch excellent models, could 


not be preſerved from change and decay, 
to what purpoſe is it to take pains with 
ours, which in time muſt inevitably meet 
the ſame fate? But will any one afk this 
who has read Virgil, Horace, Cicero, Livy, 
and the other great authors of Rome ? 
Tho' the prodigal and ſpendthrift ſucceſ- 
fors of theſe great men, riotouſly and 
wantonly ſquandered away their language 
as well as the many other treaſures be- 
| =, queathed 


nne. 
rr 


. ET Io er FEI 


ad n 


a 
Py TEED 


1 
18 


* 
Ty 
i, 
ö 
95 
| 


E 
. 
J 
; 
y 
* 
7 
g 
1 
| 
oh 


„„ 


#4 4 — — ' 
n : 


— —— 
Pas ane. 


—_ —— ES 9 its oa bo on 
roms - ow” ye” » * — * 


— 8 ̃7²˙¹‚— 


244 BRITISH Boox II. 
queathed to them by their frugal anceſ- 
tors, yet they could only do it during their 
own lives; and whatever debts they them- 
ſelves might have contracted to folly, 
their poſterity could not be deprived of 
their eſtate in knowlege, ſo indiſſolubly 
entailed by the ſettlement of language. 
And ſhall we not endeavour to ſecure to 
future generations, entire and unchanged, 
their birthright in Shakeſpear, in Milton, 
in Addiſon, and Swift ? Or ſhall we put 
it in the power of one giddy and profuſe 
age to diſſipate, or render of no value, the 
heaps of treaſure now collected in the 
many excellent books written by re 
authors ? | 
If the natural mutability of things were 
a ſufficient argument to deter us from en- 
deavouring to fix them, the ſame would 
hold good in regard to every thing elſe as 
well as to language, and we might fit 
down for ever in a ſtate of ination. Mr. 
Johnſon has juſtly obſerved on this ſubject, 
+ If the changes that we fear be thus ir- 
« refiſtible, what remains but to acquieſce 
«* with filence, as in the other inſurmount- 
4 Pref. to his dict. | | : 
© able 


Cnae. VII. EDUCATION. 245 


able diſtreſſes of humanity? It remains 
that we retard what we can not repel, 
that we palliate what we can not cure. 
Life may be lengthened by care, tho 
© death can not be ultimately defeated : 
* tongues, like governments, have a natu- 
* ral tendency to degeneration ; we have 
long preſerved our conſtitution, let us 
* make ſome ſtruggles for our language.” 
But ſurely tho' the conſideration of the 
changeable and periſhable nature of all 
other mortal works, might juſtly occafion 
deſpondence, yet ſuch deſpondence would 
not be well founded with reſpect to lan- 


guape ; ſince that is the only ſublunary 


thing from which men may expect per- 
petuity to their labours. Of this we have 


undeniable inſtances in the Greek and 
Roman authors; and ſurely a deſire of 


giving the ſame immortality to our own 
would not be irrational, and the attempt, 


however ineffectual, would be ſtill laud- 


able. Is it not to be wiſhed, that in caſe 
any great revolution ſhould hereafter 
wholly deſtroy our language in the ſame 
manner that theirs were, ſo as that it 
ſhould be no longer ſpoken upon earth, 

„ that 


: 
9. 
- 
1 
3 
45 
* 
1 
"Is 
F 
* 
3 
d. 
> 
3 
1 
15 
\ 
S2 
a 
zo 
. 
IF 
* 
T5 
Lo 
__ 
* 
TN 
1 
I ' 
＋ 
* 
9 
a> 
7 
0 
— 
8. 
7 
72 
1 
1 
1 
4 
: 


he * — — o — = oo * — 
CR ee eme Ge 


246 BRITISH Boox II 
that the fair memorials of the many great 
men produced in this cquntry, the noble 
model of our conſtitution, and the true 
ſpirit of liberty, far ſuperior to the anti- 
ents, which breathes in our writers, ſhould 
be preſerved for ever like theirs, in our 
books, in the maſterly drawing and lively 
colours of the originals ? May not this be 
the means of perpetuating the Britiſh con- 
ſtitution either here or in ſome other 
country to the end of tire? Had not the 
noble authors of antiquity come down ta 
us, we ſhould hardly haye been able to 
frame ſo perfect an idea of liberty, or to 
have enjoyed the invaluable bleſſings it be- 
ſtows. And ſhould it be in the fate of things, 
that t the long-laboured fabrick of our con- 
ſtitution, the work of ages, ſhould in time 
moulder away, and tumble to the ground, 
or be deſtroyed by violence; who knows: 
jn what regions of the earth the noble 
edifice may again and again be raiſed, 
ſhould the beautiful model be preſerved 
entire in the works of our writers? But 
to leave theſe ſpeculative points, and come 
to what i is more ou 


If 


Cup. VII. EDUCATION. 247 


If it could be made appear probable, 
that were our language once fixed upon 
juſt and certain rules, it would in all like- 
lihood continue in the ſame tate, at leaſt 
as long as our conſtitution remained, ſure 
no one would think any pains too great 
to accompliſh ſo deſirable a point. Let it 
be remembered, that the Roman ſpeech 
and ſtyle continued invariably pure from 


the date of their perfection, till there was 


an alteration in their government ; and 
that the changes and corruptions intro- 
duced into their language and writings, 


were not till ſome time after the people 


had loſt their liberties. This will in a 
great meaſure ſerve to confirm the hypo- 


theſis above laid down, that the ſtability of 


their language was chiefly, if not entirely, 
owing to the general good taſte acquired 
by the people from conſtantly hearing 


their orators. For upon the change of 


the republick into a monarchy, oratory 
was baniſhed, or only the ſhadow of it 
remained. The people no longer ac- 


cuſtomed to hear their ſpeech correctly 


ſpoken in publick, loſt their diſtinguiſhing 


faculty, their ſole criterion of propriety; 


R 4 | and 


2 OED Tagen 


i BS nh, eo o 
e. 


23235 
* oops 2 


* 
1 
0 
5 
8 
* 
„ 
1 
£5 
> 
. 
4 
” 
E 
5 
£5 
"© 
. 
4 
3 
"i 
pf 
1 
Fl * 
7 
o 
b 
3 
i 
23 
2 
„ 
14 
in 
1 
12 
} . 
S 
: Y. 
1 
BY 
5 
48 
+ 
41] 
15 
: * 
7 
4 
* 
1 
* 
"Ig 
S 4 
N 
{ 
« 
* 
{ 
A 
7 
{. 
» 
i 
j 
: 1 
17 
5 
? 


— 


ET 


"IF; 


* 
* 


— 


|: 
q 
! 
y 
i 
8 
p 
i 


.” 
75 
* 

* 


248 BRIT IS H Boox II. 


and the few perſons who did harangue at 
ſtated times, no longer reſtrained to rules 
by the awe of the people, gave a looſe to 
fancy, and affected whatever pronuncia- 
tion pleaſed them moſt. In this, thoſe 
who were moſt admired were moſt fol- 
lowed. Thus their ſpeech was no longer 
uniform, but different modes were intro- 
duced at different times, and obtained 
yogue in proportion to the reputation of 
thoſe who gave riſe to them. If there- 
fore a general good taſte in the people was 
the ſureſt preſervative of ſound, and pro- 
nunciation, it has been already ſhewn, 
that we have better opportunities of dif- 
fuſing ſuch a general taſte than the Romans 
had, provided our pronunciation were 
once eſtabliſhed by rules. I ſhall now en- 
deavour to ſhew upon the ſame principle, 
that in regard to the ſenſe of words, and 
accuracy of ſtyle, we have alſo much more 
powerful means to preſerve them in a fixed 
tate, were they once brought to it. 
Whatever exactneſs or delicacy the 
Roman people in general might have ar- 
rived at in point of ſpeech, yet they could 
know little or nothing of their written 
pe lan- 


Cxae. VII. EDUCATION. 249 


language, and could therefore be but in- 
competent judges of the ſtile of their au- 


thors. To obtain ſkill in that, reading 


and an application to books were neceſ- 
ſary ; but from the very manner in which 
thoſe books were propagated, the copies 
muſt have been ſcarce and dear, and con- 
ſequently only read by the few. In this 
reſpect therefore the ſecurity of the con- 
tinuance of their written language in it's 
ſtate of perfection, was not ſo great as of 
that which was ſpoken. But the caſe is 
different with us. The preſs has opened 
as wide an avenue to knowlege thro' the 
eye, as thro' the ear; and people now 
may be as univerſally benefited by: read- 
ing, as by diſcourſe. Thus our ſtyle in 
writing having the ſame common broad 
bottom for it's baſis with our ſpeech, 
might be more ſecure of ſtanding than 
that of the antients. But as the pyramid, 


which of all buildings is the moſt firm and 


durable, if reverſed, is the moſt liable to 


fall ; ſo the very inſtrument which might 


contribute moſt to the. refinement and 
eſtabliſhment of our language, if wrongly 


applied, may be the ſure means of it's cor- 


ruption 


: - 
9 
1 

2 
2 

245 

1 
8 
* 
* 
* 
s 
* 
= 

Fr 

i! 

14 

75 

' 1 

1 

fy 

| 2 

LY 
* 
"= 

| i 
$5 
\ 

28 

N * 

8 

17 

489 

TY 

EW 

; = 

TY 
3 

. 1 

15 

I" 

11 * 

1% 
o 
* 
” 
F 
5 
5 

7 * 
77 

x «a 
* 

i 

E 
WP 
| 
g 
of 
"Cad 
+ 
"4 
* 
2 

f 

7 

12 

| 

1 

[? 

4 

g 

= 

*. 
8 
ji 
Pe 
% 
” 
7 
i 
! 
"Y 
U 


250 BRITISH Book II. 
ruption and change. As the preſs is in 
conſtant action, it muſt conſtantly diffuſe 
either a good or bad taſte thro' the-peo- 
ple. If they have no rules to guide them, 
their judgements, governed by chance or 
fancy, will conſequently be erroneous ; 
and however evidently ſo they may be, in 
time they. muſt be eſtabliſhed, and by 
cuſtom 

(Quem penes arbitrium & jus & norma 

loquendi) 

obtain the force of a law. Venal and 
needy writers, whoſe view is profit, will 
of courſe conform to the reigning taſte, as 
the moſt likely way to obtain fale for their 
works; and they who are actuated by 
nobler motives, will be allured by the 
charms of preſent fame. Even the judi- 
cious few, finding their endeavours vain to 
ſtem. it, will ſuffer themſelves to be car- 
ried away by the torrent. This is the 
great fource of the corruptions in our lan- 
guage; © And theſe corruptions very 
few of the beſt authors in our age have 
* wholly eſcaped. If Seneca with all his 
diſcernment, his knowlege, and ine taſte, 


Swift. 
could 


Car. VII. EDUCATION. 251 


could not reſiſt the force of faſhion, but 
fell himſelf into the very faults againſt 
which he ſo violently declaimed, and that 
in a language ſo regulated, ſo fixed, what 
are we to expect from our writers in one 
as yet unſettled, unaſcertained? The Ro- 
mans had one tolerable ſecurity for the 
preſervation of their ſtyle, from the high 
price of their books; ſo that no works 
were likely to meet with many purchaſers, 
but ſuch as were of reputation. Or if any 
innovations were begun in thoſe in the 
time of the republick, they were not of 
courſe adopted into their ſpeech, ſines 
the people in general, who were the guar- 
dians of dea, knew little or nothing of 
the writings, and would not eafily — 
any new modes in their orators. But with 
us a wide communication is opened be- 
tween the two channels; the ſtreams are 
blended, and whatever taint there is in 
the one, of courſe infects the other. We 
ſee daily that new phraſes and words are 
adopted from writings into diſcourſe, and 
from diſcourſe into writings. Since there- 
fore the people in general muft be ulti- 
mately the regulators of our language, at 

4 3 leaſt 


252 BRITISH Boox II. 
leaſt in it's moſt eſſential points, it mainly 
imports us that. they ſhould be properly 
qualified for ſo important an office. If 
they muſt all be taught to read, it were 
to be wiſhed they were alſo taught to un- 
derſtand. Whilſt they are committed to 
the care of the moſt ignorant maſters, and 

ive the firſt rudiments of language-in 
| the very worſt books that can be found, 
is it to be hoped that they ſhould acquire 
more knowlege than their teachers, or 
have a notion of ſtyle different from the 
models which have been preſented to 
them ? If they were well inſtructed, and 
were made acquainted with none but 
good patterns, there can be no doubt but 
as general a good taſte would prevail 
amongſt them in regard to written lan- 
guage, as did amongſt the Romans with 
reſpect to that which was ſpoken. The 
conſequence of which general good taſte 
would be, that no books, which were not 
written in a good ſtile, would now find 
any ſale; as no orator could then make 
his way, who did not ſpeak with pro- 
priety. And if this were the caſe, it is 


incredible what a number of fountains 
from 


Cnae. VII. EDUCATION. 207 
from which flow ignorance and folly, 
vice and impiety, would at once be dried 
up, and diſappear. ' But this can never be 
till the preceptors have a ſyſtem of well- 
digeſted rules, to guide themſelves as well 
as their pupils in the courſe of their in- 
ſtructions. Till that happens the propa- 
gation of reading is but the propagation 
of error, and the preſs muſt continue to 
be the ſource of ignorance, and falſe 
taſte. 

I ſhall cloſe this chapter with obſery- 
ing that we have one great advantage 
over the antients, which is, that ſo long 
at leaſt as our religion continues unaltered, 
we have one ſure barrier againſt a total 
change of our language. This is ſet forth 
by Dr. Swift in his letter to lord Oxford, 
where he ſays, © It is your lordſhip's ob- 
« ſervation, that if it were not for the bible 
* and common-prayer-book in the vulgar 
tongue, we [ſhould hardly be able to 
* underſtand any thing that was written 
among us a hundred years ago; which 
is certainly true: for thoſe books being 
« perpetually read in churches, have prov- 


Y ed a kind of ſtandard for language, 
| « eſpe- 


254 BRITISH | Book tf, 
© eſpecially to the common people.. And 
this might be made a more certain, ge- 
neral, and durable criterion of words, 
than any the Romans had, not only in 
point of ſound and pronunciation, but alſo 
| of ſenſe and . 


CHAP. vnr. 


That we bave it more in our power to pro- 
pagate our language in other countries, 
and make it univerſal, than they had. 


A* the chief glory of a people ariſes 
from their authors, the propaga- 
tion of their language is neceſſary to the 
diſplaying of that glory in it's full luſtre, 
which otherwiſe would be unknown in 
other regions, or dimly ſeen as thro a 
cloud. Of the propagation of a language 
there are chiefly three cauſes; conqueſt, 
commerce, and the number of uſeful or 
entertaining books which are written in 
it. Of theſe, the firſt has bitherto proved 
ipeffectual. The victor may change the 
laws and cuſtoms of a country, but he 


Will od it difficult, if not impoſſible, to 
make 


Criae. VIII. EDUCATION. 255 


make a total change in their language. 
The uſe of their native ſpeech is the laſt 
thing which the vanquiſhed would wil- 
lingly part with, and next to their thoughts, 
is what the conqueror has the leaſt power 
over. The attempt would prove imprac- 
ticable with regard to a preſent race, the 
chief of whom are too old to learn a new 
tongue; and indeed all endeavours to 
eſtabliſh it in a riſing generation, have na- 
turally ended in a fort of compromiſe, a 
mixture of the two, from which reſulted 
a new one. From this ſource may be 
derived almoſt all the various languages 
now ſpoken in Europe. Commerce in itſelf 
is but a very inadequate cauſe of ſpread- 
ing language, both as a very ſmall know- 
lege of it will ſuffice for the carrying on 
buſineſs, and as in this caſe it would be 
confined only to the mercantile part of 
other countries. Beſides, this too is apt to 
give riſe to a new jargon, compoſed: out 
of the reſpective tongues of the nations 
which trade with each other. But a 
conſtant commerce naturally excites eu- 
rioſity to be acquainted with the hiſtory, 
cuſtoms, and manners, of the people 


| with 


256 BRITISH Book II. 
with whom it is carried on, which can not 
be obtained in a fatisfa&tory manner with- 
out underſtanding their language. In 
this reſpect Great Britain has not only an 
infinite advantage over Rome, but in pro- 
portion to the extent of her trade, over 
all other countries in the world. For 
if by common conſent of all nations a 
language were to be pitched upon which 
ſhould be of univerſal uſe in point of 
traffick, the ſuffrages of courſe would 
fall, ceteris paribus, upon that ſpoken 
by the people who carried on the largeſt 
and moſt extenſive trade with the reſt of 
the world. That the Engliſh therefore 
is hardly known abroad, and the French 
ſo univerſally, can not be attributed to 
that cauſe, unleſs they are allowed to ex- 
ceed us in that point. To the propa- 
gation of a language, it is neceſſary that 
they who are inclined to it, may learn it 
with eaſe and certainty ; but this it is im- 
poſſible to do without the uſe of rules. 
The French have very wiſely with great 
pains and labour regulated and fixed their 
tongue; ſo that foreigners of all countries 
may with proper pains acquire even an 
; accu- 


Cav. VIII. EDUCATION. 289 


accurate cill in it both as to found and 
ſenſe. Whereas a total negle& on the 
part of the Engliſh, in thoſe reſpects, 
has rendered it impoſſible to ſtrangers 
cither to pronounce or underſtand it with 
any degree of propriety or certainty. Nor 
is this to be wondered at, conſidering how 
few even of the natives have any great 
Rnowlege of either. And the difficulty 
of learning it abroad, may be Judged from 
the very ſmall ' progreſs made in it by fo- 
reignets who reſide for years amongſt us; 
many of whom paſs great part of their 
lives, and take immenſe pains, without 
attaining even a tolerable knowlege of it. 
If the queſtion be aſked, why the Engliſh 
above all other European languages is ſo 
hard to be attained, the aniwer is ready, 
that it is the only one not yet reduced to 
rule. And this is the true reaſon that, 
notwithſtanding our univerſal' commerce, 
it is ſo little known abroad, except to a 
few of the curious; and it is from a con- 
trary proceeding that the French has ob- 
tained a general currency. It may be 
worth the conſideration of | politicians, 
whether this may not in time give them 
a ſupe- 


258 BRITISH Book II. 
a,ſuperiority in trade, as it may be a ſtrong 
inducement to moſt people, where other 
reſpects are equal, to give the preference 
to thoſe whoſe ſpeech they underſtand, 
and with whom they can converſe with 
eaſe. 

But the great cauſe of ſpreading a lan- 
guage, and which makes it moſt ſought 
after, is the number of uſeful or delight- 
ful books which are written in it. Of 
theſe the latter tco has the preference. 
For writings merely of uſe, when well 
tranſlated, loſe nothing of their intrinſick 
value : but poems, and elegant compo- 
fitions in proſe, which are chiefly calcu- 
lated to give pleaſure, muſt loſe the great- 
eſt part of their beauty in another lan- 
guage, as that conſiſts chiefly in the har- 
mony reſulting from the arrangement-of 
words, and a peculiar grace and force of 
phraſeology. Tranſlations, to works of 
this ſort, are like prints to pictures; they 
can only ſhew the deſign, but the maſ- 
terly ſtrokes and expreſſion are but faintly 
imitated, and the colouring entirely loſt. 
But if the ſpreading of books in the ori- 
ginals in other countries, and the num- 

| ber 


Cray. VIII. EDUCATION. 259 


ber of their readers, were to be the teſt of 
the excellence of their writers, France 
would certainly bear away the palm, not 
only from Great Britain, but from Athens 
and Rome. For one reader which So- 
phocles, Euripides, Terence, and Horace 
have found in any country in Europe, theit 
Corneille, Racine, Moliere, and Boileau, 
have met with twenty. Whilſt the Engliſh 
authors of the greateſt eminence are known 
in moſt even by name but to a few; and 
their works like rare manuſcripts are only 
to be found in the libraries of the curious. 
Is it becauſe that their writers and lan- 
guage are really ſuperior to ours ? The 
contrary may be aſſerted without fearing 
any imputation of prejudice. No, it is 
becauſe they are read, and underſtood 
with caſe. Where pleaſure is the end, 
the means to come at it muſt not be too 
laborious. The delight in reading the 
beſt authors muſt be diminiſhed in pro- 
portion to the difficulty of underſtanding 
them. The French have made a high- 
way thro' their part of Parnaſſus, in which 
the eaſe wherewith the traveller jogs 
mn gives him a higher reliſh for the 
„ | beau- 


260 BRITISH Book II. 
beauties around him; and many places, 
like objects on a road, become remarkable, 
only by their being there, which other- 
wiſe might never be heard of. Whereas 
we, who muſt be allowed to poſſeſs the 
more lovely part of the hill, whether 
conſidered. in regard to it's natural or 
improved beauties, by ſuffering the way 
to be almoſt impaſſable, have rendered 
it unfrequented. To what ether cauſe 
can it be aſſigned (not to enter into any 
compariſon of the dead, which would be 
wandering into too wide a field) that the 
name of Voltaire is ſo familiar to all the 
mouths of Europe, whilſt thoſe of Aken- 
ſide or Maſon are ſcarce ever heard but 
from Engliſh tongues? 
lt will perhaps be allowed, that if the 
Engliſh language were as well and as 
univerſally known in Europe, as the 
French, it would ſoon obtain the prefe- 
rence. And in that caſe it muſt alſo be 
allowed, that it would obtain a more ge- 
neral uſe than ever the Roman did even 
in it's moſt flouriſhing ſtate, as this has 
been already effected by the French. 
That this advantage which the moderns 
636 have 


Cnar. IX. EDUCATION. 26r 


have over the antients is chiefly owing 10 
the invention of printing, is a point too' 
obvious to ie inſiſted « on. 


CHAP. IX. 


. Whether our language be capable of a ſuf- 
ficient degree of perfection to make the 
Rudy of it general, and to afford as good 
4 prop: 171 * it's duration as a Latin. 


T may be 444 that if eee 
of ſound, and the charm of numbers, 
be ſo uſeful to the propagation, and ſo 
neceſſary to the permanence of a lan- 


guage; ours being far inferior in it's own 


nature to the Roman in thoſe reſpects, 
and not equal to ſome of the modern, 
muſt have a much leſs chance of being 
ſought after by the preſent times, or of, 
being handed down to future ages: that 
if the utmoſt pains were taken to poliſh, 
it, it would only be like cutting a pebble 
after the faſhion of a diamond, which may 
make a ſhew indeed, and have ſome luſtre, 
but being of no intrinſick value, will not 
bear a price, nor intereſt people much in 

8 3 N it's 


262, BRITISH Boox II. 
it's preſervation. This opinion ſeems to 
have been too haſtily adopted by moſt 
writers upon this ſubjet. Upon a fair 
enquiry it might perhaps appear, that 
they have judged too ſuperficially, and 
miſtaken a bad habit of body, occaſioned 
by humours, the effect of indolence and 
intemperance, for original defects in the 
conſtitution. If the ſtamina be ſtrong, 
and the vitals untouched, all diſorders 
may be removed by proper remedies. But 
to examine the conſtitution of our lan- 
guage, would be to enter upon a topick 
too extenſive for the nature of this work. 
J ſhall therefore only throw together 
ſome thoughts upon our poetick ſtyle, 
conſidered with relation to that of the 
Roman, and of the modern tongues. 
In which I ſhall endeavour to ſhew, that 
upon the whole we are not inferior to the 
antients, and have an undoubted ſuperiority 
over all the moderns, from the very genius 
and conſtitution of our language. 

In the poetick ſtyle two things are to 
be conſidered, expreſſion, and harmony. 
The firſt regards the choice and arrange- 
ment of words conſidered as figns of our 

ideas: 


Cup. IX. EDUCATION. 263 
ideas: the laſt, their election and diſpo- 
ſition with reſpect to their ſound only, 
without reference to their meaning. To 
expreſſion, copiouſneſs and energy are ne- 
ceſlary ; in the firſt of which our lan- 
guage is perhaps ſuperior to all others, 
in the laſt may yield to none. And the 
only complaint in regard to either is what 
Mr. Johnſon has juſtly made, the want of 
regulation. He ſays in the preface to his 
dictionary, When I took the firſt. ſurvey 
of my undertaking, I found our ſpeech 
* copious without order, and energetick 
without rules: wherever I turned my 
view, there was perplexity to. be diſen- 
6 tangled, and confuſion to be regulated. 
In point of harmony indeed, it ſeems to 
be taken for granted, that our language 
is far inferior to the antients, and not equal 
to ſome of the modern tongues. But 
upon examination it will appear that this 
opinion is founded upon the corruption of 
language by our writers, rather than any 
original defect in itſelf. At firſt view the 
Roman ſeems to have a vaſt ſuperiority 
over ours in it's very conſtruction, from 
which reſults a natural fitneſs in it's words 
S 4 to 


264 BRITISH Book Il. 


to form ob combinations, as well 
as in the . regulations eſtabliſhed to give 
that natural fitneſs it's full force. The 
firſt great advantage which it has over 
ours ariſes from it's original conſtruction ; 
wherein the different caſes, genders, and 
numbers of their nouns, as well as moods 
and tenſes of their verbs, are all expreſſed 
by changes of termination in their words, 
From this two good conſequences follow- 
ed ; one, that their language was freed 
TEC that multitude of monoſyllables with 
which ours is neceſſarily crowded, in or- 
der to mark thoſe variations ; the other, 
that the final ſyllables, which leave the 
ſtrongeſt impreſſion on the ear, being no 
longer left to chance, were ſettled by eſta. 
bliſhed rules; ſo as to form the greateſt di- 
verſity, as well as agreeableneſs of ſound. 

The ſecond great advantage aroſe from the 
unlimited privilege given to their writers 
to tranſpoſe their words at pleaſure, and 
to range them in whatever order they 
thought proper, ſo as to form the moſt 
agreeable cadence. But if it ſhould 
. pear in regard to the firſt, that the. 87381. 
nal formation of their language anly fitted 


it 


15 


cuar. . EDUCATION. 265 


it for the particular meaſures and num- 
bers which they uſed, and that ours is 
equally well adapted to thoſe which we 
uſe; if it ſhould appear alſo that our 
meaſures and numbers have upon the 
whole a ſuperiority over theirs; will not 
this ſeeming advantage at once vaniſh ? 
As to the ſecond, tho' the reſtraint laid 
upon our writers by the neceſſity of fol- 
lowing the natural order of words may 
make it more difficult for them to form 
an harmonious combination; yet when 
that is obtained, there can be no doubt but 
that the intuitive clearneſs with which 
the underſtanding perceives the meaning 
of the words, by means of that, natural 
order, muſt leave it more diſengaged to 
. attend to the numbers, and conſequently 
ive them an additional luſtre, _. 
That what I have adyanced in relation 
to numbers may, appear in a clear light, it 
will not be amiſs to take a comparative 
view of the Latin heroick meaſure, as 
that is the chief, with the Engliſh. It 
might eaſily be proved from the ſpecifick 
differences of the two languages, that they 


Fequire different meaſures, and that the 
hexas 


Lind 


7 


1 
1 
11 
T 
1 
4 
177 
1 
11 
1 
f 
" 
' 
1 
1 
1. 
i 


— —— — — — 
SW o_ =o 


266 BRITISH Boox II. 
hexameter of the Latins is beſt - ſuited to 
the genius of their tongue, as blank verſe 
is to ours. But this at preſent would take 
up too much time unneceſſarily. It is 
ſufficient to my purpoſe that ſuch has 
been the practice of the beſt writers in 


both; and whoever has the leaſt doubt 


whether this practice has it's foundation 
in reaſon, may ſoon be convinced that the 
Latin hexameter is not ſuited to our 
tongue, by looking over the attempts 
made in that way by Sidney, and others ; 
whoſe verſes of that ſort ſeem to move 
with a ridiculous and burleſque air, inſtead 
of that ſtate and majeſty which we admire 
in the Roman poets. He would alſo be 
immediately ſenſible how ill adapted Latin 
words are to Engliſh blank verſe, ſhould 
he endeavour to fit them to that meaſure. 
The Latin heroick line conſiſts of fix feet, 
the Engliſh but of five. This at firſt view 
gives the former the pre-eminence over 
the latter in point of ſize, and when we 
come to examine their movements, in 
70 of ſtatelineſs alſo. Nor can there 
any doubt that if the mere ſtructure 

of the verſes were alone to be conſidered, 
with- 


nr. IX. EDUCATION, 267 


without reference to their uſe, but that 
the former would have evident advan- 
tages over the latter. But when they come 
to be examined with relation to their fit- 
| neſs to go thro' a long work, the latter 
will have a manifeſt ſuperiority. - To 

prove this it need only be ſhewn, that the 
Latin heroick admits but of two move- 
ments, the dactyl, and ſpondee: whereas 
the Engliſh admits of eight, the ſpondee, 
the trochee, the iambus, pyrrichius, dac- 
tyl, anapeſt,>tribrachus, and amphi-bra- 
chus. Hence we may ſee what an infi- 

nite advantage the latter has over the for- 
mer in point of variety, and conſequently 
of expreſſion and harmony; which are 
the primary, as mere ſound and melody 
are only'the ſecondary qualities of num- 
bers. So that granting their language to 
be compoſed of words more ſonorous and 
agreeable to the ear, yet as their verſe 
can have but two movements, it is im- 
poſſible to vary thoſe in ſuch a manner, 
but in works of any length a great ſame- 
neſs of cadence muſt be perceived, for 
which no richneſs of ſound can compen- 
fate. Now if wh# is here ſaid of the 


Eng- 


Engliſh meaſure be true, it. is apparent 
from the uſe of eight movements, that a 
ſkilful poet may in the longeſt perfor- 
mance throw an almoſt infinite variety 
of numbers into his verſes, and conſe- 
quently never cloy the ear. If the Ro- 
mans had but two bells, and we have ſe- 
ven, tho' theirs might be compoſed of a 
finer metal, and their tone be much ſupe- 
rior, yet whoever liſtened for any length 
of time, would find himſelf much more 
delighted by the various changes rung 
upon the one, than by the mere pleaſure - 
of ſound in the other. 

I know it will at once be ſaid, that my 
reaſonings upon this head muſt of courſe 
fall to the ground, as they are built upon 
a falſe hypotheſis. And yet, however 
univerſally the contrary notion may have 
prevailed, there is not any thing more de- 
monſtrably true than what I have advan- 
ced, in regard to the movements of which 
an Engliſh heroick verſe may be compoſed. 
But as common received opinions, grown 
inveterate by time, are not eaſily to be 
rooted out, it will require a particular 


treatiſe to ſet this hole matter right, 
| | and 


— 


Cuar. IX. EDUCATION. 269 
and to lay open the theory of Engliſh num- 
bers, which at preſent ſeem to be inve- 
loped with a general darkneſs. Leſt the 
reader ſhould too haſtily pronounce upon 
what I have already advanced, I would 
have him afk himſelf this queſtion, * Am 
* Tacquainted with the principles of Eng- 
* liſh poetick meaſure, or do I know what 
it is which conſtitutes an heroick verſe *' 
If he finds himſelf at a loſs, he can not be 
certain but that what I have ſet down may 
be true. If he goes by the common rule, 
that is indubitably falſe. It is generally 
received that an Engliſh heroick line con- 
fiſts of ten ſyllables, whereas nothing is 
more certain than that many, and thoſe 
very harmonious, are compoſed of eleven, 
twelve, thirteen, nay even fourteen ſylla- 
bles. But the conſideration of theſe mat- 
ters would carry me too far out of the way. 

It will however be immediately to my pur- 
poſe to trace the ſource of the erroneous 
opinions ſo generally ſpread in regard to 
this point, as it will at the ſame time lay 
open one of the chief cauſes of the cor- 
ruption of our language. 


No- 


. 


270 BRITISH Boox II. 

Nothing has contributed ſo much to 
deſtruy all true taſte for poetry as the eſta- 
bliſhment of rhime. A fooliſh admira- 
tion of this trifling and artificial ornament, 


has turned people's thoughts from the con- 
templation of 'the real and natural beauty 


of numbers. Like the Iſraelites, we have 
gone a whoring after our own fancies, and 
worſhipped this idol with ſo infatuated a 
zeal, that our language has in a great 
meaſure fallen a ſacrifice to it. Hear 
what a candid + Frenchman has ingenu- 
ouſly ſaid upon this ſubjet, notwithſtand- 
ing that their tongue is incapable of any 
tolerable poetick meaſure without rhime. 
© There is no rule in poetry, whoſe ob- 
© ſervance coſts ſo much trouble, and pro- 
< duces ſo few beauties in verſe, as that of 
rhiming. Rhime frequently maims, and 
almoſt always enervates the ſenſe of a diſ- 
courſe. For one bright thought which 
the paſſion of rhiming throws in our 
way by chance, it 1s certainly every day 
the cauſe of a hundred others, which 
people would bluſh to make uſe of, were 
it not for the richneſs or novelty of the 


+ Du Bos, Crit, Ref. vol. i. c. 36. 


jr mr 3D EG $39 a 


© rhime, 


Cxar. IX. EDUCATION. 271 


pe” 
a W MW M 6 


rhime, with which theſe thoughts are 
attended. 
Some perhaps will fay, that . 

muſt certainly be a much greater beauty 
in rhime than I pretend to allow. The 


conſent of all nations (they will add) is 


a ſenſible proof in favour of rhime; 
the uſe of which is at preſent n. 


ſally adopted. 
My anſwer is, in the firſt place, that 


do not conteſt the agreeableneſs of 
rhime ; I only look upon this agree- 
ableneſs i in a much inferior light to that 
which ariſes from the numbers and har- 


mony of verſe, and which ſhews itſelf 


continually during the metrical pronun- 
ciation. Numbers and harmony are a 
light which throws out a conſtant luſtre, 
but rhime is a mere flaſh, which diſap- 

pears after having given only a ſhort- 
lived ſplendor. In fact, the richeſt 
rhime has but a tranſient effect. Were 
we even to rate the value of verſes only 
by the difficulties that are to be ſur- 


mounted in the making them, it is leſs 


difficult, without compariſon, to rhime 
gs than to compoſe numerous 
* and 

$ 


* 
50 ümeüiñß]ĩj? ð ]]“ ],], 


0 * * A * a a4 * a 6 


272 BRITISH Book . 


and harmonious verſes. In' aiming at 


the latter, we meet with obſtacles at 
every word. Nothing extricates a French 
poet out of theſe difficulties but his ge- 
nius, his ear, and perſeverance ; for he 
has no aſſiſtance to expect from any me- 
thod hitherto reduced to art. Theſe ob- 
ſtructions do not occur ſo frequently, 
when a perſon propoſes only to rhime 
well!; and beſides, in endeavouring to 
n them, he meets with the aſſiſ- 
tance of a dictionary of rhimes, that fa- 
vourite book of all ſevere rhimers. For 
let theſe gentlemen ſay what they will, 


there are none of them but what have 


this excellent work in their ſtudies. 

« Secondly, I grant that we rhime all 
our verſes, and that our neighbours do 
likewiſe moſt part of theirs. We find 


the uſe of rhime eſtabliſhed even in Aſia 


and America. But the greateſt part of 
theſe people are barbarians ; and the 
rhiming nations that have been fince 
civilized, were barbarous and illiterate 


when their poetry was firſt formed. 


The languages they ſpoke were not ſuſ- 
. of a greater perfection of verſe, 
when 


Cray. IX. EDUCATION. 23 
- © when they laid, as it were, the firſt foun- 
dations of their poetry. True it is, that 
* the European nations here ſpoken of, 
became in proceſs of time a polite and 
learned people. But as they poliſhed 
themſelves not till a long time after they 
had been formed into a body politick, 
and as their national cuſtoms were al- 
ready ſettled, and even ſtrengthened by 
the length of time they had been ſtand- 
ing, when theſe nations received the im- 
« provements ariſing from a judicious cul- 
ture of the Greek and Latin tongues ; * 
* thoſe cuſtoms have only been poliſhed 
* and mended, but could never be entirely 
altered. An architect, who has under- 
© taken to repair an old Gothick building, 
may make ſome alterations to render it 
more commodious, but he can nat alter 
the defects which ariſe from the firſt 
« conſtruction, He can not ſhape it into a 
« regular building without pulling down 
the old one, in order to erect a new edi- 
« fice upon a different plan. 
FRhime, as well as fiefs and duels, 
« owes it's origin to the barbarouſneſs of 
© our anceſtors, The people from whom 
T * c the 


274 "BRITISH Boox II. 
* the modern nations- are deſcended, and 
© who ſubverted the Roman empire, had 
c already their poets, tho' barbarians, 
when they firſt ſettled in Gaul and other 
provinces of the empire. As the lan- 
guages in which theſe ignorant poets 
wrote, were not ſufficiently improved to 
bear handling according to the rules of 
metre, nor even admitted of attem pting 
it, they fancied there would be ſome or- 
nament in terminating with the ſame 
ſound, two conſecutive or relative patts 
of a diſcourſe, both of 'which were to 
be of an equal extent. This identity of 
final ſounds, repeated at the end ot a 
certain number of ſyllables, formed a 
kind of grace, and ſeemed to expreſs, or 
did, if you pleaſe, expreſs ſomething of 
a cadence in verſe. Thus it was, in all 
probability, that rhime firſt roſe and 
eſtabliſhed itſelf in Europe. 
Here we have a full picture of chime 
preſented to us, together with the hiſtory of 
it's riſe and progreſs; the legitimate off- 
ſpring of barbariſm and neceſſity, nurſed 
by ignorance. However untoward it's 
E might be from the circum- 
"Pp {ſtances 


Ii Or TS GT WW moe Boo 25> 27 


Cray. IX. EDUCATION. 275 
ſtances of it's birth and nurture, yet in 
time it has arrived at ſuch a degree of 
ſtrength and power, as to invade the poſ- 
ſeſſions of harmony and numbers in the 
regions of poetry, the genuine children of 
knowlege and politeneſs, which it has en- 
tirely ſubdued, and reduced them to a ſtate 
of ſlavery, and a blind obedience to it's 
abſolute authority. The barbariſm of it's 
origin can not be doubted, fince it has ever 
been found amongſt the moſt rude and 
ſavage nations, but was not even known to 
the more poliſhed and refined. Nor can 
we be to ſeek from what ſtock it comes, 
when we ſee that it is ſo congenial with 
all the tongues derived from the Gothick 
root, that in thoſe it is conſidered as a 
chief ornament, and gives the moſt gene- 
ral delight; whereas in the nobler Greek 
and Latin, far from adding any beauty to' 
them, it becomes ridiculous, and occaſions 
diſguſt +. So that any nation, which is 
proud of it's poetry on that ſcore, only 
boaſts of it's barbarity, and is ſo far on a 

'* This will be at once perceived by looking over the 


poems in Leonine verſe, which in the times of. monkiſh * 
learning were ſo much in vogue, 


T 2 foot- 


276 BRITISH Boon II. 


footing with thoſe ſavages who wear rings 
and other gewgaws in their noſes, and 
bobbing at their lips, by way of ornament. 
And ſhould any people be happily poſ- 
ſeſſed of a language equally capable of all 
the charms and powers of numbers with 
thoſe of the antients, yet give the prefe- 
rence to rhime, wherein would they. differ 
from the wild Indians, who barter their 
diamonds, and precious ſtones, for bits 
of glaſs and tinkling bawbles ? | 
Rhime has not only been a falſe and 
unneceſſary ornament to the Engliſh 
poetry, but it has likewiſe almoſt de- 
ſtroyed it's true beauty, and in a great 
meaſure unharmonized our language. 
Like ſome kinds of red paint, which ap- 
plied to the face, give it an artificial glow, 
but whoſe poiſonous quality by conſtant. 
uſe devours the natural bloom, ſhrivels up 
the ſkin, and impairs the conſtitution, 
So that a cuſtom begun thro' accidental 
paleneſs from a weakly habit of body, or 
indulged thro' wantonneſs, may in time 
come to be not a matter of choice, but of 
neceſſity. i 


85 When 


Cray, IX. EDUCATION. 277 
When our language was in it's firſt 
ſtate of rudeneſs and imperfection, like 
moſt others derived from the ſame Go- 
thick original, it abounded ſo in monoſyl- 
lables, and words artleſsly compoſed of the 
moſt diſſonant and diſcordant letters, that 
all attempts in our poets towards intro- 
ducing numbers and harmony into their 
meaſure, muſt have proved fruitleſs and 
vain. To ſupply. their place they were 
therefore obliged to have recourſe to rhime. 
But when it was enriched and refined, by 
means of the cultivation of the learned 
languages, with vaſt ſtores of well-formed 
and well-ſounding words, compoſed of 
different, and proper numbers of ſylla- 
bles, it would have been eaſy then to have 
eſtabliſhed new and harmonious meaſures, 
ſuited to the genius of the newly im- 
proved tongue. But on the contrary, the 
only uſe made of theſe acquiſitions, was, 
to increaſe the empire of rhime. Foreign. 
words were not admitted as denizens, 
but treated as priſoners ; and without re- 
gard to their noble deſcent, were cloath- 
ed in {laviſh dreſſes, and chained to the 
dar. The mercileſs poets, with a cruelty 
| 33 like 


238 BRITISH Book II. 
like that of Procruſtes, dragged all ſuch 
as were of tall and comely ſtature, to the 
bed of rhime, and lopped them to that 
ſize. Nor did ſuch of the natives as hap» 
pened to reſemble them in thoſe reſpects, 
eſcape one bit better. Whatever diſor- 
ders there might have been in our lan- 
guage before, this was the firſt blow 
which was given to it's conſtitution, and 
the firſt diſeaſe which ſeized upon the vi- 
tals. Moſt words of two ſyllables were 
reduced to one, of three to two, and ſo 
upwards. This too was done by a general 
law, with ſo little regard to ſound, that 
the vowels were of courſe baniſhed, and 
the harſheſt conſonants often huddled to- 
gether. Nor can there be any cauſe aſ- 
figned for this, but that of increafing 
the poet's number of rhimes, For as the 
final ſyllables of our heroick lines in rhime 
muſt be long, or accented, no word end- 
ing in a ſhort or unaccented ſyllable, could 
poſſibly be made uſe of in that reſpect. 
Againſt this the poets found a ſure reme- 
dy, by throwing out the yowels of every 
ſuch ſhort ſyllable, and crowding the 
conſonants into the preceding one. This 

practice 


CHAP. IX. EDUCATION. 279 
practice is humorouſly deſcribed by Dr. 
Swift in one of the Tatlers: Thus we 
| . cram one ſyllable, and cut off the reſt ; 

as the owl fattened her mice after he 
had bit off their legs, to prevent them 
from running away; and if ours be the 
* ſame reaſon for maiming of words, it 
© will certainly anſwer the end, for I am 
* ſure no other nation will defire to bor- 
row them.“ 

An example or two will ſet this matter 
in a clear light, and at the ſame time ſhew 
the ill effects of ſuch practice. The third 
perſon of the preſent tenſe of the Engliſh 
verb, to move, was formerly written 
moveth, of prove, proveth ; but as theſe 
could not be uſed as rhimes, they were 
reduced to one ſyllable, and the termina- 
tion altered to moves, proves; and this 
rule was made general in regard to all 
verbs. In the increaſe of the verbs, to 
drudge, to grudge, it was formerly wrote 
and pronounced drudg-ed, zrudg-ed, as two 
ſyllables, but for the ſame reaſon they 
were reduced to; one, drudg d, grudg'd. 
In the laſt of theſe examples we may ſee 


that there are five conſonants to one vowel. 
T 4 And 


280 BRITISH Boox II. 

And this cuſtom, as Dr. Swift has very 
juſtly obſerved, of joining the moſt ob- 
durate conſonants, without one inter- 
vening vowel, has formed ſuch harſh and 
jarring ſounds as none but a northern 
ear could endure. In the former, by 
changing the old termination of -er, as 
proveth, into , as proves, the uſe of 
that letter has been greatly multiplied. 
This is more immediately obvious in all 
ſuch verbs as originally contain one or 
more 9, as de/igns for defixneth, hiſſes for 
hiſſeth, diſþoſſeſſes for diſpoſſeſſeth. By be- 
ing made alſo the termination of moſt 
nouns ſubſtantive in the plural, inſtead of 
en, with which many of them formerly 
ended ®, and continuing to be the gene- 
ral ſign of the genitive cafe, our language 
has been much hurt as to found, by the 
perpetual repetition of a diſagreeable let- 
ter, with which it before too much a- 
| bounded, as the letter c before the vowels 
e and z had exactly the fame power, and 
pronunciation +. And tho' cuſtom have 
made all this fo familiar to our cars, as 


8 As houſen for houſes, - 
+e. 8 ceaſe, civil, 


to 


CHAP. IX. EDUCATION. 28 
to let it paſs unnoticed by us, yet it is 
immediately perceived by all foreigners, 
who have generally agreed in giving it 
the name of the hiſſing language. 5 
Nor are theſe the only ill conſequences 
of the uſe of rhime; pronunciation has 
been alſo rendered more uncertain by it: 
for tho' at firſt view it might rather ſeem 
to be a guide to that, as it certainly would 
were it always uſed with ſcrupulaus ex- 
actneſs, yet by the latitude which poets 
have allowed themſelves, in order to ren- 
der the taſk of rhime more eaſy, it ferves 
rather to perplex, than aſſiſt people, in 
their enquiries after true pronunciation. 
For theſe gentlemen have not been con- 
tented to admit into the number of good 
rhimes, all ſuch words whoſe final ſyllables 
ſtrike the ear with a ſimilarity 'of ſound, 
but all ſuch as appear to the eye con- 
ſtructed in the ſame manner, tho' their 
ſounds be very different when repeated. 
For inſtance ; the words loves, proves, and 
groves, appear exactly fitnilar to the eye; 


the vowels and two laſt conſonants in all 


being the very ſame; they look as if their 
ſounds too ſhould be alſo exactly alike, and 
| 6 would 


282 BRITISH Boon II. 


would certainly be read ſo by one who 
was not acquainted with the idiom of our 
tongue. And yet theſe three words, 
which are allowed to be good rhimes, 
have very different ſounds to the ear; 
tho' cuſtom has rendered this familiar to 
us, yet the abſurdity of the praQtice will 
be immediately viſible by writing down 
the words as they are pronounced, /uvs, 
prooves, and groves, by which we may 
perceive, that it is only in the laſt word 
the letter o has it's own ſound, in the firſt 
it has the power of a u, and in the ſecond 
of a double o, and conſequently that theſe 
words can no more rhime to each other 
than thoſe that are compoſed of different 
vowels. Nor can there be conceived a 
more ridiculous rule than that which 
makes the eye an arbiter of ſound. But 
the poets were in the right, in order to 
leſſen their own labour, to obtain as great 
a latitude as poſſible for their favourite, 
rhime; and as they were in undoubted 
poſſeſſion of all words of ſimilar ſounds in 
ſpeech, tho ſpelt differently on paper, they 
thought they might with equal propriety 
lay claim to all words that were ſpelt on 
wich * 


Cuae. IX. EDUCATION. 283 


paper as if they ſounded alike, tho' they 
appeared very different when ſpoken. As 
this practice is univerſal even amongſt our 
beſt rhimers, there is no occaſion to ſay 
how much it may puzzle and miſlead 
thoſe, who would aſſiſt themſelves in ac- 
quiring a knowlege of the pronunciation of 
our tongue by reading the poets : not to 
mention the many deviations from the right - 
ſound which may be pointed out in the beſt 
of them, on account of the temptation of 
an apt word. In which ſome have in- 
dulged themſelves fo looſely, as to give 
different pronunciations to the ſame word 
in different places, according as it beſt 
ſerved the preſent turn. The ſame cauſe 
has alſo affected our language not a little 
in regard to the ſenſe, and meaning of 
words, This will be obvious enough to 
any one who has ſtudied our rhimers, and 
ſeen with how little ceremony they have 
made uſe of words which furniſhed them 
with a lucky rhime, tho' at the expencc 

of preciſion. And this may perhaps be 
one of the chief ſources of the very vague 
ſignifications of our words, 


Thus 


284 B RI T IS H Boox II. 

Thus has rhime proved the greateſt 
enemy to our language in all it's eſſential 
as well as ornamental qualities, and in pro- 

tion as the power and influence of that 
increaſed, thoſe of found, harmony, num- 
bers, expreſſion, energy, clearneſs, and 
preciſion, have been diminiſhed. And 
tho' the general opinion be, that the re- 
finement of our language may be dated 
from the time that the refinement com- 
menced in rhime, in the days of Dryden, 
&c. yet this may eafily be ſhewn to be 
originally an error in judgement founded 
on falſe appearances, fince ſtrengthened 
by time, and cuſtom ; and that our lan- 
guage, inſtead of a progreſſive motion to- 
wards perfection, which it has been judg- 
ed to have had by incautious ſpectators, 
has really been deſcribing a circular one, 
and conſtantly, tho impereeptibly, bend- 

ing towards the point of it's original 2 
barity from which it ſet out. 

That our language, in point of ſound, 
has been continually relapſing into it's firſt 
ſtate of barbariſm, ever ſince the innova- 
tions made in it by means of the prevail- 
ing "_ of rhiming, may be ſeen by 

com- 


Cnae. IX. EDUCATION. 285 


comparing it's preſent with it's original 
condition in that reſpect. The great de- 
fects of our tongue, in it's rude primary 
ſtate, were, that it was chiefly compoſed 
of monoſyllables, and thoſe made up. of 
ill choſen conſonants, linked together by 
as few vowels as poſſible. This fault it 
had in common with all other tongues, 
previous to their ſtate of cultivation and 
refinement, but more particularly thoſe 
ſpoken by the northern nations, the rough- 
neſs of whoſe natures and manners ſeem 
to have communicated a harſhneſs to 
their ſpeech. When by conqueſt, com- 
merce, the introduction of literature and 
of the arts and ſciences, our language be- 
came firſt enriched with numbers of words 
borrowed from other tongues, or elſe new 
coined, it was only rendered more copious, 
and fit for uſe, but received little or no 
benefit in point of found or harmony. For 
the new, and adopted words, were obliged 
to conform to the genius of the natives; 
and upon their admiſſion, were ſtripped of 
their ornamental vowels, and many of 
their better ſounding conſonants were 
changed for thoſe of a rougher kind, which 
were 


286 BRITISH Boox II. 
were more in uſe, and familiar to the ear. 
They were all reduced to one, or to as few 
ſyllables as poſſible, by cutting off their 
initial vowels or their terminations. Thus 
out of expendo, was made ſpend, extra- 
neus ſtrange, debitum debt, dubito doubt, 
clericus clerk, and fpiritus ſprigbt. In the 
plural of this laſt word, /prights, it is 
worth obſerving that there are ſeven con- 
ſonants crammed into a ſyllable with only 
one vowel, and that from a word of three 
ſyllables with three vowels. Our firſt 
poets found it impoſſible to produce any 
thing harmonious out of ſuch diſcordant 
materials, and were therefore obliged to 
content themſelves with the ſingle and 
poor ornament of rhime. Thoſe who ſuc- 
ceeded them, endeavoured as much as lay 
in their power to remedy the defects in our 
language, and make it capable of numbers, 
by adding length'to words, and increafing 
the number of wels. This was begun 
by Sir John Gower, and afterwards carried 
to a great height by his diſciple Chaucer. 
Tho' the language had not as yet arrived 
at ſufficient perfection, to admit of diſcard- 
ing rhime entirely, and relying wholly- 
9 | : upon 


Cu Ap. IX, EDUCATION. 287 


upon numbers, yet by keeping rhime in 
it's proper ſubordinae tſtate, it was daily 
tending towards it. For in the days of 
Chaucer, rhime was conſidered in it's true 
light, as the loweſt part of poetry. Neither 
ſound nor meaning were ever ſacrificed to 
it; whenever their intereſts became in- 
compatible, rhime was always obliged to 
give way; it was thought a leſs evil to 


have an indifferent or bad rhime, than to 


maim or perplex the ſenſe or pronuncia- 
tion. No words were contracted, no 
vowels thrown out of ſyllables in order to 
make room for that ; on the contrary, they 


fixed initial, and added final vowels as. 
often as poſſible. The terminating e was 
always ſounded. The verbs in general 
were lengthened, by the addition of erh 
and ed in their variations. But all 
theſe ſteps towards rendering our lan- 
guage completely fit for numbers and 


meaſure, were defeated by ſome who af- 


terwards aroſe, and who have very im- 
properly been called the refiners of our 


tongue, when in fact they have been the 


chief corrupters of it. A few who were 


poſ- 


288 BRITISH Book II. 


poſſeſſed of a happy facility in rhiming, 
by that pleaſing knack, fo levelled to the 
capacities of all people, debauched the 
taſte of the nation, and of courſe gave 
rhime. the firſt place in poetry. This 
uſurper, like all others, exerciſed it's 
power in a tyrannical manner, and the 
whole language was made ſubſervient to 
it's will. Then it was that our vowels were 
again diſcarded according to the old bar- 
| barous rule, and the conſonants huddled 
together. Then it was that the initial 
and terminating ſyllables were lopped, 
and monoſyllables once again multiplied. 
The final e became mute, eth was chang- 
ed into the hiſſing 2, and ed was /tripp'd 
of it's vowel; with numberleſs other 
corruptions, which it would be needleſs 
to repeat. And all this with no other 
view, -but to increaſe the number of 
rhimes. Had they made uſe of this as 
a. poetical licence only in the act of rhim- 
iog, the conſtitution of our language 
could not have been impaired by it. But 
the poets knew too well, that if words 


were written or pronounced differently at 
the 


Car. IX. EDUCATION. 2389 

the end of lines from what they wefe in 
other places, rhime would have but a pre- 
carious tenure, and would ſoon be dif- 
lodged. They therefore abbreviated their 
words in the ſame manner in all parts of 
the verſe; and not contented with this, 
they introduced the ſame cuſtoms inte 
proſe too. Thus the evil has jerettievably 
been ſpread thro the whole ſubſtance as 
well as form of our language. Whoever 
will take the trouble only to caſt his eye 
over a few pages of Chaucer, and compare 
them with thoſe of any modern poet, will 
ſoon diſcover, by the number of apo- 
ſtrophes in the latter, that the proportion 
of vowels to conſonants was infinitely 
greater in his days than at preſent, and that 


conſequently the words of our language 


were better conſtituted at that time to give 
r negate point of found, 
All theſe corruptions of our language 
N will, upon the leaſt reflection, evidently ap- 
pear to have been owing to the neglect of 
the ſtudy of oratory. For had the art of 
ſpeaking been made a neceſſary branch 
of education, (which it certainly ſhould 
have been for * 2 reaſons at 
the 


290 BRITISH Boo II. 


the time of the reformation) our language 
would very ſoon, like the Roman, have 
been fixed upon ſtated invariable rules. 
The care of it in regard to ſound and pro- 
nunciation would then have belonged to 
their natural guardians, the publick ſpeak- 
ers, who were more intereſted in the pro- 
per ſupport of thoſe, as they addreſſed 
their words only to the ear; nor would 
they have ſuffered this province ſto have 
been uſurped by the poets, whoſe works 
are chiefly ſubmitted to the eye. The 
pts muſt in that caſe have taken their 
ſtandard of ſound and pronunciation from 
the orators, who certainly had the beſt 
right to fix it ; whereas, by means of this 
neglect, our ſpeakers. have been obliged 
to follow the poets in all their capricious 
changes of pronunciation, and in the Go- 
thick ſounds again reſtored by them, thro' 
the vile amputation of ſyllables, and-ba- 
niſhment of vowels, in order to bring 
down our words to their baſe ftandard. 
"Had the art of reading and ſpeaking well 
been ſtudied by all who applied themſelves 
to literature, people in general would have 
had ſome rational principles, and ſtated 


rules 


Caae.IX. EDUCATION. 291 
rules to guide them in thoſe points; and 
would therefore never have ſuffered ſuch 
abſurd and pernicious innovations to have 
taken place. But as they had neither 
precept, nor example, they were of courſe 
without either judgement, or taſte; and 
conſequently were admirably fitted to fol- 
low with a blind zeal ſuch writers as 
were moſt pleafing to them, or moſt fa- 
ſhionable. This ' prevailing ignorance, 
and want of taſte, obliged the -poets alſo 
to adapt their meaſure to the capacities of 
their readers. For there can be no doubt, 
had knowlege and a good taſte been more 
general, but that all who were poſſeſſed 
of real genius, would have applied them- 
ſelves to the cultivation of numbers and 
meaſure only, and left rhime to the pre- 
tenders, and thoſe of low capacities. But 
to what purpoſe was it to be at great 
pains and coſt to collect pearls in order to 
throw them before ſwine? Numbers, ca- 
dence, and harmony in meaſure, can no 
more be perceived by perſons who can not 
read with propriety and grace, than the 
charms of a muſical compoſition can be 


known from a view of the notes, hy one 
et hy 2 who 


292 BRITISH Zoox II. 
who is not acquainted with their powers. 
There are few ears indeed ſo dull that 
can not perceive chime ; and this it was 
which made it of ſuch general uſe amongſt 
all who wiſhed to have many readers, 
all who wrote cither with a view to profit, 
or preſent reputation. Let me endeavour 
to ſet this whole matter in a clear light. 
Every one who is acquainted with Latin 
poetry. muſt be convinced, | that it is im- 
poſſible to know any thing of the cadence 


of their verſes, without a knowlege « of pro- 


ſody. For as their various ſorts of metre 


were compoſed of different kinds of feet, 


formed out of different combinations: of 


long and ſhort ſyllables. from which re- 


ſulted the rhythmus, or cadence, it was | 
impoſſible to perceive the one, without 


| knowing the other. But the quantity be- 


ing once determined, and the particular 
movements or feet known ' whereof the 
verſe. was com poſed, whether heroick, 
faphick, alcaick, &c. the: cadence be- 
came immediately perceptible even to the 
dulleſt ear, on account of the ſimplicity 
of their meaſures, which hardly ever ad- 
n more than two movements, or 


od feet, 


Curt. IX. EDUCATION. 293 
feet, in any particular kind. For inftance, 
their heroick meaſure admitted only of 
the dactyl and ſpondee. Thus, as the 
abbè Du Bos has juſtly remarked, The 
< obſerving of the rules of Latin poetry is 
* a neceſſary cauſe of numbers in verſes 
* compoſed according to the rules of this 
poetry. The ſucceſſion of ſhort and 
long ſyllables variouſly mixed purſuant 
to the proportion preſcribed by art, pro- 
*:duces always in Latin ſuch a cadence as 
the kind of verſe requires *. Now if 
we compare our heroick ar en with 
theirs in this reſpect, it will evidently ap- 
pear that it is much more difficult to per- 
ceive the cadence, or rhythmus, of the 
Engliſh, than of the Latin verſe. For if 
what I have before advanced be true, 
which can certainly be proved, that the 
Engliſh heroick meaſure will admit of 
eight movements, inſtead of their two; 
of all the various kinds of feet which were 
uſed in all their different ſorts of meaſure; 
it will neceſſarily follow, that it will re- 
quire rather a more accurate knowlege of 
proſody, and more application and mw 
Leda. 4 er 
| U 3 tice, 


— 


294 B RIT IS H Book II. 

tice, to read or repeat Engliſh verſes with 
propriety and grace, than the Latin. This 
will be ſufficiently illuſtrated by conſider- 
ing how eaſy it is to beat time to any 
ſimple uniform movement that is gene- 
rally known, ſuch as that of a minuet, 
in compariſon of the more complicated, 
and varied concertos. And, to carry on 


the alluſion, it will require no great {kill 


or pains to learn to play or ſing tunes 
whoſe equal and ſimilar parts form an 
eaſy modulation, but to play or ſing at 
ſight thoſe whoſe harmony is the reſult 


of diverſity and inequality in their mem- 


bers, will demand a complete knowlege 
of the art, as well as much practice. 
When therefore we reflect, that notwith- 
ſtanding the great eaſe and certainty with 
which the art of reading and repeating 
their poems might be acquired, the Ro- 
mans took uncommon pains to arrive at 
the utmoſt accuracy in that reſpect ; that 
to the knowlege of the rules, conſtant - 
practice was added; that they had perſons 


regularly trained to be able to perform it 
with exactneſs and grace, as much as our 


fingers now are in muſick ; and that the 
re- 


Cray. IX. EDUCATION. 295 
' reciting fine paſſages out of Virgil, and 


their other excellent poets, was a chief 


part of their entertainment, in the ſame 
manner as the ſinging ſele& airs of Han- 
del, or playing favourite ſolos of Gemini- 
ani, are with us; we need no longer won- 
der that ſkill and good taſte in point of 
numbers ſo generally prevailed amongſt 
them. And for reaſons quite contrary, 
we can not be at a loſs to know the cauſe 
of the total ignorance, and univerſal bad 
taſte, in that reſpect, amongſt us. We 
neither know any thing of proſody, nor 
have any rules as yet ſettled in regard to 
it. The quantity of our ſyllables is till 
vague, and undetermined. There are no 
perſons trained to the art of reading well, 
nor have we ever an opportunity of hearing 
any of our poems ſkilfully and gracefully 
recited, All this will appear the more 
extraordinary, when it is conſidered how 
much more neceſſary ſuch attention and 
pains are to us, than they were to them, 
For, as it has been before obſerved, a 
knowlege of quantity alone, which muſt 
have been habitually acquired in a country 
where the ſpeech was fo regulated, and 

[0] + EX _ 


296 BRITISH. Boes ll. 


exactly ſpoken, (and indeed, as Cicero has 
informed us, was poſſeſſed by the meaneſt 
of the people) was ſufficient to make them 
perceive the cadence of their ſeveral mea« 
ſures, and to repeat them with propriety, 
tho' not with grace, But there are more 
ingredients go to the compoſition of Eng- 
liſh numbers, which as often depend upon 
the ſenſe and meaning of the words, as 
upon the ſound and quantity of their ſyl- 
lables. Accent and emphaſis are not here 
always confined to their diſtin provinces, 
inaſmuch as accent often determines the 
ſenſe, and emphaſis the ſound of words, 
Quantity wich us is not always aſcertained 
by the mere value of ſyllables conſidered 
as fimple ſounds, fince it is in the power 
of emphaſis to alter their quality, and to 
change a ſyllable, ſhort in it's own nature, 
into a long one. So that no one can pre- 
tend to read harmoniouſly, who can not 
alſo read ſenſibly. This was otherwiſe 
"amongſt the Romans; for the quantity of 
ſyllables being immutably fixed, a certain 
proportion of the long and ſhort; ranged 
according to ſtated rules, were a neceſſary 
cauſe * numbers in their verſes, Re 
| they 


CRP. IX. EDUCATION. 297 
they were read ſenſibly or not. It is true, 
that this has greatly increaſed the diffi 
culty of reading our poetical compoſitions 
with harmony and propriety ; nor can it 
indeed, on that account, be well done, 
without firſt ſtudying them; yet the ex- 
traordinary labour would be well reward. 
ed, by the additional expreſſion, energy, 


and variety, which this very circomſtance 
has given to our numbers. 


When therefore it is conſidered, that 
in order to perceive the harmony, as well 
as force, of Engliſh numbers, a perſon 

muſt not only know how to give the 
proper accent to each word, and the exact. 
degree of length and ſhortneſs to each 
ſyllable, but he muſt likewiſe be always 
able to lay the emphaſis right, and in it's 
due proportion, as any variation in that, 
will make a change alſo in the metre ; it 
muſt be evident that this ſkill can be ob- 
tained only by a complete-knowlege of 
the art of reading, and ſpeaking with pro- 
priety : and this art, which perhaps is 
more difficult than any other, can only be 
acquired as the reſt ace, by ſtudy, precept, 

and example, Since therefore the people 
; of 


298 BRITISH - Book II. 
of this country have never applied them- 
ſelves to the ſtudy of this art, nor have 
ever been furniſhed with precepts or ex- 
amples, it muſt neceſſarily follow, that 
a general ignorance in that reſpect has al- 
ways prevailed here. The conſequence. 
of which general ignorance was, that the 
poets were of courſe obliged to bring down 
their verſes to the capacity of their read- 
ers, and to write only in.ſuch meaſures as 
might be moſt obvious, and in ſuch num- 
bers as might be moſt eaſily diſtinguiſhed 
by an uncultivated ear. Hence it came 
to paſs, that rhime, which could be uni- 
verſally perceived by all readers, became 
univerſally uſed by the poets; and our 
heroick meaſure, which was capable of 
an almoſt endleſs variety, was in general 
reduced to one uniform Iambick move- 
ment, which of all others is the moſt 
eaſily perceived, as it requires only a reſt 
of the voice on every ſecond ſyllable. To 
| ſhew this neceſſity brought upon our poets 
in it's true light, it will be proper to take 
notice that their works were never pub- 
lickly recited, as thoſe of the Romans 
were, amongſt whom ſkilful readers train- 

| 6 \ ed 


Cnae. IX. EDUCATION, 299 
ed to the purpoſe, could ſet off the variety 
of their numbers, by fuitably varied tones; 
but were only to be privately read by each 
individual,. utterly unſtudied, and un- 
ſkilled in that art. It was impoſſible that 
ſuch readers could perceive the harmony 
of numbers reſulting from the various 
combinations of different feet, the they 
might eaſily enough become maſters of a 
ſimple modulation made by a ſucceſſive 
repetition of one regular movement. As 
the Iambick foot is by far the moſt pleaſ- 
ing of thoſe whereof a verſe can be form- 
ed without the admiſſion of any other, and 
as it is the only one which in the Engliſh 
heroick could anſwer that end, it of courſe 
came to be moſt generally uſed. By this 
general uſe, the hearer became ſo habitu- 
ated to the ſound, that it was made the 
common ſtandard of meaſurement, and 
the admiſſion of any other feet into the 
verſe, would found like diſcord to ears 
formed to that particular cadence. Thus 
the ignorance of readers gave bounds to 
the {kill of the poet, as the ſkill of the 
poet could not be perceived by, and con- 
ſequently could have no influence over, 

| | the 


2000 BRITISH: - Boox II. 
the ignorance of readers. All that was 
left to the writers in this caſe, was to take 
advantage of this general want of know- 
lege, and turn it to their own account, by 
making it the means of leſſening their own 
Jabour, and bf giving pleaſure with as lit- 
tle expence of time and pains as poſſible. 
And theſe ends were effectually anſwered. 
by conforming to the prevailing bad taſte. 
For, as it was before obſerved, there can 
be no doubt but that it is infinitely leſs 
difficult torhime completely, thanto eom- 
poſe numerous and harmonious' verſes. 
To which it may be added, that it will 
require much leſs labour to proceed in one 
regular uniform movement, which is ren- 
deted eaſy by a little practice, than to be 
perpetually employed in finding out and 
chuſing ſuch combinations of various feet 
as will produce the fineſt harmony, and 
give the greateſt force of expreſſion, to 
each particular thought. | 
Here it may be ſaid, that the poets 

conforming to theſe rules, muſt be defeat- 
ed in their end of giving pleaſure, as ſuch 
a vicious uniformity of cadence, and ſuch 
A n jingle at the end of each dif- | 
; tich, 


Car. IX. EDUCATION. 301 


tich, muſt in any long work occaſion ſa- 
tiety and diſguſt to the ear. But againſt 
this the writers had a twofold barrier. 
For in the firſt place, their compoſitions 
being read only in the cloſet, are hardly 
ever pronounced aloud, and the eye can 
not be at all affected by looking over 2 
perpetual ſucceſſion of the Game ſort of 
movements, tho the ear would be hurt 
by hearing them ſounded. And one thing 
has contrihuted to occaſion a. general de- 
lußon in this reſpect, which is, * moſt 
readers ſelect a few ſhining paſſages out of 
a; favourite author, which they get by 
heart, and repeat aloud; and theſe being 
compoſed of feet which form a very agree- 
able cadence, as well as ſuch a one as is 
pronounced with eaſe, will for ſo much 
give great: delight and ſatisfaction. And 
the reader is apt to form a judgement of 
the Whole poem by theſe, ſpecimens. 
Whereas were the whole to be recited, 
he would ſoon be convinced how much 
he had erred. He would then feel, that 
nothing can be ſo diſagrecable to the ear 
as a conſtant uniformity of cadence, and 
the more ſmooth and flowing the num⸗- 
$540 bers 


7 


4 at ge” 


LL GST AY 2 — — — ge" * * ** * n 
8 2 n a1 ” 6 — —— — 
RT nx: = WEE; F 9 * oy RR: N OS — 
e we Fn * 
v Sir ras 


Fa i — 
* n 


4 

7 

* 
«a 
2 „ 
2 
"oY 
WE 
E 
"I 
* U 
1 
Fs 
& {3 
1 
"i 9 
; A 

* 

* 


3602 BRIT IS H Book If. 
bers are, the more likely are they to occa« 
_ fion diſguſt, by any long ſucceſſive repe - 
tition. Sweetneſs of ſound being in this 
reſpe& to the ear, what that of taſte is to 
the palate *. If the admirers even of Pope 
want to be convinced of this truth by ex- 
perience, far more prevailing than argu- 
ments, let them only allot two. or three 
hours of a morning to the reading aloud 
ſuch of his pieces as are in the higheſt re- 
putation for numbers, and their taſte muſt 
be much corrupted indeed, if they do not 
find great wearineſs and fatiety, before 
half the time be paſſed. Thus the defects 
in their meaſure became ſecure of diſco- 
very, by being generally ſubmitted to a 
ſenſe which could not judge of it; and 
rhime was eſtabliſhed by the ſtrong power 
of cuſtom, which has made it be conſi- 
dered as an eſſential and ſhining ornament 
of our poetry. So that whilſt there are 
more readers who can perceive the ca- 


F This point can not be more clearly proved than by 
eonſidering, that even in muſick, a continued and unvari 

ſtrain of modulation will occaſion ſatiety, and grow irk- 
ſome to the ear, and that it is only by a judicious mixture 
of diſcords with concords that an agreeable harmony can 
Ih dence 


Cup. IX. EDUCATION. 303 
dence of a ſimple modulation, and the 
jingle of ſimilar ſounds, than can diſtin- 
guiſh the harmony reſulting from the va- 
ried combinations of different movements, 
ſuch as have built their poems on the 
former rules, will never want a ſufficient 
number of admirers. _ 

But in order to make a more ſecure 
barrier to their ill- founded eſtabliſhment, 
leſt people ſhould open their eyes, and 
ſee their error, the poets have contrived to 
miſlead their judgement, by laying down 
a falſe rule, which muſt for ever keep 
them at a diſtance from all knowlege of 
numbers: that is, that an Engliſh heroick 
verſe is compoſed of ten ſemipeds, or ſyl- 
lables. A rule fo contrary to common 
ſenſe, to experience, and which has been 
productive of ſuch miſchief to our lan- 
| Zuage by multiplying unneceſſary abbre- 
viations, that it is wonderful how it ever 
obtained. To talk of meaſure made up 
of ſemipeds, is like talking of tunes com- 
poſed out of half tones. If the rule be 
juſt that ten ſyllables will make a verſe, 
ten ſhort ones will anſwer the end as well 
as ten long. Now as a long {yllable takes 


? 


4 $07 dou» 


__ 


- wo 


eee ee ů — — — — ee de edt, dat at 


— 
—— «een > AB 


340 BRITISH Boon Il. 
double the time of pronouncing that a 


ſhort one does, it will follow, that one line 
may be of double the length to the ear that 
another is ;, and what a ſtrange inequality 
as well as irregularity, when we come to 
conſider in what various proportions this 
may be uſed, muſt not this introduce into 
our meaſure ? Indeed this rule is founded 
upon a principle, neither more nor leſs 
abſurd, than making the eye ſole arbiter 
of ſound : that is, becauſe ſyllables of 
written words may appear to the eye to be 


of equal length, the car muſt receive the 


law from that, and be compelled to ad- 
mit them to be fo, contrary to it's im- 
mediate conviction, when they are ſound- 


ed.: But as the works of our poets were 


chiefly to be ſubmitted to the eye, they 


. were in the right to increaſe the authority 


and power of that organ as much as poſſi- 
ble; and by this means they were able at 
leaſt to eſtabliſh a certain rule to all readers, 
however erronegus- it might be; for the 


eye can not be miſtaken in the number 
of ſyllables, the an ill informed ear might 


be in their length or ſhortneſs. By eſta» 
bliſhing this judicial youer in the eye, 


_ 


* * 
„* 8 


— 


CAP. IX. EDUCATION. 305 
they alſo gained a vaſt acquiſition to the 
number of rhimes, ſince all compounded 
of ſimilar letters paſſed muſter before ſo 
incompetent a judge, which the ſkilful 
ear would have rejected on account of the 
diſſimilitude of found. Yet with what- 
ever induſtry this rule was propagated 
amongſt the readers, the writers were too 
wiſe to follow it in their compoſitions. 
They knew it was incapable of producing 
either harmony, cadence, or meaſure. 
The only uſe therefore of this falſe light 
was to guide people wrong, that they 
might not pry too curiouſly into their num- 
bers, which would not bear a cloſe in- 
ſpection. 

The abbè du Bos has treated of this 
matter with great accuracy, in a compari- 
ſon which he has drawn between the 
French and Latin poetry. I ſhall ſelect 
a few paſſages from him, which will ſerve 
to illuſtrate the ſubject, and at the ſame 
time by affording us a comparative view 

of the French meaſure with ours, will 
ſhew what a vaſt ſuperiority we are ca- 
pable of having over them in that reſpect. 
After having made it clear, that the obſer- 
Wells © vation 


— 


- — — — , e X 


. * — " s — 
—ę—O)ᷣ̃— ͤ ——̃ —— — — ̃ — — —— — — — 4 


— —_— —_— 


306 BRITISH Boox II. 
vation of the rules of Latin poetry was a 
neceſſary cauſe of numbers and meaſure, 


. 


« 
* 
* 
6 
6 
6 
6 
* 
4 
6 
o 
64 
c 


AS M0; $5.2 


he adds, Now it is ſaying a vaſt deal 1 in 


praiſe of the rules of Latin poetry, to 
maintain that they execute one half and 
more of the work ; and that the poet's 


ear is charged only with one point, that 
is, with minding to render the verſes 


melodious, by a happy mixture of the 
ſound of the ſyllables whereof they are 


| compoſed. I ſhall endeavour now to 


prove, that the obſerving of the rules of 
French poetry, is productive of neither 
of thoſe effects; that is, that French 
verſes exactly conformable to thoſe rules, 
may be deſtitute of numbers and hermo- 
ny in the pronunciation. 
The rules of French poetry deter- 
mine only the arithmetical number of 
ſyllables, whereof the verſes are to con- 
ſiſt. They decide nothing with regard 
to the quantity that is in poetry, with 
reſpect to the length and brevity of thoſe 
ſyllables, But as the ſyllables in French 
words are ſometimes long and ſometimes 
ſhort in the pronunciation, there are ſe- 
veral inconveniencies ariſing from the 
ſilence 


Chap, IX. EDUCATION. 397 


* filence of our rules with reſpec to their 


combination. In the firſt place it hap- 
pens, that ſeyeral French verſes, which 
have nothing to be reproached with in 
point of rules, contain nevertheleſs too 
long a ſucceſſion of ſhorter or longer ſyl- 
lables. Now the too great length of 
this ſucceſſion obſtructs the numbers in 
the pronunciation of the verſes. 

The rhythmus or cadence of a verſe, 
conſiſts in the alternative of long and 
ſhort ſyllables varied according to a par- 
ticular proportion. Too great a number 
of long ſyllables ranged ſucceſſively one 
after another, retards the progreſſion of 
the verſe in the pronunciation. Too 
great a number of ſhort ſyllables ſuc- 
ceeding one another immediately, ten- 
ders it diſagreeably precipitant. 

* Secondly, it falls out frequently, that 
when we have a mind to examine two 
Alexandrine French verſes connected 
together by the ſame rhime, with re- 
gard to the time in pronouncing each 


verſe, we find an enormous difference. 


between the length of theſe verſes, tho” 
they are both compoſed according to 


X 2 the 


— 


- —— 4 oF 
— _ Cob hls. tx ns & 
S ne Cs * Ca? 5 EI, = 4 * hs rd " $5 
> my wa . 4 — > 7s > 2 
35 N 2 7 — - 34 — eee ba 
* * 


— nent 9 ooo ome Ava. 
D 


33 


4 
18 
1 
+0 

Ld 


08 B R IT IS H Book II. 
the rules. Let ten ſyllables out of twelve, 
which compoſe a maſculine verſe, be 
long; and let ten ſyllables of the follow- 
ing verſe be ſhort; theſe verſes, which 
will appear equal on paper, will be of 
a ſurpriſing inequality in the pronunci- 
ation. Wherefore theſe verſes, not- 
withſtanding their being allied to one 
another, and anſwering by one com- 
mon rhime, will loſe nevertheleſs all the 
cadence which might ariſe from the 
equality of their meaſure. Now tis not 
the eye, but the ear, which judges of 
the cadence of verſes. 

This inconvenience does not, as Ihave 
already obſerved, attend ſuch as write 
Latin verſes, by reaſon that therules pre- 
vent it. The arithmetical number of 
ſyllables which conſtitutes each kind of 
Latin verſe, is determined with regard 
to the length or brevity of theſe ſyl- 
lables. Theſe rules, which were made 
from obſerving the ſuitable proportion 
in each kind of verſe between the arith- 
metical number, and the quantity of 
ſyllables, decide in the firſt place, that 
in the particular foct of a verſe we ought 

2 6 | to 


| 
| 
[ 


S. 4, 4 SDS 4 S,% ©: ©: $a; Seen? 


» * * * * * * * * * & «x8 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


Cuay, IX. EDUCATION. 309 


to put ſyllables of a certain quantity. 
Secondly, when theſe rules leave the 
poet at liberty to employ long or ſhort 
ſyllables in a particular part of the verſe, 
they direct him, in caſe he chuſes to 
uſe long ſyllables, to employ then a' 
leſſer number of ſyllables. If the poet 
determines in fayour of ſhort ſyllables, 
he is ordered by the rules to uſe a greater 
number. Now as the pronouncing of a 
long ſyllable continues double the ſpace 
of time that a ſhort one does, all the La- 
tin hexameters are conſequently of the 
ſame length in the pronunciation, tho” 
ſome contain a greater number of ſyl- 
lables than others. The quantity of 
ſyllables is always compenſated by their 
arithmetical number. 
Hence the Latin hexameters are al- 
ways equal in the pronunciation, not 
withſtanding the variety of their pro- 
greſſion; whereas our Alexandrine verſes 
are frequently unequal, tho' they have 
almoſt conſtantly an uniformity of pro- 
greſſion. Hence ſome criticks have been 
ol opinion, that it was almoſt impoſſible 
to write a French epick poem of ten 
1 thou- 


By 


SAS SS SDL EW 


oy VVV 
W. 
—_ 


Oo 


B RIT IS H Boon II. 
thouſand verſes with any ſucceſs. True 
it is, that this uniformity of the rhyth- 
mus has not obſtructed the ſucceſs of 
our dramatick poems in France and fo- 
reign countries ; but thoſe poems which 
do not exceed two thouſand verſes have 
ſufficient excellencies to ſuſtain them, 
notwithſtanding the ſatiety of the like- 
neſs of their rage; Beſides, it 1s leſs 
obſerved on the ſtage, where theſe ſorts 
of pieces appear with greateſt luſtre, by 
reaſon that the actors, before they fetch 
their breath, run one verſe into another, 
or elſe fetch it before they have finiſhed 
the verſe, to prevent our being ſo ſen- 
fible of the vitious uniformity of it's 
cadence. 

What has been here ſaid with reſpect 
to hexameters, may be equally applied 


to any other kind of verſe. Thoſe which 
run precipitately by reaſon of their be- 


ing compoſed of ſhort ſyllables, laſt 
therefore as long as ſuch as go a very flow 
pace, becauſe of their being compoſed 


of long ſyllables. For example, Virgil 


uſes ſhort ſyllables as much as the rules 
of metre permitted him in that verſe, in 
| * which 


Cup. IX. EDUCATION. 311 
-* which he draws ſo complete a picture 
of a courſer in full gallop, that the very 
* ſound of the verſe makes us imagine we 
© hear the noiſe of his motion. 
0 en putrem ſonitu quatit un- 
gula campum. 
* This verſe contains ſeventeen ſyllables, 
but it does not continue longer in the 
* ptonuntiation than the following verſe 
of thirteen, in which Virgil deſcribes the 
* Cyclops at work, and lifting up their 
arms to ſtrike the hammets on the an- 
vil, an effect which is well repreſented 
in the cadence of the verſe. 
Olli inter ſeſe multa vi brathia tollunt. 
* Thus the cadence of verſe is not at 
all interrupted by uſing a greater num- 
ber of ſhort or long ſyllables, in order 
to give a better deſcription of the object. 
From what is here ſaid it is evident, 
that the rules of French poetry neither 
produced equality of meaſure, nor variety 
of numbers, which are the only ſources 
of harmony in verſe. The writers there- 
fore endeavoured to conceal the want of 
equality in meaſure, by an uniformity of 
cadence, and to compenſate for the want 
| X 4 of 


a 0 


K 


: * 


312 nnr Book. II. 


of variety of numbers, by rhime. How 
poor a ſuccedaneum theſe were, muſt be 
known to every reader of taſte. The in- 
genuous criticks of France, far from.boaſt- 
ing of their poetry, have acknowleged it's 
defects, and lamented the poverty of their 
language, which would admit of no other 
ornaments than what were prejudicial to 
it in it's moſt eſſential points. This is 
ſtrongly ſet forth by Du Bos, where he 
conſiders the difficulties brought upon a 
French poet by being under the double 
reſtraint, of following the natural order 
of words, and of rhiming. As to the firſt, 
he obſerves, * That a Latin writer may 
© eaſily avoid any diſagreeable colliſion of 
«© ſounds by the help of tranſpoſition ; 
© whereas it is very rare that one can get 
rid of this difficulty in French by means 
of ſuch an expedient. There is very 
© ſeldom any other reſource left but that 
of altering the word which interrupts 
* the harmony of the phraſe, or elſe to 
© make the latter fall a victim to the for- 
mer. Nothing is more difficult than to 
preſerve the reſpective rights of ſenſe 


6 and harmony, when we write in Frepeh; 
ſo 


Cuar. Ix. EDUCATION. 313 
ſo great is the claſhing of their ſeveral 


« intereſts,” 


In another place 3 he conſiders the 


effect of this reſtraint, added to that of 


rhime, he ſays, That rhime alone be- 


{a5 


* 


comes, thro' the ſubjection of the French 


phraſe to the natural order of words, 
as checking a reſtraint for an ingenious 
poet, as all the rules of Latin poetry. 
In effect, we ſeldom obſerve, even in 


the moſt indifferent Latin poets, thoſe 


idle epithets that are employed as mere 
expletives to fill up the verſe ; but what 
numbers of them do not we meet with, 


even in our beſt poems, introduced by 


the ſole neceſſity of rhiming ? Without 
enlarging any farther on this article of 


the difficulty of rhiming, the reader 


will give me leave to refer him to Boi- 


leau's epiſtle to Lewis the fourteenth on 
the paſſage of the Rhine; as alſo to the 
epiſtle written by the ſame poet to Mo- 


liere. There he will ſee better than I 
can tell him, that if rhime be a ſlave 
whoſe duty it is to obey, yet it coſts a 
great deal to reduce this ſlave to a Ppror 


25 ſtate of ſubjection? 
Rol- 


414" BRITISH Box II. 


Rollin has treated of this matter on] 


ſuperficially, and has not, like Du Bos, 


dived to the bottom. Nor has he con- 


ſidered it with the ſame candour, and im- 
partiality, but has ſhewn evident marks 
of prepoſſeſſion in favour of the F rench 
tongue. He ſays, +* The different taſtes 


ES . , . as. © 


6 
c 


t Belles Let. vol. i. b. ii. ch. 2. 


of different nations in point of verſifica- 
tion, has ſomething in it very ſurpriſing. 
What in one language is extremely 
agreeable, in another is infipid, and the 


mark of a bad taſte ; rhimes for inſtance, 


which have ſo good an effect in modern 
poetry, and ſtrike fo agreeably upon the 
ear in French, Italian, Spaniſh,. and 
High-Dutch, are ſhocking in Greek and 
Latin; and in like manner the meaſure 


of the Greek and Latin verſes, which de- 


pend upon the quantity of ſyllables, 
would have no grace in our modern 
poetry. 

* There is one thing in this diverſity of 
taſte, which very much puzzles me, 
and that is, why rhimes, which pleaſe 
ſo much in one language, ſhould be fo 
«© ſhocking in another. Can this difference 


4. «© ariſe 


Cray. IX. EDUCATION. 3135 
« ariſe from habit and cuſtom, or is it de- 
* rived from the nature of languages ? 
© The French poetry (and the ſame 
* may be ſaid of all the modern langtiages) 
* abſolutely wants the delicate and har- 
monious variety of feet, which gives 
numbers, ſmoothneſs, and grace, the 
Greek and Latin verfification, and is 
forced to be content with the uniform 
joining together of a certain number of 
_ © ſyllables of equal meaſure in the com mew” 
ſition of it's verſes. To artive therefore 
at it's proper end, which is pleafing the 
ear, it is under a neceſſity of ſeeking out 
for other graces and charms, and ſup- 
plying what is wanting, by the exact- 


neſs, cadence, and plenty of rhimes, 


a 2% 


the French verſification.” 
Yet tho' he has allowed ſo much in this 


place, in another, where he has more par- 


ticularly enumerated the great advantages 
which the Greek and Roman languages 
have over the French in other reſpects, 
he concludes with this extraordinary queſ- 
tion, * And yet notwithſtanding all theſe 
* ſeeming impediments, can it be per- 

* ceived 


which make up the principal beauty of 


! 


a - > 


-7 


_T 
__ = 


n * 


W. Ws, a a. 
8 Ane s 
— r 


" 8 oe C .* N 2 


= 
x. 
443 
X \ oh 
* 
* 
al 
* 

- * 
15 1 
== 
: * 
1 

F- 


316 B RIT IS H Book II. 
ceived from the writings of good authors, 
© that our language is in any wiſe defec- 
© tive, either as to copiouſnels, variety, 
© harmony, or any other grace? A queſ- 
tion which carries with it ſuch an appa- 
rent ſtamp of prejudice, that it is aſtoniſh- 
ing how it could have dropped from the 
pen of a writer, 1n general remarkable for 
accuracy and penetration. The abſurdity 
of ſuch a method of ſettling the point can 
not be ſhewn in a clearer light, than by 
ſuppoling the ſame queſtion put to a 
Dutchman, Swede, Norwegian, Ruſſian, 
or the native of any country where the lan- 
guage is in the moſt uncultivated ſtate ; 
and it will undoubtedly be decided by 
each of them in favour of their own, from 
a natural affection to their mother tongue. 
Nor is this prejudice peculiar to barbarians 
only, or the offspring of ignorance, for we 
find even amongſt the poliſhed. Gręeks, 
that tho' the Attick idiom was allowed to 
be the pureſt of all others, yet. the other 
ſtates of Greece tenaciouſly adhered to 
their reſpective dialects, from the inſupe- 
rable force of early impreſſions and habit. 


But 


Cray. IX. EDUCATION. 317 


But whatever neceſſity the French and 
other modern tongues may be under to 
make uſe of rhime, and the imperfe& 
rule of meaſure which they have em- 
ployed, the Engliſh alone, from the very 

genius and conſtitution of the language, 
need not ſubmit to thoſe reſtraints. On 
the contrary, from whatever lucky con- 
currence of circumſtances it hath hap- 
peeed, it may be proved to be ſuperior in 
it's qualities not only to all the modern, 
but upon the whole to the admired lan- 
guages of antiquity. Whether it be, that 
as in the well-known ſtory of the paint- 
er's ſpunge, the accidental blending of 
the different colours produced a more na- 
tural foam on the horſe, than the utmoſt 
ſkill of the pencil could have drawn, ſo 
the variety of tongves out of which ours 
has been compoſed, has caſually formed 
one more perfect in it's nature than the 
utmoſt labour or art of men could. have 
contrived ; or from whatever other cauſe 
it may proceed, the fact is certainly ſo, 
that we are poſſeſſed of one more capable 
of anſwering all the purpoſes of ſpeech, 
whether of uſe or ornament, than any 
EL | that 


*C 


338 BRITISH Boo II. 


that has hitherto exiſted upon earth. 

The very reaſons aſſigned by the French 
writers why their language was incapable 
of meaſure or numbers, ſhew that ours is 
capable of both. The chief of which are 
given by Rollin,: when in ſpeaking of the 
Romans, he ſays, * They had a thouſand 
* delicacies in their delivery, which we 
are ſtrangers to. They diſtinguiſhed the 
accent from quantity, and knew very 
* well how to raiſe a ſyllable, without 
making it long, which we are not accuſ- 

* tomed to obſerve. They had even ſe- 
* veral ſorts of long and ſhort vowels, and 
« expreſicd the difference.” Whoever can 
read Engliſh with propriety will ſee, that 
this is the very caſe of our language, tho' 
theſe beauties are loſt to a vitiated ear. 
This diſtinction between accent and quan- 
tity, which Capella calls the very ſoul of 
ſounds, and the foundation of harmony, 
animam vocum & muſices ſeminarium, may 
be conſtantly perceived in a juſt and cor- 
rect pronunciation. We too can raiſe a 
ſyllable without adding to it's length. 
And as to the long and ſhort vowels, we 


have as copious a uſe of them as ever the 
Ro- 


Cray. IX. EDUCATION. 319 


Romans had, and much more ſo, as well 
as more eaſily to be diſtinguiſhed now, as 
Latin is pronounced. Every vowel with 
us is ſometimes long, and ſometimes ſhort, 
and their different quantities are marked 
by different pronunciations, which is not 
the caſe of the Latin at preſent, as we can 
not know the different ſounds given to 
them by the antients, according to their 
quantity, in their ſpeech. We have the 
uſe of the ceſura too in as great a latitude 


as they, ſince it may be at the end of any 


fyllable of an Engliſh verſe, the laſt of 
courſe excepted. Whereas the ceſura of 
the French is ever in the middle of the 
verſe, which cauſes a perpetual ſameneſs 


of cadence. So that we are not only poſ- 
ſeſſed of all the fame ſources of harmony 
with the antients, but we have one ſuper- 


added, which is the cauſe of a greater va- 
riety, and more forcible expreſſion in num- 
bers than all the reſt ; that is, the unlimit- 


ed power given to the emphaſis over quan- 


tity, and cadence, by means whereof a 
neceſſary union between ſound and ſenſe, 
numbers and meaning in verſification, un- 
known to the antients, has been brought 


about. 


” 


2 4 
ws 


D 
IF ox oy IN} Sons 


2 W r 3 2 — —— 
r a ons 


TP 
— 


a> -3 * 
— 2 
r 


320 BRITISH Book II. 
about. From all theſe, together with the 
very ſtructure of our language, a particu- 
lar fort of meaſure has refulted, capable 
of ſuch a variety of movements, that it can 
alone ſupply the place of moſt of the dif- 
ferent ſorts uſed by the antients in their 
different ſtyles of poetry. The Engliſh 
blank verſe is equally well ſuited to the 
heroick, tragick, comick, paſtoral, elegi- 
ack, and didactick ſtyles of poetry. Nor 
is this aſſertion founded on theory only 
and ſpeculation, but warranted by practice, 
and confirmed by proofs. The Paradiſe 
Loſt ſufficiently ſhews it's fitneſs for he- 
roick poetry. In the works of Shake- 
ſpear we may eaſily diſcover, that it is 
the moſt proper metre for tragedy ever 
yet made uſe of: if the rule be well 
founded (as it undoubtedly is) that the beſt 


meaſure for tragick compoſitions is that 


wherein leaſt art appears, and which ap- 
proaches neareſt to diſcourſe. The fame 
alſo may be ſeen in ſome of his come- 
dies, of the more grave and Þ elevated 


kind, as the Tempeſt, Meaſure for Mea- 


ſure, &c. In ſome of our Engliſh paſ- 


- + Interdum tamen & tollit comwmdia vocem, Hor. 


CnAP. IX. EDUCATION. 327 
torals, notwithſtanding it is robbed of it's 


ſimplicity by rhime, we may ſee how ad- 


mirably well it would ſuit the nature of 
that ſort of poetry, were it in the hands 
of a real genius, Who was above wearing 
ſo improper an ornament. Milton's Ly- 


cidas affords an example of it's elegiack 


powers; and the Cyder of Philips, of it's 
didactic. It may be ſaid, that the heroick 
meaſure of the antients was alſo uſed in 
their paſtoral and didactic poetry, as in the 
eclogues and georgicks of Virgil. But in 
regard to the former, every reader of taſte 


mulſt ſee how ill ſuited it was to the ſub- 


ject, and how little the majeſty of the lines 


agreed with the meanneſs of the charac- 
ters. The numbers ſeem rather to be the 


compoſition of ſome poet in an Arcadian 
court, than the natural and uncultivated 


ſtrains of ſimple ruſticks. And in regard. 


to the latter, whoever will compare the 
didactic part of the georgicks only, omit- 
ting the captivating epiſodes, with the 
poem on cyder by Philips, will ſoon be 
convinced of the advantage which the 


Engliſh poet had over the Roman in point 


of the aptitude of his meaſure, to his mat- 
* . 


— — 


— — x — <> 


— —— 2 -- 2 


X o 1 * 
5 — dare 2— 6 * — \ * - — 
3 3 
E P'S, 4 fy tor FOES $I we ns ru enter: — 99h hpi AFG mere — . 7 ya a: : 
IE «PTY IE l >», 1 4 Fo C b N — c 2 1 * 5 q rp THEE - 
ng EN va > 2 * 8 7 us wa 8 * eee ane 44 3 * n N 


8 
8 
— rr 


r 


322 B KP I 8 HH Book II. | 
ter. Horace has uſed it too in his ſatyrs 
and epiſtles; but in order to make his 
verſes, as he himſelf expreſſes it, ſermoni 
propiora, he in fact only uſed the feet of 
heroick meaſure, but had little regard to 
the numbers or cadence, on which account 
they often offend the ear. Whereas no- 
thing is lefs difficult than to preſerve a 
proper degree of cafe and familiarity in 
writings of that ſort, by means of Engliſh 
blank verſe, without ever offending againſt 
the rules of harmony: Add to all thefe 
it's uſe in a new vein of poetry, and per- 
haps not one of the moſt unpleafant kind, 
whereof no traces remain in the writings 
of antiquity, the grave burleſque, as in the 
Splendid ſhilling of Philips. This great 
variety of poetick ſtyles which it is capa- 
ble of ſupplying, is a ſufficient confirma- 
tion of what I have advanced before in 
regard to our blank verſe, that it may be 
compoſed of almoſt all the various feet 
uſed in all the various kinds of Latin poe- 
try, ſince nothing elſe could make it equ- 
ally adapted to fo many different ſpecies 
of it, in which the Romans were obliged 
to make uſe of different meaſures, or to 
uſe 


Cray. IX. EDUCATION. 323 
uſe the heroick very improperly in ſome 
of them. If therefore the proportion of 
movements, or feet, which our heroick 
meaſure admits, be to theirs as eight to 
two, it neceſſarily follows that we have an 
infinite advantage over them in point of 
variety and expreſſion ; and conſequently, 


that ours in all works of length muſt be 


much more pleaſing. It is therefore bet- 
ter adapted to the two nobleſt of all hu- 
man compoſitions, the epick poem, and 
tragedy. 

If it be ſaid, that ſuppoſing we have 
this advantage over them in point of va- 
riety of numbers, yet their language muſt 
ever have a ſuperiority over ours with re- 
gard to ſound, from the happy conftruc= 
tion of their words: that this muſt evi- 
dently a appear by comparing both with the 
infallible rule laid down by Quinctilian, 
Ut fyllabee e litteris melins ſonantibus clari- 


ores ſunt, ita verba e ſyllabis magis vacalia; 
& quo plus gueque ſpiritus habet, eo auditu 


pulchrior x. and that therefore in all leſ- 


ſer compoſitions, ſuch as odes, and lyricx 


poetry, they have a Pecultt grace and 


® Lib. viii. c. 5. | 
; Y 2 ca 


. 
FRI Ig Gn =» Tan 


pA — 7 K pu . 4 
9 rn RC rn cs —— 


ke 5 
9 
1 
w_ 
. * 

* 
1 
;, * 
i gd 
4 2 

BD 

* 

3 

2 

N. 

A 

7 
. 


Dee 
r 


— A — = 
; ua WA i Y_—— - 4 8 1 IO. _ 7 . 
r r 


324 BRITISH Boe II. 
ſweetneſs which we can never arrive at, 
nor even attempt any thing in that way 
without the aid of rhime: my anſwer is, 
that if their language be compared in this 
reſpect with ours as it now ſtands, we 
muſt undoubtedly yield the preference to 
them. But this defect in ours does not 
ariſe from the genius and conſtitution of 
our language, but from the abuſes and 
corruptions crept into it thro' the want of 
care and cultivation. Nor was the per- 
fection of the Roman in this reſpect ow- 
ing to chance, or the original formation 
of their words, but to the great pains 
taken to poliſh and adorn it. We have 
it from undoubted authority, that previous 
to the ſtudy of eloquence, their language 
was in a very bad ſtate as to ſound, and 
their words ill ſuited to poetical compo- 
ſitions. Were the fifth part of the labour 
beſtowed upon ours which was upon. 
theirs, we might perhaps rival them even 
in this reſpect. Nay, had our language 
not been induſtriouſly ſpoiled and mangled, 
had not ſuch numbers of our vowels been 
ſwallowed up by the monſter chime, it 
might without much application or pains 


not 


= 


CA. IX. EDUCATION. 325 
not have been inferior to the Latin in 
that point. For tho' we might be ſtill 
obliged to confeſs that their words are 
compoſed of ſyllables more vocal, yet ours 
would have more ſpirit ; theirs might 
have more- of ſweetneſs; but ours of 
energy theirs might be better conſtituted 
to form melodious, but ours to produce 
harmonious combinations. Were the 


pleaſing flow of the ſyllables to the ear 
alone- fufficient to the perfection of ound 


in a language, the Greek and Roman both 
muſt yield to the modern Italian. But too 
great attention to ſweetneſs will rob poe- 


tick numbers of their greateſt beauties, 


which are, variety, and expreſſion. Were 
our language to be ſtudied and improved 
to the pitch of perfection whereof it is ca- 
pable, it would perhaps appear, that the 


qualities of ſound to fit it to all ſorts of 


poetical compoſitions, are blended in more 
lucky proportions than in any other; and 
that we have on that account as great an 
advantage over the antients in point of 
numbers, as the invention and 1 improve- 
ment of our muſical inſtruments have given 
us with reſpect to harmony. But in both 

* calcs 


* 8 = 4 | 
F P 


1 Ae 


— — — —— — — - — = —— = = - — — =_—— "5 — — — — — — - LY _— 
— codon — . — — 2. — — — — —  —— ads. -=> — “ — . — pony 
— — 


— 2 — — 


8 — 2 —— 


4 
8 
i! 
q 
if 
4 
v7 I 
3 (3 
18 
1. 
| 


326 BRITISH Booxll. 


caſes we have failed of the end, by an 
abuſe or neglect of the means which alone 
could give us a ſuperiority, The ꝓ author 
of a late ingenious treatiſe on muſical ex- 
preſſion, has laid open the ſources of the 
bad taſte which at preſent prevails with 
reſpect to that art. As the fate of it's ſiſter 
poetry ſeems to be exactly ſimilar, and 
from ſimilar cauſes, I ſhall make uſe of 
what he has ſaid with regard to the one, 
to elucidate what I have advanced with 
relation to the other. He obſerves, © That 
properly ſpeaking, there are but three 
* circumſtances on which the worth of 
any muſical compoſition can depend. 
Theſe are, melody, harmony, and ex- 
preſſion. When theſe three are united in 
their full excellence, the compoſition 1s 
then perfect : if any of theſe are want- 
ing or imperfect, the compoſition is pro- 
portionably defective. The chief endea- 
vour therefore of the ſkilful compoſer 
mult be, to unite all theſe various ſources 
of beauty in every piece; and never ſo 
far regard or idolize any one of them, as 
to deſpiſe and omit the other two.' 
t Aviſon's eſſay, &c. 


S212 *. <2 A v _ a & W a «4 


Every 


Cnar. IX. EDUCATION. 327 


Every reader of diſcernment will ſee at 
once that this is exactly analogous to the 
numbers of poetry. He proceeds to ſhew 
the preſent errors and defects in theſe re- 
ſpects. 

The firſt error we ſhall note is, where 
* the harmony, and conſequently the ex- 
* preſſion, is neglected for the fake of air, 
or rather an extravagant modulation. 
* The preſent faſhionable extreme of run- 
ning all our muſick into one ſingle part, 
to the utter neglect of all true harmony, 


© is a defect much more eſſential than the | 


'* neglect of modulation only, inaſmuch as 
harmony is the very baſis of all muſical 
* compoſition. 

Ils not this exactly ſimilar to the prac- 
tice of our poets in making rhime the 
chief object of their attention, and uſing 
as much as poſſible one uniform move- 
ment in their verſes, to the great preju- 
dice of harmony and expreſſion? In ac- 
counting for the ſpreading of this falſe 


taſte, he aſſigns the following as the chief 


cauſe, | 

It may perhaps beaffirmed with truth, 

* that the falſe taſte, or rather the total 
1 * want 


” : — b 1 my 
— cn — 2 — — _ 
4 E 1 bY 27 — 0 — bs — — — — — 
2 8 vo r . 


"Ss, 2 * 1 r —— 


* 


328 BRITISH Book II. 


« want of taſte in thoſe who hear, and who 
always aſſume to themſelves the privi- 


© lege of judging, hath often produced this 


© low ſpeciezof muſick. For it muſt be 
* owned that this kind of compoſition is 


© apt, above all others, at firſt hearing to 
„ ftrike an unſkilful ear; and hence the 
'© maſters have often ſacrificed their art to 
the groſs judgment of an indelicate au- 


dience. | | : 
Is not this directly parallel to what has 
been before ſaid of poets and their read- 
ers? 4 | | 
He has aſſigned a quite contrary cauſe 
for a corruption of a different kind, when 
comparing the ſtate of modern with an- 


tient muſick, he ſays, From the ſtruc- 
ture of their inſtruments, we can not 


form any vaſt idea of their powers: 


they ſeem to have been inferior to thoſe 
in uſe at preſent: but which, indeed, be- 


f And if a falſe taſte could be ſo generally propagated 


from this cauſe, in a ſcience founded upon certain prin- 
"ciples and eſtabliſhed rules, which are open to the know- 


lege of all enquirers, how much more likely is it to be 
the caſe in an art, where the ſtudious can find no prin- 


- ciples to found their judgments upon, nor no rules to be 


their guides, excepta few that are falſe, which will cer- 


tainly miſlead them? 


Cnay. IX. EDUCATION. 323 


ing capable of as much execution as ex- 
© preflion, are only rendered more liable 
to be abuſed. Thus the too great com- 
paſs of our modern inſtruments, tempt- 
ing as well the compoſer as performer, 
to exceed the natural bounds: of har- 
© mony, may be one reaſon, why ſome 
authors have ſo warmly eſpouſed the 
cauſe of the antient muſick, and run 
down that of the modern.' 

Here indeed the compariſon does not 
hold. Our poets, far from running riot on 
account of their abundance, have ſtarved 
themſelves in the midſt of plenty. And 
thro' their want of {kill in the manage- 
ment of their inſtrument, inſtead of pro- 
ducing the great variety of tones whereof 
it is capable, they have confined them- 
ſelves to a few ſimple modulations, which 
make it appear to have a leſs compaſs than 
thoſe of the antients. And this was a 
natural conſequence of not ſtudying our 
language ; without which it was impoſe 
ſible we could know it's peculiar graces 
or force, or perceive what ſort of num- 
bers were beſt ſuited to it's genius. No- 
thing was left us in this caſe, but imita- 


tion ; 


— — . — — b —_ — 2 ĩðͤ b TY TITTY — TI. 
— Oo — — — No — @*_ Aa. — ._ — „ — 14 — par — 
2 — R 8 =_ Cadena _ oma 2 _ 1 — — 
- _ - — — * N md + l l \ ALES = _ 


2 — 
—ƷX — mo 


— 3 —— 


— — ————ů — — — = 
— — — 


- — 2 —— 
A na_— yr 
— K — 
— — 5 


- — — 2 
= —— 

— — gs wn 

= GAZ | 


_— 4 


—_— — Chad * © b 5 5 ay — — ny WO — 

5 _ SE --- fi : G L l - l 
. cc — —. . w — * 
— — — — = —— - — 2 = = w ITE 


= — 


pun >. — 


fect productions ſtare us in the face. But 


3350 B'RFTI6H; Boon 11. 


tion; and as it was ſoon found that the 
Roman meaſures could not be adopted 
into our tongue, we followed the track 
of our neighbours, and built our poetry 
upon their rules. Thus did we ſubmit, 
thro' choice, to all the imperfections under 
which theirs laboured from neceſſity. We 
blindly conſidered our language as formed 
upon the ſame Gothick model as the 
other European tongues; and thro' want 
of enquiry, did not know that ours alone 
had luckily retained all the qualities 
which gave ſuch charms to antient poetry; 
beſides ſome peculiar to ourſelves, which, 
properly uſed, give us a ſuperiority over 
them. We did not know that amidſt all 
their variety of meaſures, in their different 
ſpecies of poetry, there is not one to which 
we either have not, or may not have, 
ſomething analogous in ours, and for the 
moſt part more perfect in it's kind. Our 
blindneſs in this reſpect is at this day the 
more extraordinary. becauſe it is no longer 
a thing in embryo, to be ſeen only thro' 
microſcopes, but we have proofs of it glar- 
ing as day- light, and the full-grown per- 


WWE 


Cnar.IX. EDUCATION. 33. 


we have eyes and ſee not, ears have wwe 
and we hear not. How few are there ca- 
pable of knowing, that Milton does not 
exceed Homer and Virgil in any thing fo 
much as in his numbers? And if it can 
be proved that we excel them in that re- 
ſpect in the more ſublime compoſitions of 
epick and tragick poetry, no one can pre- 
tend to ſay that we might not vie with 
them even in the lyrick, were our lan- 
guage cultivated and reſtored to it's pu- 
rity. We have at leaſt one inſtance to 
ground this opinion upon, which is, that 
the Engliſh can boaſt of the moſt perfect 
ode that ever was produced in any lan- 
guage, in point of variety, harmony, and 
expreſſion in it's numbers; and were it 
not diſgraced by rhime, it muſt, in the 
opinion of the moſt delicate, and unpre- 
judiced judges, bear away the palm from 
all antiquity. I mean the ode on St. Ce- 
cilia's day, by Mr. Dryden. If our lan- 
guage in it's corrupt ſtate were capable of 
ſo much, what might we not hope for 
from it were it poliſhed and refined ? 
Should we recover a true taſte, and by 
diſcarding rhime make room for our ba- 


niſhed 


332 B Ir SH - Book IT, 
niſhed vowels, who knows, when the 
ſound of our words ſhould be rendered 
more melodious, what pleaſing meaſures a 
true genius might yet diſcover ; and what 
bold Pindarick flights he might take when 
his wings were full grown, and his fetters 
taken off? Leſt we ſhould too haſtily deter- 
mine with reſpect to the number and kinds 
of meaſure which the genius of our lan- 
guage will admit, by what has been already 
done, be it remembered that Horace, 
the numeroſus Horatius, was the firſt who 
diſcovered to the Romans, in his odes, 
the variety of numbers of which their 
language was capable, notwithſtanding 
it had been for ſome time in it's utmoſt 
ſtate of perfection before he began to 
Write. 
Of all the poets who have written in 
our language, there ſeem to be but two, 
- who have dived into the principles of ver- 
ſification, and traced Engliſh numbers to 
their. ſource. Theſe were Dryden, and 
Milton. What I have ſaid upon this ſub- 
ject will be ſufficiently exemplified by the 
different conduct of theſe two contempo- 
rary writers, and the different reception 


which 


Cnuay, IX. EDUCATION. 333 


which their works met with from the 
publick. Dryden knew perhaps the theory 
of numbers as well as Milton, but was far 
from making the ſame uſe of his knowlege, 
which he turned wholly to ſerve his qwn 
purpoſe. ' He wrote for bread, which de- | 
pended upon preſent fame; and preſent 
fame was to ariſe from pleaſing the preſent 
taſte. That once obtained, his bookſeller, 
who never confided” the intrinſick value, 
paid: him in proportion to the bulk of his 
work, or the number of lines which it 
contained. As he was always a needy, he 
was of - courſe a haſty writer. Poſſeſſed as 
he: was of ſuch a happy knack of rhiming, 
he could have produced a hundred lines 
that would give delight on account of that 
ornament, in the ſame ſpace of time that 
he could have written ten, whoſe beauty 
depended upon the propriety and harmony 
of numbers, and whoſe charms, after alt 
his-pains, could not. be perceived by the 
multitude of unſkilful readers. Many 
haſty thoughts would even appear beauti- 
ful on account of the richneſs of a rhime, 
which in-blank verſe would paſs for pu- 
erile. Add to all ne that indulgence to 


all 


334 BRITISH. Book II. 


all faults and errors in this kind of writ- 
ing is much more eafily granted, than in 
any other, from a ſuppoſed reſtraint which 
the poet lies under; when in fact, to one 
poſſeſſed of a natural faculty in that re- 
ſpect, improved by habit, there is no ſtyle 

whatever ſo eaſy. When all this is confi- 
dered, it can not be a matter of wonder, 
that Dryden ſhould do every thing in his 
| power to keep up a taſte which was ſo per- 
fectly adapted to his purpoſes, and to make 
it as extenſive as pofſible. With this view, 
he gave a remarkable inſtance of what has 
been before obſerved, © how much it is 
in the power of one ſingle perſon of re- 
putation, to introduce or confirm a bad 
taſte in a whole people, by writing even 
tragedies in rhime, which were not only 
heard without diſguſt, but, as we are in- 
formed, gave great delight to the vitiated 
ear of thoſe times. Nor is it long ſince we 
have recovered taſte enough to baniſh 
thoſe monſtrous performances from the 
ſtage. Upon the whole, Dryden was the 
reigning poet of his time, and his works 
were univerſally read and admired. Nor 
would the number of his votaries have 
| 0 been 


Cnuar.IX. EDUCATION. 335 


been leſſened at this day, had not a ſuc- 
ceſſor of more application, and greater 
leifure, outdone him in his own arts. 

But Milton acted upon principles di- 
rectly oppokite. Like the great poets of 
antiquity, he painted for eternity; only 
his conduct in this reſpect was infinitely 
more difintereſted, as. he gave up all 
chance of prefent fame. His light ſhone 
forth in vain, for the darkneſs comprehended 
it not. His almoſt divine poem of Pa- 
radiſe Loſt. was fold for fifteen” pounds, 
which was to have been received at three 
different payments, the laſt of which 
t here is ſome reaſon to believe was never 
made: nor do we find that the book ſel- 


ler was a great gainer by the purchaſe. 


Vet notwithſtanding the unſuitable re- 
turns he met with, he ſtill proceeded with 
2 noble zeal for the honour of his coun- 


try, and it's language, to leave behind 


him the moſt perfect models, whoſe 
beauty, tho' loft upon the blindneſs of a 
preſent age, might be perceived by a more 
enlightened - poſterity, Nor could any 


mean or ſelfiſh motive induce him to 


ſwerve from that ſtrict rule of right, by 
which 


-, 


2 - 


- 1 * 
_ "_— — T 


l - 04 © « . 
. : — Yo »% - NR” rr Jer. 2 
” =_ v 5 . IE 6 dad — rn N. n r 9 7 o 1 * 
* n 5 8 r n FLY * + Wr 17 , Th By. 
nn 2 — . r AMC; er + wes * rere 
3 ur n 2 8 St 8. — 2 27 Fe . 
TP DR ad es EN gens 8 - 
N 2 1 2 E br * ao — * 
F — r 
* — 1 — * : _ — oe = _ - 
i 3 


2 — 5 

* Den . 
N Ws a4 

* E 3's 


236 BRITISH Boox II. 


which he ſquared all his poetical writings. 
To make uſe of the words of one of the 
moſt ingenious as well as judicious of the 
moderns, *-* The contempt, in which, 
perhaps, with juſtice, he held the age 
he lived in, prevented him frem conde- 
* ſcending either to amuſe or to inſtruct it. 
He had, before, given to his unworthy 
C countrymen the nobleſt poem, that ge- 
© nius, conducted by antient art, could 
© produce; and he had ſeen them receive 
© it with diſregard, if not with diſlike. 
©. Conſcious therefore of his own dignity, 
© and of their demerit, he looked to po- 
* ſterity only for reward, and to poſte- 
« rity only : directed his future labours. 
Hence it was perhaps, that he formed 
his Sampſon Agoniſtes on a model more 
«* ſimple and ſevere than Athens herſelf 
would have demanded ; and took /Ef- 
chylus for his maſter, rather than So- 
phoeles, or Euripides: intending by this 
conduct to put as great a diſtance as poſ- 
fible between himſelf and his contem- 
« porary writers; and to make his work 
(as he himſelf ſaid) much different 


8 Maſon's ſecond letter, pref, to Elfrida. 
8 from 


Cnay. IX. EDUCATION. $37 
from what amongſt them pa ler the 
© beſt. 

The ſucceſs of this poem was, ac- 
* cordingly, what one would — expect - 
ed. The age, it appeared in, treated it 
* with total neglect; neither hath that 

« poſterity, to which he appealed, and 
* which has done juſtice to moſt of his 
other writings, as yet given to this ex- 
« cellent piece it's full meaſure of popular 
© and univerſal fame. 

Here I muſt beg leave to dident from 
the opinion of this very judicious remark- 
er, where he ſeems to- think that the po- 
ſterity to which he appealed hath already 
done juſtice to moſt of Milton's other writ- 
ings, tho' not to his Sampſon, We have 
indeed done him all the juſtice in our pow- 
er, and given him his due degree of praiſe 
for ſuch part of his excellence as we were 
capable of perceiving ; but Iam far from 
thinking the preſent age ſo far enlightened 
as to be able to ſee, much leſs to admire, 
ſome of his greateſt beauties. It is true, 
his Paradiſe Loft has long ſince obtained 
it's full meaſure of popular and univerſal 
fame. But this perhaps may be attributed 

Ar 2 to 


* 


338 BRITISH Boon II. 

to another cauſe than a general improve- 
ment of taſte. It is more than probable 
that it was chiefly, if not wholly owing 
to the papers of criticiſm upon that poem, 
publiſhed by the moſt popular and uni- 
verſally admired of our * writers in proſe. 
As theſe are preſerved in + books more 
generally read than perhaps any other in 
the Engliſh language, the fame of the 
poet goes hand in hand with that of the 
critick ; and the perfeQtions of the poem 
pointed out by him, are as generally 
known, as the eſſays in which they are 
ſo diſplayed. One ſtrong argument in 
ſupport of this opinion, may be drawn 
from the vaſt number and variety of edi- 
tions of that poem, which have made 
their appearance in the world ſince the 
publication of thoſe papers, whereas be- 
fore that time the work was little known 
or ſought after. True criticiſm was then 
a new ſpecies of writing in Engliſh, nor 
has it been much improved fince. It had 
not only the charms of novelty to recom- 
mend it, but likewiſe the higheſt abilities 
in the writer. All who admired the ana- 


* Mr. Addifon, + The SpeQators. | 
y 


Cray. IX. EDUCATION. 339 


lyſis of the work, of courſe applied them- 
ſelves to read the original; partly led by 
curioſity, and partly from an actuating 
principle of man, to judge for himſelf in 
all critical enquiries, and to examine whe- 
ther the remarks were made with juſtice 
and propriety, This will ſufficiently as- 
count for the univerſality of this poem as 
to it's being read, and alſo for the general 
applauſe which it has ever ſince met with. 
Readers of taſte and knowlege extolled it 
from a perception of it's merit; and the 
Ignorant, and taſteleſs, relied on the au- 
thority of the critick, and joined in the cry, 
leſt they ſhould diſcover their own want 
of judgement. This may alſo ſerve as a 
clue to guide us to the cauſe why the 
Agoniſtes obtained ſuch a diſproportionate 
ſhare of fame, and was known only to a 
few ; for had the ſame critick taken the 
ſame pains to point out the beauties of 
that poem which he did with regard to 


the other, it is more than probable that 


it would have been as univerſally known, 
and ſpoken of, as the other, tho' perhaps 
not ſo generally admired. To ſtrengthen 
this argument it is well worth obſervation, 
19933 - A Z 2 e 


5. 
IT 
4 7 Xx 0 * 


« 
: . 
R 
. 7 
4 8 
. 7 
i 
: * 
1 
1 
| . 
N 
. Fre 
a 4 * 
: $ * 
1 
. 
7 
133 
4 M7 
= 
1 
4» . * 
* . 
"= 
: C F 
-  —_ 
-— 
j 5 
0 Y 1 
+ % 
: << 
: 1 
1 
1 
_ == 
- = 
== 
x8 
=. 
r 
= 
: Fi 5 
: WL 
=” <0 
* t "7 
- rx 
J A 
: _ 
"= 
3. CE 


= 
* 
a | 
. 
N | 
& 
* 2 
* „ 
I 
1 
"= 
-46 
"i 
1 > 
1 1 5 
59 
45, 
Es 
* 
"ERS 
8 \ , 
| 9 0 
* 9 1 
9 
b I £ 
12 by 
N 13 
"73 
3 
F 


— 


340 BRITISH Book II. 
that no other work of his has made it's 
way to publick knowlege without the af- 
ſiſtance of ſome helping hand. The Al- 
legro and Penſeroſo were confined to the 
claoſets of the judicious, till the celebrated 

Handel by the charms of his mufick 
forced them into fame. And his Comus 
lay buried in obſcurity, till the luſtre of 
muſick ſhewed it to the publick eye: and 
how little that was capable of perceiving 
it's beauties, might be ſeen from the re- 
ception it met with. For whilſt the mu- 
fician's ſkill was applauded to the ſkies, 
the poem itſelf was either not attended to, 
or only occaſioned wearineſs and ſatiety. 
It will be allowed by all, that had it not 
been for the ornament of the ſongs, the 
dramatick part could not have lived to a 
ſecond night: and the whole piece, ſince 
the muſick has loſt great part of it's charms 
with it's novelty, is now ſcarcely able to 
hold up it's head. His Lycidas, and ſome 
other pieces, for want of ſome. ſuch aſ- 
_ ſtance, are ſtill in the ſhade. 

A particular fatality ſeems to have at- 
tended Milton, different from the caſe of 
all other pn _ one piece of allowed 
2 excel- 


Cnar.IX. EDUCATION. 3341 


excellence, and general reputation, would 
be ſufficient, in any other writer, to ex- 
cite the higheſt curioſity to ſee whatever 
other compoſitions he might offer to the 
world, and to ſtamp a value upon them 


beyond their intrinſick merit. Whilſt in 


his caſe, tho' there never was any thing 
more univerſally allowed, than that he was 
the author of the nobleſt poem that has 
appeared in the Engliſh language, yet this 
has not induced many people to look into 
ſome of his other works, tho they are 


really in their ſeveral kinds of equal per- 


fection with that. And this is an incon- 
teſtible proof, that however general the 
praiſe has been, and however laviſhly be- 
ſtowed on the Paradiſe Loſt, the greateſt 
part of it aroſe from faſhion and authority; 
and whatever quantity of admiration it 
hath excited, has been for the moſt part 


only pretended. For if people were really 


as much pleaſed with that work, as they 
ſay, and would make us believe, what 
could ſtop them from purſuing the delight 
which they muſt neceſſarily receive from 
the . of his other inimitable * ? 


— 5 — — - 332 — — — — — „„ RR" — 22 
* wg * - = vb) aw ? 6 » LY FI: [on n 8 : 
DINE” Wola ww 22 WD I > > % NA 1 r + 2% 3 is „5 bee Don hd», om r He ws 44 1 
* 0 pg v . 4 4+, FESL = df AY NOISY: Fg Paw By Le AE * a, a * Bs The 1 e 1 
. — IPA TEVY hs WK} Ann £245 OST LO, ns 8 err . > + uy ts ah OE a, 
< 1 ö LS. — — 7 2 — enn e I 1 n £ 
$ — N 


5 
I 
3 
* 
1 
* 
s - 

" 


2 3 The 


r 


„ dil o 


MA» a 


\ 1 8 7 4 
eee 8 — 2 
24" 1 * * * 
E . — 2 Sr 
* q - : « < \ 
if 3 ä—ͤy— z — A ita. K X32 Os © BESS - * 


342 BRITISH Boox II. 
Ihe fact is, that tho Milton has by 

the means abovementioned obtained uni- 
verſal fame, yet it is far from being found- 
ed upon a right and folid baſis. Faſhion, 
and the authority of a few allowed judges, 
may go a great way towards making. a 
poem be talked of, and to obtain the in- 
cenſe of general praiſe; but this, as Mac- 
beth ſays, is ouoly 

—— Mouth honour, breath, 
Which the poor ſlave would fain deny, 
and dare not. 

The poetical, like the regal crown, can 
have no great ſecurity but in the hearts 
of the people; and the hearts of the peo- 
ple can be engaged to the poet only by 
the pleaſure and delight which his works 
afford them. Now tho' Milton has been 
put into poſſeſſion of his lawful ſcepter, 
and all the due homage attendant on that 
has been paid to him; yet his throne ſeems 
only to be founded on his right, and hath 
not as yet obtained the ſecurity of the 
people's affections. 

The reaſon of this will at once be ſeen, 
when we reflect, that however ſome other 
points in a poem may to the judicious ap- 

pear 


pear more eſſential, yet it is by the charms 
of verſification alone that the multitude is 
caught. In poetry, as in painting, the 
unſkilful majority are more captivated-by 
the colouring than the drawing. If there- 
fore the works of Milton appear defeQiye 
in this reſpect; if his verſes in general, far 
from giving pleaſure and delight, ſhould 
ſtrike the uncultivated or vitiated ears of 
the age, as diſcordant, and unmuſical, the 
whole difficulty will at once be ſolved. His 
other merits, and excellencies, diſplayed 
by judicious criticks, may procure him a 
few real, and ſhoals of pretended admirers 
but can not gain him any lovers. Men 
may be reaſoned into eſteem, but not into 
affection. That ariſes from an involuntary 
delight, immediately perceived from a con- 


templation of the object which excites it. 


Mr. Addiſon has, with great accuracy and 
clearneſs, laid open the admirable art and 
profound judgement of Milton, in the 
choice and conduct of his fable, in the 
maſterly drawing of his characters, with 


ſuitable manners, and in the ſublimity and 


beauty of his ſentiment and diction, Theſe 
juſtly challenge our admiration, and de- 
Z 4 mand 


=, 


o 
— — 


n 
ne 


T 

- 

: 

k 1 

xt 

: [ 

- >. 

. 

: 2 

— 

: * 

: RI 

. oh 

. 7 

1 1 

: >. 

£ .. 

14 "$0 
= 

. 

: - 5; 

4 1 

2 4 

_ 
4 

. ” 

1 

R  -© 

* + . 

Ki 

: 

1 

2 > > 

: 

» q 

. * 

: 15 
"= 

r 

i * 

: 

: * 

* 
* 
pb bu 

1 4 * 

IS 
* 
> 
Bo 
* 
+ 

27 

: * 

: * 

oy 

' : 

” 14 = 

A . 
= 
* 
* 
: * 
5 
ol 
4 
4 
4 
a 
bl 
N 3 
1 
14 
i 
4 % 
» 
} =» 
\ . 
z 1 l 
* 
828 
* 0 
2 2 
> "" 
4 
- 
g 
3 
= o 
* 
+» - 
* 

þ 4 = = 
xg 
= 
1 on 

, L _ 

l by 

1 
4 . 
* 

* 5 \ 
3x N 
F 

4 CY 
nd 
4 
30 
Fg 
- 

, 2 

— 
— 
* 
2 
Al 
% 
; 

, _ 
AS - 

* 
4 
7 
ooh 
4 
5 
2 
F. 
A 
5 
28 
* C 
"== 
2 
1 | 

" b _ 

a 
3 


. 
— 1 — 
Pr 
5 * — . = 
- = 1 


22 ů²;ͤ“⁊4̃ —S 
— —E—ä—ä—äa E 2 


Wm — 
= - 2 


A ——— he Een 
— —m—— — by 


8 
LS 


8 


U—— =» we 


344 BRITISH Boon II. 
mand our praiſe. But the charms of his 
numbers are ſtill covered as with a vail- 
The admirers of the antients, when they 
are compelled to allow him his due me- 
rits, yet add with a ſeeming concern, tho 
with a ſecret ſatisfaction, that it is a pity 

ſo excellent a workman had ſuch poor 
materials, and the compoſitions of ſo great 
a genius had not the advantage of ſuch 
ornaments as the languages of - Greece or 
Rome would have ſupplied : whilſt thoſe 
of modern taſte, ſincerely ſigh for their 
dear rhime, and lament the want of that 
uniformity of cadence to which their cars 
had been tuned. But there is not one 
reader perhaps in five thouſand, who 
knows that the greateſt beauty of Milton 
is his verſification; and that he has excel- 
led all the writers of all ages, and all coun- 
tries, in the variety, expreſſion, and har- 
mony of his numbers. a 
Nor will this appear a very extraordi- 
nary aſſertion when it is conſidered, that 
this is impoſſible to be known without per- 
fect {kill in reading; chat we are neceſſa- 
rily corrupted in our firſt principles of that 
art, * ignorant maſters and falſe rules; 
and 


char. IX. EDUCATION. 345 
and that there is not even an attempt 
made to amend this in the reſt of our 
lives. Whilſt therefore we remain in an 
ignorance of that art, we muſt as neceſ- 


ſarily remain in a total ignorance of the 


true beauty and power of numbers, as we 
ſhould do in regard to muſical compoſi- 
tions, where the inſtruments are defective 
and out of tune, or the players unſkilful. 
The poems of Milton muſt appear in the 
ſame light to us, as our pictures do to the 
Chineſe, and ſeem to have too many black 
ſpots in them. Till that art is ſtudied, 


we ſhall be ſo far from having it in our 


power to give that firſt of poets his due 
praiſe, that we ſhall be blind to ſome of 
his greateſt perfections; beſide the charms 
of verſificatiun, we ſhall loſe ſome of the 
fineſt part of his imagery, and in many 
places not even be able to en; 
his full meaning. 

Let us therefore apply ourfibive ſeriouſ- 
Iy, and with diligence, to a ſtudy capable 
of affording us ſuch delight. Let us no 
longer think, that to learn to read is ſuf- 
ficient, but to read well, and then, 


Pleas'd 


r ˙ A %⅛—˙u— ̃ ̃ 0 Cots , 


; ; 

1 1 
1 
4 


1 
+4 \ _ 

5. 
| 
> : 
I 
= 


_ * - 
1 » AM +. 4 F * o 
Cowie. iD 2. = <9 wa I hog ANC IST. ISR > 
l . =: bl 0 3 % 4A * 
= - —_ 


OE TS. DS * 


4 4 
Lhe ba 


* 2 Ce tran wrt he — — 


e — 


n RR n 


— - -_ 
— 1, a = ed Bun 
5 


— 

Sar «Ad waxy. Ag; wn 
W + 22 
* = 


DT — — 
nated = = 3 


346 B RI T ILS H Boox II. 
0 Hleas d we ſhall hear, and learn the ſceret 
41/1 power: 
of homneny in tones, od; — hit, 
© By voice, or hand | 
Or, as. the ſame author ſays i in his wreatifh 
on education, if we ſet about this work, 
We ſhall be conducted to a hill fide, la- 
© borious indeed at the farſt- aſcent, but 
© elſe fo ſmooth, ſo green, ſo full of good- 
* by proſpect, and melodious ſounds on 
every ſide, that the harp of n was 
not more charming. <2; 
Let us examine our language with care, 
and ſearch into it's ſecret treaſures. Let us 
no longer be contented with a poor mea- 
gre vein of ore which we find near the ſur- 
face, and which, after the French faſhion, 
| ſerves us only to wiredraw, or gild over a 
baſer metal ; but let us dig deep into the 
mine, where we ſhall find a plenteous 
vein, equal in richneſs, and ſuperior in 
magnitude, to that of the antients. Or if 
theirs ſhould be allowed to be of a purer 
kind, yet ours will be found to contain no 
more alloy in it, than what will render it 
more fit for all ſorts of work manſhip. 
9 " FR reg, ; 


Too 


CnAp. IX. EDUCATION. 347 
Too long have the beauties of the 
Britiſh muſe, like thoſe of our ladies, 
been concealed, or ſpoiled, by foreign 
modes and falſe ornaments. The paint 
and patches of the French, the fantaſtical 
head - dreſs, the ſqueezing ſtays, and enor- 
mous hoop, only ſpoil the bloom of her 
complexion, the flowing ringlets of her 
hair, her eaſy ſhape, and graceful mien. 
Should a poliſhed Athenian ariſe, and be- 
hold her thus decked out, he would be 
aſtoniſhed to ſee, in a country enlight- 
ened by their rules and example, de- 
formity made a ſcience, and barbariſm re- 
duced to rule. Thus adorned like a 
harlot, the inflames the youth with wan- 
ton defires, and ſpreads infection thro' the 
land. What hopes can there be of a ro- 
buft and healthy offspring from ſach im- 
pure embraces? Let us endeavour to re- 
cover her from the tyrannical ſway of 
faſhion-and prejudice, and reſtore her to 
her native rights. Let us leave to the ſal- 
low French their rouge and ceruſe, 
but let the Britiſh red and white appear 
in it's genuine luftre, as laid on by na- 
ture's own pencil, Let them tortute the 
body 


-,. 


348 BRITISH Boon II. 
body into a fantaſtick ſhape, or conceal 
crookedneſs under an armour of ſteel; let 
them cover puny limbs, and a mincing 
gait, under the wide circumference of a 
hoop ; but let the eaſy mien, the comely 
ſtature, the fine proportioned limbs de- 
cently revealed, and the unreſtrained ma- 
jeſty of motion in the Britiſh- muſe, be 
diſplayed to fight in their native charms. 
Then ſhall ſhe move forth confeſſed the 
genuine ſiſter of the Grecian muſe, and 
not the leſs beautiful for being the 
younger. Then ſhall her votaries burn 
with a pure and holy flame, and the poeti- 
cal offspring, from a chaſte marriage be- 
tween ſenſe and harmony, will be found 
lovely, vigorous, and long-lived ; inſtead of 
monſtrous chimeras, ſhapes flitting as 
clouds, and mere airy echoes produced from 

the wanton amours of ſound and fancy. 
Upon the whole, were our language to 
be ſtudied and cultivated, we ſhould find, 
that in point of giving delight, it would 
not yield to thoſe of antiquity ; and that 
it is much better fitted for univerſal uſe. 
Were it reduced to rules, it might be 
more e caſily learned, and with more accu- 
racy, 


CAP. IX. EDUCATION, 


racy, as it is a living language. The true 
pronunciation may be acquired with cer- 
tainty, on that account, from the mouth 
of a proper maſter; whereas we can at 
beſt only gueſs at that of the antients, and 
muſt therefore be ſtrangers to many beau- 

ties in theirs as to ſound. What in this 
caſe could hinder ours from being more 
univerſally propagated than any other, 
conſidering the great advantages we enjoy 
by means of general commerce, and a free 
preſs? And from the many excellent writ- 
ings with which it is already enriched, to- 


gether with thoſe which may hereafter be 


added, probably even of a ſuperior kind, 
ſhould men of equal genius ariſe, with the 
advantage of having their labour leflened, 
and their way ſmoothed, why might there 
not be as fair a proſpect of immortality to 
our authors, as to the Greek and Roman? 
Nothing but the moſt ſhameful neglect in 
the people can prevent the Engliſh from 
handing down to poſterity a third claſſi- 


cal language, of tar more Wen than 
the other two. 


4 CHAP. 


349 


con 


q 2 we i * YR A» 
— + 


4 4 — —_— ann N \ = 
| b ** % — a dd ac 
ey he So Ne. — * 1 , \ — 
- 8 \ 2 — — vn — o — 
g . 
— _ 


— — 
— — 

— — 

- _ * Ll 
= = 


— 2 
— — 


A * - © 4 
il * : 
— — —— 
EE. — 


TD 24 * 


r 


me 


e — ry A ²w ĩ³ ũ Ie ooo . P 2 OI. TA III, oo I: -ↄꝓ— U. . Y oleTYOel * 


250 BRITISH Boon II. 


CHAP. X. 


Of the means whereby our language may be 
refined and aſcertained. | 


HE only ſcheme hitherto propoſed 
for correcting, improving, and aſ- 
certaining our language, has been the in- 
ſtitution of a ſociety for that purpoſe. But 
this is liable to innumerable objections; 
nor would it be a difficult point to prove, 
that ſuch a method could never effectually 
anſwer the end. In the firſt place, it 
would be no eaſy matter to find a ſuffi- 
cient number of members properly quali- 
fied to compoſe ſuch a ſociety; as there 
are few or none trained in the ſtudy of 
thoſe points, in regard to which they are 
to paſs judgement: and perhaps there 
would not be one who ſhould appear at 
ſuch a board, without fixed and rooted 
errors from the prejudices of a wrong 
education. If they were not properly 
qualified, their rules and determinations 
would be proportionably falſe, and de- 
fective. In this caſe we ſhould be in a 
worſe 

$ 


Cnay.X. EDUCATION. 357 
worſe condition than without any rules at 
all. In the ſecond place, ſuppoſing them 


to proceed ever ſo rightly in their ſyſtem, 


tho' they might aſcertain the ineaning of 
words, it would be impoſſible by any 
works which they could publiſh to fix the 
ſound and pronunciation, as a knowlege 
of thoſe can be communicated only by 
ſpeech. And unleſs ſome means can be 
found to aſcertain thoſe, the language 
muſt be in a perpetual ſtate of fluctuation, 
But the chief reaſon which mult ever ren- 
der ſach a ſcheme abortive, ariſes from 
our conſtitution, and the genius of the 
people. The endeavours of ſuch a ſociety, 
in arbitrary governments, under the ſane- 
tion and countenance of an abſolute prince, 


may be crowned with ſucceſs : but the 


Engliſh have no idea of ſubmitting to any 
laws, to which they do not give their own' 


conſent. Tho' ſuch a ſociety were there- 


fore to proceed upon the righteſt prin- 


ciples, they would find it difficult to get 


their ſelf-raiſed authority, had it even the 


ſanction of the higheſt powers, acknow- 
leged by a ſtubborn free people, ever 


jealous of their rights, and naturally in- 
2 clined 


1 
oe 


= 

* 
7 
; 
J 
i 


. a . x 8 
5 . 1 _ — 72 is * ne 1 * 8 * * 1 
(> £005 - 2-1 ror jth 0 ISS <> ec 01 ard. 10 OO "EF WW or". ; p REDD att ak iy on Loo Fu r 
” — ww» - * \ . q 5 \ 2 
r . — TS” 1 _— _ * —— — —— —_—  —— os Ao + — — o 
= Lo * oy * r 


9 
2 
＋ 
! 
| 
"wo 
1 == 
28 
= 
$ 
bl 
7 


3 1 —— 
— o 


4:22 BRITISH .'Boox II. 
clined to withſtand all .uſurpations : and 
without a foundation on allowed autho- 
rity, their whole edifice muſt of courſe 
fall to the ground. But why ſhould we 
even think of following any :methods 
purſued in the countries of ſlaves, and 
which at the beſt have fallen very ſhort 
of perfection * when we have before 
our eyes the example of a free people 
like ourſelves to guide us, and whoſe 
conduct in this point was followed by 
the moſt rapid and complete ſucceſs ? 
The means which they employed are fo 
exactly ſuited to our circumſtances and 
ſituation, that we only want to make 
uſe of them, to attain our end, with 
equal eaſe, and certainty, It has been 
already ſhewn, that the ſtudy of eloquence 
was the neceſſary cauſe of the improve- 
ment, and eſtabliſhment of the Roman 
language : and the ſame cauſe'wauld in- 
fallibly produce the ſame effect with us. 
Were the ſtudy of oratory once made a 

neceſſary branch of education, all our 


*, We find at this day that Monſieur Voltaire has ſet 
kimſelf up againſt the determinations of the French aca- 
demy, in many points, and that he has already multitudes 
of followers. | 


youth 


Cnay.IX. EDUCATION. 353 
youth of parts, - and genius, would of 
courſe be employed in conſidering the 
value of words both as to ſound and ſenſe. 
The reſult of the reſearches of rational en- 
quirers, muſt be rules founded upon rati- 
onal principles; and a general agreement 
amongſt the moſt judicious, muſt occaſion 
thoſe rules to be as generally known, and 
eftabliſhed, and give them the force of 
taws. Nor would theſe laws meet with 
oppoſition, or be obeyed with reluctance, 
maſmuch as they would not be eſtabliſhed 
by the hand of power, but by common 
ſuffrage, in which every one has a right 
to give his vote : nor would they fail, in 
time, of obtaining general authority, and 
permanence, from the ſanction of mT 
founded on good ſenſe. 
It has been already ſufficiently FROM 
that we have all the ſame inducements 
to the ſtudy of eloquence, which the Ro- 
mans had, together with ſome peculiar 
to ourſelves, of a more powerful nature : 
nothing therefore could poſſibly hinder 
us from endeayouring to acquire ſkill in 
fo uſeful an art, but the want of proper 
maſters, who might be enabled to teach 
A a at 


Lo 


354 BRITISH Boox If. 
it with eaſe, and certainty, by laying open 
it's principles, explaining them by ex- 
amples, and affording in themſelves mo- 
dels and patterns for imitation to learners. 
Could this once ve done, there is no doubt 
but that the Britiſh youth would be in- 
flamed with as great an ardour to arrive at 
excellence in that art, as thoſe of Rome. 
For, to omit all the more powerful incite- 
ments of fame, and profit, the very plea- 
ſure reſulting to themſelves from the prac- 
tice of it, would be of itſelf a ſufficient 
motive to allure them to a cloſe applica- 
tion, and to confirm them in an habitual 
exerciſe of it. Cicero, who enjoyed all 
the advantages reſulting from a complete 
knowlege of this art, in the moſt eminent 
degree, does not ſcruple to ſay, in his 
Brutus, Dicendi autem me non tam Jrudus, 
& gloria, quam ſtudium ipſum, exercitatio- 
que delectat. Since therefore there are ſuch 
ſtrong motives of profit, honour, and de- 
light, to induce individuals to the ſtudy 
of oratory ; and fince their labours and ad- 
vancement in that art would in many points 
be attended with ſuch excellent effects to 
the publick, but more eſpecially in the 

arti- 


Cnar. IX. EDUCATION. 3355 
article of refining and eſtabliſhing our lan- 
guage, is it not a pity that no attempts are 
made towards the revival of it? Too long 
has the Engliſh tongue been neglected, 
too long have all ſorts of corruptions and 
abuſes been ſuffered to make their way 
into it. It is not yet too late to amend 
all, tho' the ſame inattention continued 
for a few years longer may poſſibly re- 
duce it to an irremediable ſtate. We 
have ſtronger reaſons than ever at this 
very juncture to take care that our lan- 
guage be not wholly deſtroyed. One 
ariſes from a new-fangled cuſtom intro- 
duced by ſome late authors, of ſpelling 
words differently from their wiſer prede- 
ceſſors; and out of a poor ambition of 
ſhewing their learning, omitting and 
changing ſeveral letters under pretence of 
pointing out their derivation. But theſe 
gentlemen do not conſider, that moſt of 
thoſe letters which ſeem uſeleſs to them, 
upon paper, or improper, are of the utmoſt 
conſequence to point out, and aſcertain 
the pronunciation of words, which is al- 
ready in too precarious a ſtate, ' So that if 
this cuſtom ſhould continue to increaſe, 
| A a 2 a ccord- 


* 


356 BRIT IS H Book II. 
according to the caprice of every new 
writer, for two or three centuries more, the 
beſt authors we have will by that time ap- 
pear as obſolete, and as difficult to be read, 
and underſtood, as Chaucer is at this day. 
Principus obſta. Innovations are ever to 
be withſtood at firſt, ſince it has been often 
known that thoſe which in their begin- 
nings have appeared too flight to merit 
regard, have in time brought about the 
moſt total and ſurpriſing changes. There 
are alſo at preſent great endeavours uſed 
to introduce and eſtabliſh another cuſtom 
not leſs pernicious, and which may be 
attended with the moſt fatal conſequences, 
There are many perſons, and even large 
bodies of men, eſteemed amongſt the 
moſt learned, who being weary of the 
great uncertainty of pronunciation in our 
tongue, would reduce the whole to one 
invariable and general rule, that of throw- 
ing the accent as far back in our polyſyl- 
lables as poſſible. It is inconceivable that 
ſuch a thought ſhould have entered into 
the heads of any but barbarians: much 
leſs that perſons converſant in the Greek 
and Roman languages, ſhould endeavour 
1 to 


Cray. IX. EDUCATION. 357 
to eſtabliſh a practice ſo opj ofite to that 
of thoſe poliſhed nations. The hey can not 
but know; that no word in theirs was ever 
accented beyond the antepenultima, or 
laſt ſyllable but two; and if they were 
able to read, they would know that this 
was founded upon the Jufteſt principles. 
Indeed nothirig but a total ignorance of 
that art, could poſſibly make them think 
of introducing a rule, which if it ob- 
tained, would at once deſtroy all melody, 
harmony, and quantity, in our words, as 
well as derivative meaning. 

We have at preſent alſo a much mronger 
inducement than ever, to the ſtudy of our 
language, as the way has been ſmoothed 
and made eaſy by the late publication of 
Mr. Johnſon's dictionary. Without ſuch 
a work, indeed, the taſk muſt have been 
extremely laborious, if not impracticable. 
Nor can the great merit and utility of that 
performance ever be perceived without ; 
ſach ſtady. If that be brought about, 
the publick will no longer have reaſon to 
lament, that one of ſuch uncommon ge- 
nius, and abilities, ſhould have paſſed fo. 
much of his life in a kind of work, 

On”) A a 3 which 


358 BRITISH Book II. 


which has hitherto fallen to the lot of 
mean capacities. Nor will he himſelf 
have reaſon to regret the many irkſome 
and diſagreeable hours paſſed by him in 
a dry and laborious ſtudy, when he re- 
fleas on the proportion of fame which 
will attend it: ſince if our language ſhould 
ever be fixed, he muſt be conſidered by 
all poſterity as the founder, and his dicti- 
onary as the corner ſtone. 

As the cultivation and eſtabliſhment of 
that can be effected by no other means, 
but by the introduction of the ſtudy of 
eJoquence, I ſhall cloſe this head with a 
few paſſages from QuinRilian, wherein the 
objections which may ariſe on account of 
the difficulty of arriving at excellence in 
that art are fully anſwered, and the mo- 
tives to engage men in the purſuit are diſ- 
played in the brighteſt colours. 

With ſo many maſters, and with 
* ſuch a nymber of models, hath antiquity 
* furniſhed vs, that no age could ſeem 
luckier in the lot of it's nativity than our 
own ; for the inſtruction of which all 
the preceding have laboured. 


Above | 


Cu Ap. IX. EDUCATION. 359 


Above all, we have a ſufficient incen- 


tive to perſevere in our ſtudies, when we 


conſider, that to ſay, becauſe a thing has 
not yet been effected, therefore it can 
not be done, is a contradiction in nature; 
ſince there was a certain period of time 
when every thing that was great and ad- 
mirable began to be produced. For juſt as 


much as poetry was perfected by Homer 
and Virgil, in the ſame high proportion 
was eloquence improved by Demoſthenes 


and Cicero. In ſhort, there was a time, 
' when whatever is excellent had no exiſ- 
tence. But ſhould a man even deſpair 


of the higheſt attainments (and why he 


ſhould do ſo, who neither wants genius, 
nor health, nor opportunity, nor a maſ- 
ter, no reaſon can be aſſigned) it is ſtill, 
as Cicero ſays, an honour to rank in 


the ſecond, and third degrees. 


Add to this, that even a moderate ſhare 


of eloquence produces great advantages; 


and, if one meaſures theſe ſtudies merely 
by the profit, is almoſt on a par with the 
perfection of oratory. Nor would it be 


a difficult taſk to prove, either by an- 


tient or modern examples, that there is 
A a 4 | uo 


By 


1 
* 
8 
5 
1 
p 
2 
| 
! 
| 
1 


no ſource from which men derive greater 
« honours, eſtates, connections, and pre- 

« ſent as well as future fame ; if the dig- 
© nity of erudition would allow us to ex- 
act this ſmaller recompence from a glo- 
rious ſtudy, the mere exerciſe and enjoy- 
ment of which moſt amply rewards our 
application ; like thoſe who make no 
ſcruple of declaring, that not virtue, but 
the pleaſure which reſults from it, is 
the object of their purſuit, Let it there- 
fore be our whole ambition to arrive at 
the true majeſty of eloquence, than 
© which the immortal gods have beſtowed 
nothing better on men; without which 
all things become ſpeechleſs, and are cut 
© off from the notice of the preſent age, as 
* well as the knowlege of poſterity. In or- 
* der to compaſs this, let us always keep 
© the beſt models in our eye; by doing 
which, we ſhall either arrive at the ſum- 
* mit, or at leaſt ſee many below us.” 


TJ) LM, wo gu WW 


END of the SEconD Book 


B R I- 


EDU CATION, Sn: 


BOOK III. CHAP. I. 
07 the liberal arts, and ther fares: 


IERE is no Mk which has 
in all ages puzzled the curious en- 


quirers more, than when it has 


been aſked, what the reaſon could be, that 


the liberal arts have in certain countries, at 


particular æras, made a rapid progreſs, to- 


wards perfection, flouriſhed together for 
a ſhort ſpace of time, (not ſo lang as the 
life of a man) then either gradually fallen 
to decay, or periſhed ſuddenly, nor ever 
rated their heads again in thoſe countries, 


\ 
* 
in = 
- 


——_ 5 22525 OS 


1 
4 
|? 
5 
| 
' 
AT 
= 
1 
| 


362 BRITISH Boox III. 


in ſpite of the utmoſt endeavours uſed to 
revive them ? I ſhall ſet down this queſ- 
tion as ſtated at large by Velleius * xa 
culus. Who can ſufficiently admire 
© that the moſt eminent wits of every 

* profeſſion ſhould have been crowded 
© into their proper_ claſs, and nearly 
within the ſame limits of time? As 
© animals of a different kind, when ſhut 
* pp in a pen, or any incloſed ground, 
do nevertheleſs, quitting thoſe of a di- 
« ſtin& ſpecies, herd together each in a 
« particular body; juſt ſo men, whoſe ge- 
* nius qualified them for the nobleſt pro- 
« duftions, have ſeparated themſelves from 
the reſt, in a manner which agrees both 
< as to the circumſtances of times and im- 

provements. Thus one æra, and that 
too circumſcribed within the ſpace of not 
0 many years, by means of thoſe divine 
c writers, Æſchylus, Sophocles, and Eu- 
© ripides, brought tragedy to perfection. 
© Thus under Cratinus, Ariſtophanes, and 
© Eupolis, did another æra finiſh the old 
comedy: and thus, within the compaſs' 
of a very few years, did Menander and 


his contemporaties, rather than equals, 
40 Phi- 


enar. I. EDUCATION: 46x 


a ‚ 0, W  @ e 


, 6 


a, 0 @©®, & 


,,n , 4 


o 


4 * 


Philemon and Diphilus, invent the 
new; leaving behind them perfor- 


mances above all imitation. How ſhort 


a time did the philoſophic wits, who 
derived their original from Socrates, 
continue to flouriſh after the death of 
Plato and Ariſtotle ? Who before Iſo- 
crates, who after his hearers and their 
ſcholars, diſtinguiſhed himſelf as an ora- 
tor? So contracted was the æra, or ſpace 
of time, that no two deſerve to be men- 
tioned, who might not have ſeen one an- 
other. Nor was this leſs the caſe among 
the Romans than among the Greeks > 
ſince, unleſs we go back to ſome rough 
and rude performances, which have no- 


thing but the honour of the invention to 


plead ; in Accius and his contemporary 


' writers is the Roman tragedy to be found. 
Much about the ſame time did the 


charming elegancies of the Roman wit 


receive their poliſh from Cæcilius, Te- 
rentius, and Afranius. With regard to 
our hiſtorians (even if we annex Livy to 
the earlier claſs of them) an æra conſiſt- 
ing of leſs than eighty years produced 
them all, except Cato, and ſome antient 

/ and 


——ͤ— — 


—— . > 


2 
— ow — 


ce 
_ _—_ a » ' vw ＋ Pre 8 1 8 * 4 8 1 » . 0 p 
* 2 — Ws 1 " 
__ 5&7 -< n > 6B _ 2 — — _—y —— — 5 2 - 2 »# 


N 


1 8 
J ** 1 

= 
4 4 x 
2 Af 
LA 

7 

a 

My 


17x 
14 
4 

I 
1 

1 

4 U 

We: 

{ $4 ö 
A . qt 
= 

$ * 
F. 2 
1-68 
j. 
4 F 1 * 
+5 
Wy 
== 

s 

E 


364 BRITISH Book III. 
and obſcure ones: neither did the rich 
« yein of our poets reach higher or lower. 
But oratory, the power of pleading, and 
the glorious perfection of proſe elo- 
© quence, if we ſtill except the ſame Cato, 
(with the leave of Publius Craſſus, of 
Scipio, of Lælius, of the Gracchi, of 
Fannius, and of Ser. Galba be it ſpoken) 
did all fo compleatly burſt ont in the 
prince of his profeſſion, Tully, that of 
© thoſe who went before him, very few 
© can give you delight; but you certainly 
can admire none who was not either 
* ſeen by him or who ſaw him. Who- 
© ever diligently traces the characters of 
time, will find that the ſame thing has 
happened to grammarians, ſtatuaries, 
*. painters, and ſculptors; and that the 
«. meridian of every art has been of an ex- 
© treme ſhort duration. —Whilſt therefore 
J am continually ſearching after the 
* cauſes, why this, and the preceding 
© ages, have united men of the like ge- 
nius in the ſame courſe of ſtudy and 
improvement, I find none upon the 
© truth of which I can abſolutely depend.” 


Thus, 


Cnae. I. EDUCATION. 365 

Thus, after having eſtabliſhed the fact, 
he acknowleges thathe does not know how 
to account for it by any reaſons which ap- 
pear to him ſatisfactory. Nor indeed hab 
this problem, notwithſtanding the num- 
berleſs attempts towards it, as yet met 
with a proper ſolution, Of all the writers 
upon this ſubject, the abbè Du Bos ſeems 
to have laboured the point the moſt, as 
he has employed the greateſt part of the 
ſecond volume of his Critical Reflections 
profeſſedly upon that head. But who- 
ever examines what he has faid with at- 
tention, will find that he has ſhewn more 
fancy than judgement in his manner of 
diſcufling this point; and that his argu- 
ments are rather ingenious, than conclu- 
five. He himſelf indeed has offered them 
with great modeſty, and only as conjec- 
tures ; for in the introduction he ſays, - 
* Whilſt I have been meditating on this 

ſubject, a great variety of ideas have 
frequently preſented themſelves to my 
mind, which I look upon rather as 
* ſimple glimmerings, than real lights. 
However, there is a ſufficient air 


« of f probability in theſe ideas, to think 
them 


5 


366 BRITISH Boon III. 


© them worthy of ——_—— my rea- 
« der.” 

Suppoſe therefore an explanation of this 
phenomenon ſhould be attempted by a 
new hypotheſis, not founded on ſpecula- 
tion merely, but facts; not ſupported by 
ſpecious arguments, drawn from opinions 
and notions which are incapable of proof, 
but from the reaſon and nature of things. 
Suppoſe it be ſhewn that the liberal arts, 
whatever different courſes they might af- 
terwards take, all had their riſe from one 
common fountain : it will no longer be a 
matter of wonder that their ſtreams ſhould 
be copious, and clear, in proportion to the 
exuberance, and purity, of their ſource ; 
nor that they ſhould diminiſh or diſappear 
as that was exhauſted or dried up. . In 
ſhort, let us only ſuppoſe that oratory was 
the fountain from which alone the libe- 
ral arts. flowed, and all the ſeeming dif- 
ficulties and intricacies of this queſtion, 
will be at once ſolved and explained. 
Let us ſee, in the firſt place, how far this 
hypotheſis can be ſupported by facts; in 
the next, by reaſon, and the nature of 
things. Firſt, as to facts: the proof of the 

fol- 


Cnar.ll. EDUCATION. 367 


following propoſitions will be ſufficient to 


eſtabliſh it with reſpect to them. _ 
© 'That the liberal arts never flouriſhed, 
or arrived at perfection in any country, 
* where the ſtudy and practice of oratory 
© was neglected. 

| © That in thoſe countries, where the 
© liberal arts arrived at their higheſt pitch 
* of glory, there were no traces of them, 
previous to the ſtudy of oratory. 

That the liberal arts always followed 
© oratory in their progreſs towards perfec- 
© tion ; arrived at their ſummit ſoon after 
© that did; declined as that declined ; 
© and, when that was baniſhed, wholly 
* diſappeared. 


| S HAP. I. 
That the liberal arts never flouriſhed, or 


arrived at perfection in any country, 
however otherwiſe remarkable for know- 
lege, and ingenuity, where the fludy and 
practice of oratory was neglected. as 


hiſtory muſt know, that amidſt the 
various accounts tranſmitted of ſeyeral 
flou- 


LL who are converſant in antient 


. > 4 
$ nd r or INSET 0 IH tO be oc 4 . _ : 
nere. ere. n . 2 
ED - > —_ » — - - 8 — es 


368 BRITISH BooxHf. 
flouriſhing nations, remarkable for wiſ- 
dom, knowlege, and learning; diſtin- 
guiſhed for the cultivation of all the uſeful 
ſeiences of life; there are no traces appear 
of their having bronght the politer arts to 
any perfection: Such as the Aſſyrians, 
Perfitans, Chaldeans, Carthaginians, and 
many more. Nay even in Ægypt, and 
Pheenicta, from which countries the Greeks 
are allowed to have borrowed all their 
knowlege, and ſkill in other ſciences, they 
are known to have been ever in a low and 
rude ftate. The few monuments that re- 
mained have inconteſtably proved this 
fact, as there were none, which ſhewed 
marks of any taſte, but ſuch as were known 
to be the works of Grecian artiſts, It is 
an undoubted truth, that both the Ægyp- 
tians, and Perſians, when they ſet about 
any great work, were obliged to ſend to 
Greece for their painters and ſculptors. 
We may find in many other countries a 
number of eminent names of great com- 
manders, able lawgivers, wiſe philoſo- 
Phers, ſkilled in the deepeſt myfteries of 
ſeience: but it is in the annals of Greece 
and Rome alone, that we muſt look for 
a lift 


Cup. III. EDUCATION. 369 
a liſt of poets, hiſtorians, painters, ſculp- 
tors, and muſicians. - Nor has all anti- 
quity furniſhed us with a fingle inſtance: 
of any excellent performance in any of 
thoſe arts, which was not the production 
of ſome genius either born or bred in one 
of thoſe two countries. And here let it 
be remembered, that it was in thoſe two 
eountries alone that oratory was ever ſtu- 
died and 3 as an art. 


CHAP. III. 


That in thoſe” countries where the liberal 

arts arrived at their higheſt pitch of 
glory, there were no traces of them, 3 * 
vious t ble udy of oratary, 


IN ang where all theſe arts Geini 

to have had their firſt birth, at leaſt 
in any maturity, we can trace no me- 
morials of them previous to the inſti- 
tution of oratory. The firſt works of any 
maſter which have been handed down to 
us, were thoſe of Homer; and as Cicero 
has juſtly obſerved, it is apparent from 
thoſe very works that eloquence had been 

| B b in 


370 BRITISH Book III. 


in high repute long before his time. 80 
that tho' we can not fix the preciſe date 
of the firſt riſe of oratory amongſt them, 
yet we have a moral certainty that it pre- 
ceded that of the other liberal arts. In 
Rome we can not be at a loſs to fix the 
exact æra of both. We know that, pre- 
vious to the introduction of the ſtudy of 
eloquence, which happened a little be- 
fore the time of Scipio and Lzlius, their 
taſte for poetry, painting, muſick, &c. 
was as rude and barbarous as in the moſt 
uncultivated nations ; nor did there ever 
ariſe amongſt them, before that period, 
one maſter. of eminence in any of - thoſe 
arts, nor was there produced one com- 
poſition in any kind worthy to be pre- 
ſerved and tranſmitted to poſterity. Tho' 
it is well known, that in leſs than fourſcors 
years after the inſtitution of oratory a- 
mongſt them, all thoſe arts, together 
with eloquence, gradually atoſe to their 
higheſt ſummit ; inſomuch that Rome 
might almoſt vie even with Greece, in 
point of the number of excellent artiſts, as 
well as in the perfection of their ſeveral 
kinds of works. 0 


CHAP. 


CAP. IV. S 37 


C HAP. IV. 


7 bat the liberal arts always followed ey 
in their progreſs towards perfection; ar- 
rived at their ſummit foon after that did; 
declined as that declined ; and, when that 


was baniſhed, wholly diſappeared. 


T was in the age of Pericles and De- 
moſthenes that oratory was brought 

to it's higheſt pitch in Greece; and we 
find that all the great [maſters in the ſe- 
veral arts, whoſe works have gained to 
them immortal fame, and have ever ſince 
been the admiration of the world, were 
their contemporaries. What an amazing 
number of poets and other writers ſtarted 
up and flouriſhed together during that 
ſmall ſpace ? Eſchylus, Sophocles, and 
Euripides, in tragedy : Ariſtophanes, Eu- 
polis, Cratinus, and Menander, in comedy: 
Herodotus, Thucydides, Iſocrates, Xene- 
phon, Plato, and Ariſtotle, in proſe: be- 
ſides many others of great name, whoſe 
works have unfortunately periſhed. The 
lame | _ of time produced Zeuxis, Apel- 
| B b 2 les, 


292 . BRITT ISH Boer H. 
les, Aglaophon, and many more, in the 
art of paining : Phidias, Praxiteles, Ly- 
ſippus, Myro, Polycletus, in ſtatuary and 
ſculpture. Then alſo aroſe all her great 
mulicians, whoſe names only are handed 
down to us, as their works have periſhed, 
But with the life of Demoſthenes ended 
the liberties of Greece; oratory became 
mute, and the arts vaniſhed. 

Nothing can ſerve more ſtrongly to il- 
luſtrate and prove the point propoſed, than 
to obſerve the amazing ſimilarity which 
there was between the fate of the arts, in 
Rome, and in Greece. It was in the time 
of Hortenſius and Cicero that oratory 
reached it's ſummit ; and the ſame zra 
gave birth to all the admired artiſts of 
Rome. During that period flouriſhed, 
or were trained up, all their great poets 
Lucretius, Virgil, Horace, Propertius, Ca- 
tullus, Tibullus, Ovid, Phædrus, Corne- 
lius Gallus, and many more, equally ad- 
mired in thoſe times, tho' their works did 
not happen to eſcape the devaſtations of 
barbarians; ſuch as Fundanius, Pollio, 
and Varius ; whoſe merits we can not 
doubt of, when celebrated by the candid 

$0 and 


Cnay.1V. EDUCATION. 3; 


and judicious Horace. At that time aroſe 
Julius Ceſar, Livy, Salluſt, &c. Then it 
was that Rome produced her Vitruvius, 
and all her eminent painters and ſculptors. 
But after that, in Rome, as in Greece, 
with the loſs of liberty, oratory declined, 
the arts drooped together with eloquence, 
and gradually ſunk away. It may be here 
objected, that it was in the reign of Au- 
guſtus, after the form of government had 
been changed, that the arts appeared in 
their higheſt luſtre at Rome. But in an- 
ſwer to this let it be obſerved, that the 
artiſts themſelves were all bred up during 
the moſt remarkable period of the re- 
publick, whoſe laſt blaze was it's brighteſt: 
at a time when all the faculties of the 
greateſt minds were exerted to the utmoſt 
in defence of expiring liberty: when a 
Cato or a Brutus found proper opportuni- 
ties to diſplay that ſuperior magnanimity, 
which has ever ſince rendered them objects 
of admiration to the whole world: when 
Cicero found ſubjects adequate to his 
mighty talents, and when oratory ſhone 
out from it's full meridian, and the ſtudy 


of eloquence was univerſal. As there 


B b 3 could 


4 


—— 


— * : 5 \ CA 
— * — q — IT - — — he. * - —_— eh be We — w# LY 
— — — — e vw, av —_—7 — 2 — * az * —— — —_ ks - 8 
2 = . os Fae 2 — nnr = \ oaks © — „ rr - * * 
1 > a . 


ey gt 


. . 4 1 „ — 
— — 2 2 Sy ne 


3334 BRITISH Book Hl. 
could not poſſibly have been a more hap- 
py juncture for the raiſing and cultivation 
of early genius, ſo the ſeaſon that ſucceed- 
ed was of all others the beſt fitted to make 
it flouriſh and produce fruit. The long 
and peaceable reign of Auguſtus ; his 
great liberality, and nice diſcernment, to- 
gether with that of his miniſter, in re- 
warding merit; muſt have made every 
artiſt exert his talents to the utmoſt. But 
tho' this due encouragement produced 
| fuch wonders in the works of thoſe who 
had been already formed, yet it had not - 
power to raiſe any new ones. Nor was 
there afterwards a fingle inſtance of any 
maſterly performance, which was the 
work of a perſon born and bred up during 
his rejgn, or thoſe of his ſucceſſors ; the 
beſt of them being only copies of thoſe 
great originals : A plain and demonſtrative 
proof, that the fountain which nurſed and 
invigorated thoſe great geniuſes was dried 
up. If a' concurrence of moral cauſes 
could have been able to have raiſed the 
arts from their ſeeds to maturity, there 
never had been a period which promiſed 
ſo plentiful a crop. 400 tho it may be 

ſaid, 


CAP. IV. EDUCATION. 375 
ſaid, that the tempeſtuous weather during 
the cruel and bloody reigns of Nero and 
ſome of his ſucceſſors, might for a time 
have blighted and ſtopped their growth ; 
yet what cauſe can be aſſigned that they 
did not revive and flouriſh under the ſet- 
tled calm, warm ſunſhine, and genial 
{kies, of five ſach ſucceſſive reigns as 
thoſe of Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, Antoninus 
| _ and Marcus Aurelius ?? 
When we conſider, that previous to the 
patfotion of oratory in Greece, there was 
no inſtance of any excellent performance 
in any of the liberal arts, the works of 
Homer alone excepted; and that in Rome 
there was not one example: that after the 
abolition of oratory in both countries, 
there never was any thing maſterly pro- 
daced in either: when we reflect, that the 
liberal arts never roſe to any height in any 
country of the globe where oratory was 
not ſtudied and practiſed; and that, in 
thoſe countries where oratory was culti- 
vated, they grew and flouriſhed, declined 
and periſhed as that did: we can not but 
conclude that there muſt be a near and in- 
timate connexion between them, and that 
* 8 the 


376 . BRITISH . Boox III. 


the one lian a neceſſary eee 700 
the other. 
From the above ſtate of the caſe one of 
the two following concluſions muſt evi- 
dently be deduced; either, that the per- 
fection of oratory was the cauſe of the 
perfection of the liberal arts; or, that the 
. perfection of the liberal arts was the 
ö cauſe of the perfection of oratory.” The 
former opinion ſeems to be ſupported by 
fact, as it has been clearly ſhewn that the 
riſe of oratory was always previous to that 
of the arts; let us now ſee how it can be 
maintained and confirmed from the reaſon 
and nature of things. In order to do this, 
I ſhall firſt endeavour to ſhew, that this 
opinion is founded upon the higheſt de- 
gree of probability, by making it appear 
that it was much more eaſy far oratory, 
and by means more natural, fo raiſe and 
ſupport the liberal arts, than that the libe- 
ral arts ſhould have power ta raiſe and 
ſupport oratory. In the ſecond place I 
ſhall endeayour to eſtabliſh it upon certain 
proof, that it is almoſt impoſſible that thoſe 
arts ſhould arrive at perfection without the 
gid and aſſiſtance of oratory. 


CHAP, 


| Re. n; 377 


n v. 


2 bat it it es more Par #9 5 oras 

| tory raiſed and | ſupported | the liberal 

arts, than that the liberal arts raiſed 
and Ae oratory. 


VERY one, a at all e 
the point, muſt at once ſee, that in 
* alone are contained the principles 
of all the other arts; and that to form a 
compleat orator, the talents of a poet, 
painter, and muſician, are abſolutely ne- 
ceſſary: ſo that the perfection of that 
one art, would of courſe afford ſupplies to 
the others, and bring them to maturity. 
Whereas, on a contrary principle, oratory 
muſt wait for it's perfection, till each of 
the other arts had reached theirs, and 
flouriſhed all together: a circumſtance not 
very likely to happen, as they have by no 
means ſo near a connection with each 
other (tho ſomewhat allied) that the pro- 
greſs of the one ſhould of courſe introduce 
that of the other. Fruſtra fit per plura 
gud 4 fiert potef per pauciora, is an un- 
doubted 


378 BRITISH Boox III. 
doubted axiom. And ſurely it is more 
rational to account for different effects 
from the energy of one cauſe, if they may 
be allowed naturally to flow from it, than 
to attribute one effect to the united power 
of various cauſes, which have no neceſſary 
union amongſt themſelves. The variety 
of colours is much more eaſily accounted 
for, by ſuppoſing that they reſide in the 
rays of light (which has indeed been 
proved) than in the ſeveral objects. And 
this method of reaſoning muſt ever be al- 
lowed to be the moſt probable, when not 
contradicted by facts. But there is alſo ano- 
ther argument to be drawn in ſupport of 
this opinion, from the very nature of theſe 
arts, and the manner in which they ope- 
rate, that will amount to ſomething equi- 
valent to proof. Allarts ate accompliſhed 
and ended either in a work, or an energy. 
A work is that whoſe parts are co-exiſtent, 
and the perfection of whoſe eſſence de- 
pends upon their remaining in the ſame 
ſtate. An energy is that, whoſe parts exiſt 
only in ſucceſſion, and which hath it's 
very being in tranſition. Thus a ſtatue and 
a procure are works; as are alſo a poem and 
Seele a mu- 


'Cnae, V. EDUCATION. 379 


a muſical compoſition, When reduced to 
writing and notes, as their parts in that caſe 
become co- exiſtent and fixed. But dance 
ing, playing on any inſtrument, and ſpeak» 
Ing or reciting, are only energies. Hence 
it will follow, when the production of any 
art is an energy, that the perfection of the 
art can be only perceived during that 
energy, and muſt alſo of neceſſity be co- 
eval with the artiſt. Thus the delicate 
touches and maſterly hand of a muſical 
performer can be only heard during the 
action of his playing, muſt end when 
that ceaſes, and neceſſarily finiſh with his 
life. Thus alſo the animated looks, en- 
forcing. geſture, and. expreſſive tones of 
the orator, can be known only to his im- 
. mediate ſpectators and hearers; and, ex- 
cept ſuch part of them as is impreſſed on 
the memories of thoſe, muſt neceſſarily 
periſh with himſelf. But the caſe is quite 
otherwiſe in regard to works, the petfeg- 
tion of which is not viſible during the ener- 
2y, but only after it. It is not till the 
painter, the ſtatuary, and the poet, have 
put their laſt hand totheir pieces, that they 
are 6s to be finiſhed, or their full beauty 


per * 


7 


380 BRITISH Book III. 
perceived. After that, they have no con- 
nection with the fate of the artiſt, but may 
remain to perpetuity when he himſelf is 
no more. When this conſideration has 
had it's due weight, upon a ſuppoſition. 
that the liberal arts borrowed their aids 
and ſupplies from oratory, we ſhall no 
longer be at a loſs for a reaſon why there 
were no more excellent artiſts to be found 
in any of thoſe, when there were no longer 
any good orators ſubſiſting. But on the 
contrary ſuppoſition, that oratory drew it's 
ſupplies from the liberal arts, there can be 
no reaſon aſſigned why many excellent 
orators might not at any time have ariſen, 
ſince the compoſitions, and works, of the 
ſeveral artiſts ſtill remained in equal per- 
fection, and conſequently equally capable 
of affording them all proper lights and 
aſſiſtance. But why ſhould we fuppoſe 
that theſe ſeveral works ſhould be able to 
produce great maſters in a diſtin& art, 
when they were not capable of raiſing any 
in their -own ſeveral kinds ? It would be 
more natural to think that a number of 
excellent compoſitions in poetry, muſick, 
_ painting, ſhould ſerve as models to 
form 


Caae.V, EDUCATION. 385 


form good poets, maſters of muſick, and 
painters, each being . wholly employed in 
the ſtudy, and practice of his own art, 
than that finiſhed orators ſhould be pro- 
duced from the difficult and laborious 
ſtudy of all three; and yet we find that 
they were far from being equal even to 
this. Seneca, who wrote in the reign im- 
mediately ſucceeding that of Auguſtus, 
complains heavily of the great depravity - 
of taſte, and viſible decay in all the arts: 
and Quinctilian, fixty years after the de- 
ceaſe of that prince, wrote an expreſs trea- 
tiſe on the cauſes of the decay of Roman 
eloquence. He has alſo ſhewn us in ma- 
ny places, that the other arts were equall 

in a low ſtate. Since therefore we fol 
it indubitably proved that the arts always 
roſe, flouriſhed, and declined with ora- 
tory, why may we not conclude- with 
confidence, that it was from oratory alone 
that they all drew their -ſupplies ? But 
as it may be ſaid that all which has been 
advanced upon this ſubject wilÞat' moſt 
only amount to a ſtrong preſumptive proof, 
I ſhall now endeavour to ſhew, that it is 
alot aL for the liberal arts to 


1 reach 


382 BRITISH Boo III. 
reach perfection, or flouriſh to any great 
degree, without the aid of oratory, and the 
ſupplies which they draw from thence. In 
order to do this it will be neceſſary to 
trace the principles upon which the per- 
fection of thoſe arts is founded. Let us 
therefore take a ſurvey of poetry, mulick, 
and painting, with this view ; fince what- 


ever relates to ſculpture and ſtatuary will 
come under Ge 1 head. 


When CH AF. VI. 


of baun Mufick, and Palins and Heir 
S ource. 


HESE arts are al Founded upon 
one common principle, which is 
imitation. They differ from each other 
only in the ſubjects which they are ſeve+ 
rally capable of imitating, and in the in- 
ſtruments, or media, made uſe of to diſplay 
that power. Painting, for inſtance, can 
imitate only thro' the media of figure and 
colour, and is therefore confined to ſuch 
ſubjects as are peculiarly characteriſed by 
thoſe, Muſick, for the ſame reaſon, is li- 


mited 


cur. VI. EDUCATION. 383 


mited to ſuch only as depend upon motion 
and ſound: whilſt poetry, working by 
the medium of words, which by compact 
ſtand for ſymbols of all our ideas, can 
imitate as far as language can expreſs; and 
that in a manner includes all things. © 


As the fundamental point in all theſe 


arts is imitation, it is evident that, with- 
out that, they can have no merit, or ra- 


ther indeed can not ſubſiſt. But the moſt 


perfect imitation in the world is not of it- 
felf ſufficient to ſtamp a value upon' a 
work, which muſt ever be conſidered with 
relation to the ſubje& or thing imitated, 
and be rated in proportion to the merit of 
that. For tho the chief object of the artiſt 
himſelf be imitation, and he has certainly 
arrived at perfection in every work, where 
he has been able to produce an exact re- 
ſemblance; yet the world, who are to rate 
the merit of the piece, will not confine 
themſelves merely to the {kill of the artiſt, 
but vill take into the value, eircumſtances 
of delight, and profit, which arife from 
qualities inherent in the original ſubject. 
Hence it is plain, that in all theſe arts there 
is an abſolute and relative perfection. The 
abſo- 


3 


1 - 
0 — — a 2 * - 
_ . » — — " * — . — A N > 22 « . 5 ct ———_ - 5 — . K 2 
3 N — — ae re — 2 - 2 — - 2 — GR ® VF SED _— + wane Fe - FP Hogs NS dot Oo TD ON SERIE EY Oo” BF wid on _ 
LETS Chet ** 8 * — . — — wh — * =. Xa, Os OT: — — r 4 SEC FEISTY SG n „ Oy = n gan den « 3 
— 8 - —— r 8 I BE I Fo — "40 = : TW ans — _—_ = \ —2 
* — . * l Nr . N . n W. * A 1 7 8 "aA to * * * 20 r —_ o 
— * r 9 d 8 by : 5 k * »Dc \ w__ = = = - - = 
„ EEO = . NN No ne 9 9 9% I» = | TS l Ee T7 \ r * 
= - l 


384 BRI TI S Book III. 


abſolute depends upon the exact ſimilitude 
of the copy to the original, of whatever 
kind it be; the relative, upon the choice 
of the ſubject, as well as. accuraey of re- 
ſemblance. As the laſt is that which aſcer- 
tains the value of works, it is therefore 
chiefly to be attended to by all artiſts. 
The great ends of all thefe arts, being 

the ſame with thoſe of oratory, viz, to 
delight, to move, and to inſtruct,” (un- 
der which laſt head I include every thing 
which tends to better the heart as well as 
to improve the underſtanding) theſe points 
ſhould be conſtantly kept in view both in 
the choice of ſubjects, and in the manner 
of handling them. Whence-it muſt fol- 
low, that all ſubjects for imitation taken 
from human nature, and all means to diſ- 
play them borrowed from that, muſt with 
mankind obtain a preference, and have a 
ſtronger influence than. from the whole 
univerſe beſides." Nature itſelf has im- 
planted in us a particular attraction to our 
own ſpecies, which is viſible in all animals; 
and endued the heart with a kind of in- 
ſtinctive ſenſibility to certain ſounds and 
tones, as wel as looks and geſtures, which 

have 


CAP. VI. EDUCATION. 385 
have a natural expreſſion in them, inde- 
pendent of words, and which may be 
conſidered as the univerſal language of 
the paſſions, equally underſtood by all 
the different nations of the earth. No- 
thing therefore can delight or move the 
heart of man ſo much as a lively repre- 
ſentation of the actions and ſufferings, of 
others, ariſing from qualities to which 
he finds ſomething congenial in himſelf. 
And what inſtruction can be of ſuch ad- 
vantage to him, as that which improves 
him in the knowlege of human nature, 
the uſe whereof he muſt daily and hourly 
experience in every action of his life? 

We find that by common conſent man- 
kind have agreed to rate the value of 
works by this ſtandard. Thus the epick 
and dramatick poetry have obtained the 
firſt place, in preference to the lyrick, epi- 
grammatick, and all writings of wit and 
fancy. Thus the hiſtory painter has an 
allowed ſuperiority over thoſe who draw 
landſcapes, animals, flowers, and the 
whole tribe of inanimate beings. In mu- 
ſick alſo, they who make uſe of that art, 
as an in ad und to poetry, and by that means 
2 Ge | ren- 


436 BRITISH Book IH. 
render it capable of moving the paſſions, 
and of impreſſing (entimentsmmore*ftrong4 
ly on the mind, are preferred to thoſe, 
whoſe compoſitions: only ſexve to pleaſe 
the ear, or charm the fancy. In this alſs 
the human voice is conſeſſedly preemi- 
nent over all muſical inſtruments, whoſe 
power of moving and pleaſing the heart 
and ear, is in proportion to their near re- 
| ſetnblatice toghag cs 20s dy! ito, 
Me find alſo, that 4 410 nn 
in the ſevetal imitative arts who chuſe 
human nature for their object, there is a 
diſtinction of rank in proportion to the 
dignity and importance of their ſubjects. 
Thus the writer of epick poetry, who 
relates the actions of kings and heroes, 
and diſplays all the more elevated and ſub- 
lime qualities of the human mind, 'toge- 
ther with the more exalted and noble paſ- 
ſions, is placed at a great diſtance above 
the writers of paſtorals and elegies. For 
the ſame reaſon the tragick poet is prefor- | 
red to the comick. Thus the painter of 
famous and remarkable hiſtorical actiono, 
is in higher eſtimation, than he who is 
_— employed — portraits, or con- 
verſa- 


Chr. VI EDUCATION. 387 
ver ſation pieces in common life. And 
thus the compoſers of operas, maſques, 
oratorio's, ' &. are of a higher order, 
than they who only ſet ſingle ſongs, can - 
tatas, or dialogues, to muſick. This being 
premiſed, let us now examine the points 
which are neceſſary to enable each artiſt 
in his ſeveral way, to arrive at the higheſt 
degree of perfection whereof his art is 
capable, and to be ranked in the foremoſt 
claſs. 

To the completion of an artiſt; four 
things are chiefly neceflary, genius, ap- 
plication, proper ſubjects, and ſuitable 
inſtruments to work with. Suppoſing 
therefore an equality as to the two firſt re- 
quiſites, in. perſons born in different coun- 
tries: or ages, let us fee how far their 


works will be affected, and riſe up to, or 


fall ſhort of perfection, in proportion to 


their opportunities of being Ws with 


the latter. 

All tmitation neceſſarily ſuppoſes a ſub- 
je&, or thing imitated, and muſt there- 
fore ever be conſidered with relation to 
that; otherwiſe it changes it's nature, and 
loſes it's very eſſence. | 
; ee The 


-- 
— 


1 Ja = — — — — — — = —— a - — = 
— = — 
2 * 
— — — . —— — 2 — £2 Y 2 
« 2 od I 1 2 * — . Sy 07 RN WP — rn HT 
; \ 1 "I rr _— Ln 7 1 * * T 4 2 * = 
- * 8 7 Q hk \ N Y - 
** . FRE E135 Hine ByhaV4,, AF omen ee L \ 8 Sos a Z 
* 7 . - 96 & a _ - \ : \ = = 
\ r 
: 6 = 


388 B RIT IS H Boox III. 
The perfection of imitation conſiſts in 
the exactneſs of ſimilitude to the thing 
imitated. Whence it evidently follows that 
it muſt partake of all the good and bad 
qualities of it's ſubject; that it muſt be 
beautiful, or deformed, give pleaſure, or 
diſguſt, in proportion as that would. 

As all tranſcripts are formed from im- 
pteſfions made on the imagination, the 
ſtronger thoſe impreſſions are, the more 
lively and ſimilar will the tranſcripts be. 
Now nothing contributes ſo much to the 
ſtrength of impreſſions, as the frequent and 
reiterated action of the objects upon the 
ſenſes, thro' which they are ſtamped. on 
the imagination, and fink deeper at every 
new ſtroke. As their ſimilitude depends 
much upon this, fo the beauty of their 
form, and the ſymmetry of their parts in 
the copies, mult ever be determined by 
thoſe qualities in the originals. Whence 
we muſt conclude, that all ſuch artiſts 
(ſuppoſing an equality of genius and ap- 
plication), as have the maſt frequent op- 
portunities of ſeeing and examining the 

beſt and moſt perfect 3 will necet- 
2 ſuarily 


Cxar. VI. EDUCATION. 3389. 


farily produce works of the ſtrongeſt re- 
ſemblance, and greateſt excellence. 
Here it is to be obſerved, that I ſpeak 
all along of real artiſts, whoſe works are 
an immediate tranſcript from nature; and 
are therefore dignified with the name of 
originals, in contradiſtinction to the me- 
chanical labours of copyiſts, who content 
themſelves with a ſervile imitation of the 
manner of thoſe maſters; and whoſe 
productions, as they do not proceed from 
a warm imagination, ſtrongly impreſſed by 
the energetick power of nature, but from 
à cold obſervation of artificial rules; ſo, 
tho' they may be poſſeſſed even of a ſcru- 
pulous ſimilarity; and raiſe analogous ideas, 
yet they are deprived of all power of 
moving and affecting. The impreſſions 
made by them laſt no longer than whilſt 
they are ſeen: in the ſame manner as a 
man views his own image exactly diſplayed 
in a mirror, but when hegoeth away, firaight= 
way forgettet what manner of man he is. 
After the ſubjets, the next things 
which come to be confidered are the in- 
ſtruments, or media, by means whereaf the 


2160 $3 images 


296 BRITISH Book III. 
images and ideas which are in the brain of 
the artiſt, are ſubmitted to the ſenſes of 
others; and without which he can do no- 
thing. Here it muſt at once be evident, 
that the fkill of the artiſt muſt appear in 
a greater or leſs degree, in proportion to 
the degrees of perfection in his inſtru- 
ments, and aptitude to their end. For 
whatever ideas he may have himſelf, he 
can not communicate any beyond what is 
in the power of thoſe inſtruments to 
ſhew. Thus in poetry, a writer can not. 
compoſe harmonious "verſes in a language 
of which the words have a diſcordant and 
diſagreeable found: the painter who has 
but a few colours, muſt be confined only 
to ſuch objects as they are capable of repre- 
ſenting: and the muſician muſt be re- 
ſtrained in his compoſitions, to ſuch notes 
as are within the compaſs of his inſtrument. 
Hence it will follow, that a poet who 
writes in a language well adapted to po- 
etical numbers: muſt have an advantage 
over one, who has a diſſonant and unplea- 
fant tongue to ſtruggle with: that a 
painter who has the art of blending co- 
lours, ſo as to form as great a variety as 
| are 


ORA. VI. EDVCATI ON, 391 


are to be found in the works of, nature, 
has A. much. larger fieſd. to diſplay: his ta- 
lents i in, than he who is. confined. to 
few: and that the muſical compoſer may 
ſhew infinite powers in his art, by means 
of inſtruments of proper force and.compatſy, 
Which can not be at all diſplayed by one, 
whofe inſtruments. are, poor, and confined. 
Let us now apply theſe rules, to the ſet 
veral imitative arts; from which it will 
appear, that the maſters i in thoſe, whoſe 
chief, buſineſs. it is to give a lively and 
beautiful repreſentation « of human nature, 
in its moſt exalted. and, graceful point of 
view, muſt. of , neceflity have had . the 
higheſt advantage, by means of living 3 in 
thoſe countries, and in thoſe periods of 
time, when. oratory was at it's height, 
over all other artiſts.in the world, of every 
other age and country. And we ſhall ſee 
the reaſon why it is almoſt impoſſible; that 
perfect tranſcripts of that kind could have 
been produced at any other juncture, thro 
the want of proper yeh, or - James 
inſtruments. e Jo 
And firſt as, to poetty. The 2 
ment of the poets is language, and their 
Gods C 0 4 works 


392 BRITISH Boo III. 
works muſt be proportionably perfect, or 
defective, as that is. In regard to this 
point, we have already ſhewn, both from 
fact, and the reaſon of things, that the 
ſtudy and practice of oratory alone could 
bring language to perfection. It was to the 
orators therefore that the poets of all de- 
nominations were obliged for the uſe and 
improvement of an inſtrument perfectly 
adapted to all their ſeveral purpoſes ; as 
well as for inſtructions in the art of manag- 
ing it with eaſe and dexterity. - But the 
epick and tragick writers, in whoſe works 
the dignity of human nature was to be diſ- 
played, as well as all the more exalted paſ- 
fions and affections, mult have been chiefly 
indebted to them for the principal excel- 
lence of their art. Their great ends are, 
to move, to delight, to inſtruct; and from 
whom could they learn the power to do all 
theſe fo effectually, as from the orator ; 
who muſt ſo far fail of his point, as he falls 
ſhort in any of thoſe ends; and whoſe 
conſtant practice pointed out the means by 
which thoſe were to be attained ? Where 
zould they have ſuch opportunities of 
Jawing the paſſions from the life, as in 

thoſo 


uA. VI. EDUCATION. 393 
thoſe aſſemblies where they were perpetu- 
ally to be ſeen both in their cauſes and ef- 
fects ? From what ſchool could they learn 
the art of giving ſuitable ſentiments, pro- 
per diction, and becoming deportment to 
their exalted: characters, which they could 
have but few. opportunities of obſerving 
in life, ſo well as that of oratory; where 
they might ſee men of the moſt elevated 
genius diſplaying all the higheſt faculties 
of the mind, upon the moſt important 
ſubjects? Where they had conſtant mo- 
dels before them of the moſt animated 
nature, under the guidance of the beſt 
regulated art? It is eaſy to ſee how much 
all writers-in proſe, whether of hiſtory, 
or any thing elſe relative to human af- 
fairs, muſt have been indebted to that 
for the ornamental parts of their works, 
as this is viſible enough in the many ex- 
cellent orations to be Wand in the antient 

writers, Ens 25 
Secondly, as to Mabel The — ould 
and uſe of muſick is to move, and by ſtir- 
ring the paſſions to give delight. For con- 
ſidered as a mere ſenſual gratification, it is 
of no ſort of benefit, and it's effect is to the 
laſt degree: tranſient. It was to anſwer.the 
for- 


394 BR ILTIS H Roo 1h 
former purpoſe, that the antients em- 
ployed their whole {kill in that art. They 
conſidered it therefore chiefly. as an aſſiſt · 
ant to poetry, and in the conſtruction of 
their inſtruments; they had that point 
principally. in view. As an adjunét to 
poetry, it's great force muſt depend upon 
expreſſion : and expreſſion muſt be bor - 
rowed from the various ſounds and tones 
which nature has annexed, to the various 
paſſions; but ſtill under the regulation of 
art, as to the proper proportions and de- 
grees ſuited to the octaſien- The human 
voice, or the inſtruments which approach. 
ed neareſt to it, were of courſe the moſt 
gapable of producing. this effect. From 
whom therefore could the muſical eem- 
poſer acquire ſuc h. ſkill in this reſpect as 
from the orator, to whom it was abſo- 
lutely neceſſary that he ſnquld be able to 
expreſs all the different paſſions in their 
natural and ſuitable tones and ſounds ? 
And how finely and properly muſt theſe 
have come prepared to the compoſer, 
when heard from the tuneful and well- 
mudulated voice of a finiſned ſpeaker ? It 
was from this example that the muſician 


Learned the complete management of his 
. 


CAP. VI. EDUCATION. 147 
art, as deſcribed by Quinktilian. Nanique' 
& voce & ee, grandia elate, jucun- 
da dulciter, moderata leniter tusit, totũgur 
arte comſentit cum eorum, qua dicuntur, 
afettibus. With ſuch aĩds and ſuch ſubs: 
ects for imitation, we need” no longer: 
2 at the amazing effects which are 
recorded to have been produced/by antient 
muſick, nor the extraordinary powers 
which it had over the paſſions: a power 
equal (if we: may believe the concurrent 
teſtimony of many hiſtorians, und other 
writers) to the fancied deſcription: of it in 
Dryden's ode. Nor fhall we be at a loſs 
to account for this, when we'conſider the 
mighty force of oratortabexpreffion alone: 
what then muſt it be, when conveyed to 
the heart with all the ſuperadded powers 
and charms: of mufick ? No perſon of 
ſenſibility, who has had the good fortune 
to hear Mrs) Cibber ſing in the oratorio o 
the Meſſiah, will find it very difficult to 
give credit to accounts of the moſt won 
derful effects produced from ſo powerful 
a union. And yet it was not to any ex- 
traordinary powers of voice (whereof ſhe 
mo but a: very moderate ſhare)" nor to a 
x g -*” preaer 


396 BRITISH Book III. 
greater degree of ſkill in muſick (wherein 
many of the Italians muſt be allowed to 
exceed her) that ſhe owed her excellence, 
but to expreſſion only; her acknowleged 
ſuperiority in which could proceed from 
nothing but ſkill in her profeſſion. What 
has been ſaid may ſerve clearly to point 
out the reaſon why the muſick of the an- 
tients was upon the whole far ſuperior 
to that of the moderns ; notwithſtanding 
it muſt be granted that our inſtruments 
have great advantages over theirs; and 
that our muſick, conſidered as a ſingle 
and diſtinct ſcience, has been carried to 
a much higher pitch of perfection than 
obably ĩt ever was amongſt them. The 
chief end which the antients had in view, 
was it's utility in ſtirring the paſſions, 
rouzing the affections, and giving them a 
roper diretion. This could never ef- 
fectually be accompliſhed but by making 
it an adjunct to poetry; and as an adjunct 
to poetry it muſt obtain it's chief force 
from expreſſion, it's chief delight from 
melody. The completion of their whole 
point was therefore finiſhed. in the ac- 
compliſhment of thoſe two ; and this 
"FTP being 


Crar.1V. EDUCATION. 397 


being their ſummum, they ſeldom turned 
their thoughts to conſider how far the 
powers of muſick might be carried as a 
ſeparate art. But the caſe of the moderns 
was quite otherwiſe. With the ſprings 
of oratory, was alſo dried up the ſource 
of expreſſion in this art, when uſed as 
an ally.to poetry. As they found it im- 
poſſible therefore to arrive at any great 
degree of excellence in that reſpect, they 
changed their object, and employed their 
whole thoughts in conſidering it's: ſepa- 
rate powers; and their labours, in endea- 
vouring to bring it to the higheſt degree 
of perfection, of which in it's own na- 
ture it was ſingly capable. With this 
view they applied themſelves affiduouſly 
to the improvement of the old, and the 
invention of- new inſtruments, which 
might be capable of diſplaying the whole 
powers and variety of harmony : and their 
works have fince chiefly tended to diſplay 
the whole -powers, and variety of thoſe 
inſtruments, In this reſpe& they have 
perhaps gone as great lengths, and ac- 
compliſhed their point as effectually, as 
* antients. But if to move the paſſions, 


and 


N 
3938 BRITISH BSN tit. 
and thereby. to better the heart; be an end 
in itſelf of more uſe and importance, 
than mercbhy to gratify the ear or amuſe 
the fancy, the antient muſick .muft ſarely 
be of 2 ſuperior rank to the modern. To 
be convinced of this, we need only con- 
fider the effects which are naturally pro- 
duced by the two different kinds. The 
beſt mnſical imitation can, of atfelf, only 
excite, ideas fimilar and analogous to ſuch 
as are in the mind of the compoſer, and 
which are as evaneſcent as the ſounds 
which excite.;them:: nor can it's effect be 
at all greater or tore durable in moving 
the 3 But when. it is annexed to 
| Poetry, the ideas raiſed by it are exactly 
the ſame,: and are fixed on the memory 
by permanent marks: the paſſions alſo 
arg not enly rouzed and put in motion, 
but acquire duration by being aſſociated 
to the images of poetry, and are directed 
to proper ends by the ſentiments. In- 
deed the natural ſuperiority of this kind 
of muſick over the other, oan not be more 
fully proved, than by the general preference 
which it has obtained amongſt us, even in 
Wc HINT imperfect and defective ſtate. 
| The 


Cf. V. EDUCATION. 390 
The inſtrumental muſick is univerfally 
held in lower eſtimation than the vocal, 
notwithſtanding that the compoſitions in 
the former muſt be allowed” to be more 
perfect in their kind, and it muſt be grant- 
ed that the maſters have attained theit 
end more completely, than in the latter. 
The imperfeckion of the modern vocal 
muſick clearly atiſes from a want of pro- 
per expreſſion: nor ſhall we have cauſe 
to wonder that this defect is ſo general, 
when we confider that in order to be 
able to produce that, a compoſer ſhould 
completely underſtand the whole art of 
| eloquence. For how ſhould he be able 
to give the proper cadence to words by 
means of muſical notes, or annex faitable 
ſounds expreſſive of the paſſions, who 
does not know how to lay the right 
emphaſis in reading or repeating thoſe 
very words, or to enforce the ſentiments 
by the natural tones of voice? The total 
and general want of ſkill in that art, has 
deen the cauſe that the compoſers of vo- 
cal muſick have been under a neceſſity of 
giving up what ought to be their chief ob- 
ject, and of- making their end the fame 
55 | 4 with 


499 BRITISH Boox III. 
with that of the inſtrumental. They con- 
ſider the human voice therefore in the 
light merely of an inſtrument, and em- 
ploy their whole art and {kill only in 
ſhewing the compaſs and various inflec- 
tions of that, and content themſelves with 
the ſuperiority which the mere powers of 
the organ, together with the natural en- 
ergy of it's operations upon the kindred. 
ſenſes of the hearers, give to their works, 
preferably to thoſe which are diſplayed by 
artificial inſtruments. So that both kinds 
of muſick have now one common object, 
that of charming the ear, and amuſing 
the fancy; and the ſuperiority of the one 
over the other has only reſulted from it's 
natural qualities, and fitneſs to anſwer 
thoſe ends. The neceſſity brought upon 
the compoſer of vocal muſick of changing 
his object, and making his end the ſame 
with that of the inſtrumental, may be 
made ſufficiently apparent from a due con- 
ſideration of the following circumſtance. 
Let us ſuppoſe a maſter were to ariſe, 


FE who with immenſe pains ſhould make 


himſelf well {killed in expreſſion, and in 
* his compoſitions ſhould . that 


Canary. VI. EDUCATION. 40t 
as the chief point; would not all his 
labours be fruitleſs, unleſs he could find 
performers equally well ſkilled in that art 
with himſelf? For if the ſingers were not 
able to enter into the ſpitit of the work, 
and to produce the whole force of ex- 
preſſion, according to the deſign of the 
artiſt, the compoſition muſt” fail of it's 
great end, that of moving the heart. 
When that end is miſled; the chief ex- 
cellence of the work is of courſe not per- 
ceived, and in this caſe nothing remains 
to be conſidered but it's other qualities, 
of pleaſing the ear and flattering the ima- 
gination. In theſe reſpects, as it muſt 
neceſſarily be much confined; and cir- 
eumſeribed in narrow bounds, by the 
main object, when it comes to be com- 
pared with compoſitions where the full 
reins are given to faney, it muſt appear 
infinitely inferior, and be rated aecording- 
ly. Of this we have a remarkable inſtance 
in the works of the greateſt muſical genius 
that this country has produced; Parcel, 
tho not the inveritor of the Engliſh mu- 
ſick, yet was the great improver of it 
and had it been cultivated with care ſince 
Ge D d his 


. ES IE "> Doe i ES IO I mg NET ETC ENE _ EE ERR _ 
A EE ER 2 Bs * — . — 2 - n — 
— — — — — . — —— — , ine it 7 * . > 9 22 ES. —— — et 
% . F 1 a —_ w-.- 


. 


462 BRITISH Boo. 
his time, we might perhaps claim à ſu- 
petiority over all the moderns. He clear- 
ly ſaw that the chief object of vocal mu- 


ſick ought to be expreſſion. This was 
therefore what he principally attended to 
in his compoſitions, and he carried the 
point much farther than could have been 
expected from the weak lights and aſ- 
fiſtances which he met with in thoſe 
times. Had he lived in the illuſtrious 
ages of old Greece or Rome, it is more 
than probable, from the immenſity of his 
genius, and the aids and advantages which 
he might have had then to improve it to 
the utmoſt, that he might have been 
ranked amongſt their foremoſt artiſts. 
During his life, the beauty of his works 
might have been perceived, and his re- 
putation proportionably raifed, as he had 


an opportunity of inſtructing the perfor- 


mers, viva voce, in the manner of ſinging 
them according to their true ſpirit. But 
fince his death, by means of a total igno- 
rance in the fingers as to the article of ex- 
preſſion, they have gradually ſunk away 
in their eſtimation, and are now almoſt 


buried i in oblivion. In a century or two 
more, 


Cuar. IV. EDUCATION, 403 
more, unleſs a true taſte ſhould revive, 
they will probably be wholly obliterated, 
and the memorial of them remain no more 
upon earth. The ſame cauſe may ſerve 
fully to account for the total annihilation 
of the antient muſick, inſomuch that not 
the leaſt traces of it were handed down to 
ꝓoſterity, except the figures of their in- 
ſtruments preſerved on medals, baſſo re- 
lievos, and other pieces of ſculpture. When 
muſick flouriſhed in thoſe countries, the 
compoſers, as well as performers, were all 
regularly trained in the ſtudy and practice 
of elocution; for, as it has been before ob- 
ſerved, without a knowlege of that art, 
they could never have diſplayed excel- 
lence in their - own, which depended 
chiefly on expreſſion. This art therefore 
neceſſarily ſunk with that of eloquenee, 
and loſt all it's charms. The preſervation 
of the notes of a compoſition, was only 
the preſervation of their powers as to 
mere ſound; but their force and beauty 
in point of expreſſion, could never be 
pointed out by any yifible marks, without 
the aſſiſtance of a maſter's 'voiee. - The 
true powers therefore of ſuch marks could 
al D d 2 be 


404 BRIT IS H Boox III. 
be as little known to poſterity, in muſical 
compoſitions, as the true uſe of the ac- 
cents in the works of the Greek poets and 
orators. As therefore the great beauty of 
their vocal muſick was loſt, and as they 
had never carried their inſtrumental to 
any great height, nothing remained in the 
whole art worthy of much pains to pre- 
ſerve it, and conſequently it was eaſily 
ſwept away and drowned in the torrent of 
barbariſm. Nor ought this to appear at 
all ſurpriſing to us when we reflect, that 
beſide the inſtance before mentioned of 
Purcel, whoſe reputation, tho' he lived fo 
near our own times, is amazingly ſunk, 
we have examples alſo in our great old 
maſters Tallis, Lawes, and Blow, whoſe 
names are now ſcarce known to the pub- 
lick. Theſe three, like Purcel, had ex- 
preſſion for their object, and on that ac- 
count their works have ſhared the ſame 
fate. Nor ſhould we probably at this day 
have any traces oſ their compoſitions re- 
maining, were not ſome of them employed 
in the church ſervice: where, thro' a falſe 
taſte in the performers, and a total inabi- 
* to give them they due force of expreſ- 
fion, 


Cray. VI. EDUCATION. 409 


ion, they loſe the greateſt part of their 
beauty, and conſequently muſt in time be 
ſupplanted by others more adapted to the 
prevailing taſte. | 

I ſhall finiſh this head with a quotation 
from the abbot Gravina, 4 1 the 
judgement which he paſſed upon the Ita- 
lian muſick, whoſe ſuperiority over all 
the modern kinds is generally allowed, af- 
fords a ſtrong confirmation of what I have 
advanced upon this ſubject. He ſays, 
*The muſick which we hear now on 
our ſtages, is far from producing the 
ſame effects as that of the antients. In- 
ſtead of imitating and expreſſing the 
meaning of the words, it contributes 
only to enervate and choak it: where- 
fore it is as diſagreeable to thoſe who 
have a juſtneſs of taſte, as it is pleaſing 
to ſuch as differ from reaſon. In fact, 
vocal muſick ought to imitate the na- 
tural language of the human paſſions, 
rather than the ſinging of canary birds, 
which our muſick affects ſo vaſtly to 
mimick with it's quaverings and boaſted 
cadences : Tho we have at preſent a 
Abbate Gravina della tragedia, 9 | 
1 very 


I A, „ „ 6a «a „ „ „ 


* 


BE ESE SIS 0.00.0 2.14 4.8 


o BRITISH Box III. 


very ſkilful muſician, and a man of 
good ſenſe, who is not carried away with 
the torrent. But our poetry having been 
corrupted by the exceſs of ornaments 
and figures, the contagion has ſpread it- 
ſelf into our muſick. Tis the fate of all 
arts, which have a common origin and 
object, that the infection paſſes from 
one to the other. Our muſick is there 


fore ſo loaded at preſent with trifles and 


gewgaws, that we can hardly trace any 


remains of the natural expreſſion. Nor, 


tho' it flatters the ear, is it therefore fit 


for tragedy; becauſe the imitation and 


expreſſion of the inarticulate language 
of the paſſions is the chief merit of 
dramatick muſick. If our muſick is 
ſtill agreeable to us, tis becauſe we know 
no better, and it tickles the ear, which 
it does in common with the warbling of 
goldfinches and nightingales. It reſem- 


ples thoſe Chineſe pictures which have 
no imitation of nature, and are only 


pleaſin g by reaſon of the vivacity and va 


riety of their colours. 


Thirdly, as to painting. Here it muſt 


at once occur, that as the buſineſs of the 


hiſe 


Crae. VI. EDUCATION. 407 
hiſtory- painter is to repreſent human na- 
ture in a manner which ſhall be at once 
graceful and expreflive, when animated 
by all it's variety of paſſions and affections; 
and that, in order to do.this, .he muſt be 
able to give all the various configurations 
of the muſcles of the face, together with 
the whole deportment of the body, and 
action of the limbs, which are the natural 
concomitant ſigns. of thoſe paſſions; and 
all theſe muſt be in the moſt exa& degree 
of due proportion; he could no where 
meet with ſuch perfect ſubjects as amongſt 
the orators. There he would find the 
moſt complete models ready to his hand, 
not only of the moſt animated expreſ- 
fion, but alſo of the moſt graceful ; nat 
only of the moſt natural and forcible ac- 
tion, but alſo of the moſt becoming, and 
| ſuch as was regulated by the niceſt art. 
Not is it poſſible to conceive any look, 
attitude, or geſture, which the painter 
might have occaſion for in all the ſeveral 
ſtyles, whether of the grand, the terrible, 
the graceful, the tender, the paſſionate, 
the joyous; whether expreſſive of the 

more furious and violent paſſions, as an- 
ger, hatred, &c. or of the more calm 
D d4 and 


48 BRITISH Boon III. 


and pleaſing, as of pity, joy, &c. which 
he might not have frequent opportunities 
of catching warm from the life in the end- 
leſs variety of ſubjects treated of by an im- 
paſſioned orator. From whom could an 
Apelles borrow the tender, and the grace- 
full, fo well as from the man whoſe power 
_ of perſuaſion was irreſiſtible ? From whom 
the grand, and terrible, ſo well as from 


| ® 6 Thoſe antient—whoſe reſiſtleſs elo- 
* quence | 

© Wielded at will that fierce democratic, 

© Shook th' arſenal, and fulmined over 
Greece 

To Macedon and Artaxerxes oc 


How could a Phidias have given ſuch 
ſuitable forms to the creatures of fancy; 
how could he ſo juſtly have framed an 
image of the god of wit and eloquence, 
as by a faithful tranſcript from a Pericles, 
in whoſe lips the Graces were ſaid to in- 
habit ? Or how could he have made {0 
auguſt a ſtatue of a Jupiter Tonars, as 
from a repreſentation of the ſame Pericles, 
when at other times he was ſaid to © thun- 


der and lighten in the * of the 
_ © Paradiſe regained. 


0 peo- 


Cray. VI. EDUCATION. 409 


people? Nor did the orators afford to 
the painters patterns for imitation in them- 
ſelves only, they likewiſe opened whole 
volumes, wherein they might ſtudy the 
paſſions at large in all their ſeveral mo- 
difications, by means of the ſtrong impreſ- 
ſions made by their harangues upon their 
auditors; who, in proportion to their ſe» 
veral degrees of ſenſibility were all ac- 
tuated and inflamed, and muſt therefore 
have afforded an infinite variety of objects, 
as well as degrees of paſſion, from which a 
judicious obſerver might cull what would 
beſt ſuit his purpoſe. An artiſt in thoſe 
times might have had a better opportunity 
of ſeeing all the nobler paſſions fully and 

properly diſplayed, and in a greater va- 
_ riety of ſubjects, in one ſingle day, than 
he could now in a whole life ſpent in the 
ſearch, or from an obſervation of ſuch ſub- 
jeRs as caſually fall in his way. Indeed 
the advantage which the painters of thoſe 
times muſt have had, by theſe means, 
over all who ſucceeded them, is fo very 
obvious, that it would favour of uſeleſs 


declamation to enlarge further upon this 
head, 


CHAP. 


* 


410 * 118 H Boon IL 


CHAP. vn. 


That it it  almof impoſſible hi; the mu 
in theſe ſeveral arts ſbould arrive at per- 
Jection, without the lights and e 
borrowed i from —_— | el 


10 bogs with 3 Ie = 2 
ready been made appear, that no 
one can be a maſler in that art, who can 
not exhibit a juſt o view of the various looks 
mitant ſigns of the ſeveral paſſions and af. 
fections: that this view muſt not only 
be expreſſive, but exact in the degrees of 
expreſſion given to each paſſion, ſuited to 
the occaſion; without which, tho' it may 
have force, it will be void of. propriety : 
and laſtly, that this view muſt be taken 
immediately from life, and not from the 
works of other artiſts. Here it muſt be 
obſerved, that as there is a natural and ar- 
tificial language, ſo there is alſo a natural 
and artificial action. By natural language 
I mean the inarticulare tones which nature 


herſelf has given to the paſſions, and 
| which 


Cnae. VII. EDUCATION, 411 
which are equally well underſtood by all 
perſons of all nations. Thus the cries 
and ſhrieks of a foreigner in diſtreſs move 
the human heart as much, and as inſtinc- 
tively draw people to his aſſiſtance, as thoſe 
of a compatriot: and thus laughter, and 
all expreſſions of joy and merriment, ex- 
Cite the ſame emotions in people of dif- 
ferent nations. Theſe natural ſounds in 
ſome degree accompany all the paſſions, 
tho they are more or leſs perceptible, in 
proportion as thoſe are more violent, or 

moderate. By artificial language is meant 
thoſe arbitrary marks affixed to ideas by 
different nations, and which having no 
natural connexion with them, are only in- 
. telligible to the natives of each country, 
or thoſe who ſtudy their ſpeech. In the 
ſame manner there is alſo a natural and 
an artificial action. The natural, is that 
which ſpontaneouſly reſults from the 
emotions of the heart, and to which na- 
ture has annexed a power indicative of the 
paſſions. The artificial is that which, 
like the words of a language, has no na- 
tural congruity with the paſſions or ſenti- 


ments, but bas it's foundation in caprice 
and 


412 BRITISH Book III. 

and faſhion, and is by cuſtom annexed to 

certain modes of expreſſion in particular 
ccuntries; it is therefore intelligible only 

to the natives of thoſe countries, and con- 
ſequently can have no force but with 
them, or ſuch as are ſufficiently conver- 
ſant with them to. acquire a knowlege of 
their meaning. Now as in all caſes it is 
known, that nature muſt give way to the 
power of mode and faſhion, it often hap- 
pens that this artificial action, tho directly 
oppoſite to the natural, is eſtabliſhed in it's 
room, ſo that no traces of the latter re- 
main. And this muſt neceſſarily be the 

caſe in all nations where no care is taken 
to cultivate, and ſupport natural action. 
For if art be not employed as a handmaid 
to nature, ſhe will ever make herſelf miſ- 
treſs. When judgement and induſtry 
- Nleep, caprice and idleneſs ſeize the reins, 
If we take a:view of the different nations 
of Europe, we ſhall find that artificial ac- 
tion has almoſt univerſally ſupplanted the 
natural; and that people of the ſeveral coun- 
tries do not differ more from each other in 
their ſpeech, than in their geſtures. Thus 
the French, who are of an airy volatile na- 
ture, 


Cray. VII. EDUCATION. 413 
ture, accompany almoſt every word with 
grimace, and uſe a deal of action when 
diſcourſing on the moſt trifling ſubjects: 
whilſt the proud Spaniard has habitually: 
ſubdued all muſcular motion, which he 
thinks inconſiſtent with his dignity, and 
preſerves as much as poſſible, upon all. oc= 
caſions, aninflexibility of countenance, and 
an unmoved gravity of deportment. The 
Engliſh in general, who have more liberty: 
than any other people, and amongſt whom, 
from this unbounded freedom, every one 
follows his own humour as his guide, 
have almoſt as many ſpecies of action as 
there are individuals in the country; ex- 
cepting only ſome religious ſects amongſt 
them, who have adopted certain modes 
of looks and deportment peculiar to 
themſelves; which run thro' the diffe- 
rent bodies, and make them appear as diſ- 
tinct from the reſt of their countrymen, 
as if the iſland were inhabited by different 
nations. Such, for inſtance, are the more 
rigid quakers: from an obſervation of the 
countenance, gait and geſture, of the mem- 
bers in which ſect, one would think that 
they were all caſt in the ſame mbuld, or 

| cut 


414 BRITISH. Boox III. 


cut out by the ſame pattern. Theſe, like 
the Spaniards, have alſo ſubdued by habit 
all viſible marks of emotion, except when 
they give way to abſurd, unnatural, and 
wild geſtures, proceeding from the fan- 
cied operations of the ſpirit ; and in theſe 
alſo they generally reſemble. each other, 
and are always moved by the ſpirit in the 
fame manner. But a the reſt of 
the people, there are hardly two to be 
found who accompany their thoughts 
with actions exactly ſimilar. Thoſe are 
generally taken up by chance, and con- 
firmed by habit, and become in time ſo 
much a part of a man's ſelf that he uſes 
them involuntarily, and applies them in- 
diſcriminately to all ſorts of ſubjects, only 
with more or leſs vehemence, according as 
he himſelf is more or leſs actuated. Things 
being in this ſituation, I ſhould be glad 
to know where any modern artiſt could 
poſſibly find living ſubjects from which 
he might copy true natural expreſſion, 
and action ? If a Spaniſh painter were to 
draw a hiſtory piece, and borrow his 
figures from ſuch life as he is converſant 
with in his own country, tho' the piece 
might 


CAT. VII. EDUCATION. 415 
might even ſeem natural and excellent to 
unſtudied and untravelled natives, yet 
to perſons of all other countries it muſt 


appear to be devoid both of meaning and 
grace. Were a Frenchman to draw after 
nature in his country, his piece might 
appear there to have both force and beauty 
to the illiterate ; but .m other places it 
muſt be conſidered only as a groupe of 
frantick and unmeaning figures. And if 
we bring it home to ourſelves, we ſhall 
find the cafe infinitely worſe in regard to 
our painters. For tho' in thoſe countries 
the expreſſion and action of countence 
and limbs be for the moſt part artificial, 
yet the ſame kind being generally uſed 
upon the ſame occaſions, by all perſons of 
the ſame rank in life and breeding, it be- 
comes perfectly intelligible to all who are 
converſant with them, and a repreſenta- 
tion of it is as well underſtood as their 
ſpeech, by the natives, and thoſe 'who 
reſide any time amongſt them. But in 
England, except amongſt the common 
people, with whom ſuch pains have not 
been taken to ſuppreſs all viſible emotions 
of nature, by what is commonly called 

* | 


476 BRITISH Boor III. 
good breeding, there is no general action 
either natural or artificial, ſufficiently uſed 

to characteriſe the ſentiments and paſſions 
in a repreſentation taken from the life, 


even to us at home; much leſs can it be 


intelligible to our neighbours. People do 
not differ more from one another here in 
their phyſiognomy, than they do in their 
action. Every individual has ſomething 
peculiar to himſelf, which proceeds either 
from his humour, or mere chance and 
cuſtom; and when there is any thing ſin- 
gular or odd in it, there is no farther no- 
tice taken of it than to ſay, Oh! that is 
Mr. ſuch- a- one's way. Now I ſhould be 
glad to know what a genius in painting, 
ſuperior even to the greateſt of the an- 
tients, who happened to be born, and to 
paſs his life in this country, could poſſibly 
do, thus circumſtanced ? He can not 
produce any perfect work which is not 
taken from life; and the things which 
he wants chiefly to take from life, he can 
never ſee. Let us ſuppoſe ſuch an artiſt, 
born with all the talents neceſſary to 
form a hiſtory painter, ſearching about 


for proper ſubjects from which he might 
bor- 


9 


Car. VII. EDUCATION, 417 
borrow impaſſioned looks, forcible geſ- 
ture, and graceful attitudes, in order to 
give life to the figures in his piece, and 
to unite in the whole, propriety, grace, 
and expreſſion. If he goes to the ſenate- 
houſe, he may perhaps ſee there a Bri» 
tiſh orator haranguing upon the fate of the 
nation, and the liberties of Europe, with 
great good ſenſe indeed, and in well- 
choſen words, wor thy to be read ſeveral 
times over when reduced to writing ; but 
with leſs emotion than a Frenchman 
would ſpeak of diſcompoſing his perriwig. 
This excellent diſcourſe is perhaps deli- 
vered with his hands in his boſom ; or if 
decorated with action, it is only ſuch as 
refults from habit, and of which he is at 
the time unconſcious ; fuch as playing with 
his hat, fumbling in his pockets, ſettling 
his perriwig, toffing or twiſting his head, 
and fee ſawing his body. If he goes from 
thence to the bar, he will hardly fare 
much better. There he may hear a long 
and eloquent piece of pleading delivered 
with an unmoved compoſure of counte- 
nance, and the orator perhaps twirling a 
piece of pack-thread round his fingers, 

E e which 


418 B RIT IS H Book III. 
which is humorouſly called in the Specta- 
tor the thread of his diſcourſe; or elſe 
every now and then filling up his pauſes, 
by applying his noſegay to his noſtrils. 
Since the uſe of tobacco indeed, ſome of 
the younger ſort have found a great ſub- 
ſidium to the gracefulneſs of their action, 
by the proper management of the ſnuff- 
box. As to the pulpit, I believe I need 
hardly mention that he would find little 
or no aſſiſtance there, unleſs it were for 
pieces of ſtill life. If from an obſervation 
of the orators he reaps ſo little benefit, he 
will hardly find any from their ſeveral 
auditories; who certainly can diſcover no 
more emotion than what is excited by 
the ſpeakers. I do not mean, but that in 
all theſe places there may be found ſeveral 
of ſuperior talents, who do not fall into 
theſe puerilities, and improprieties of geſ- 

ture and behaviour ; but it will be no 
very confident aſſertion, to affirm that even 

the beſt of thoſe, poſſeſſed of the ſtrongeſt 

natural talents, on account of the want of 
opportunities of ſtudying an art, which of 
all others requires the moſt pains, will 

hardly be able to afford in themſelves, 

— 


Cnae. VII. EDUCATION. 419 
perfect patterns for imitation, of grace, 
propriety, and energy of expreffion, in 
their countenance and action. And this 
may ſerve to ſhew the reaſon why Eng- 
land never yet has, and probably never 
will, if things ſhould remain in their pre- 
ſent ſituation, produce a good hiſtory 
painter. Several have acquitted them- 
ſelves well in landſcapes, animals, flowers, 
and the repreſentation'of all ſuch things 
as they could immediately copy from 
nature; and have therein fallen ſhort ot 
their neighbours, only ſo far as their op- 
portunities of making themſelves maſters 
of the mechanical part of their profeſſion 
were inferior. Some alſo have ſhewn 
themſelves excellent maſters of expreſ- 
fon in ſcenes of low life, drawn from 
living objects, amongſt whom the lan- 
guage of the paſſions had not been ef- 
faced by art. Such are many of the per- 
formances of the celebrated Hogarth. - 
Now what reaſon can be aſſigned, that they 
ſhould not be as well able to delineate the 
various outward configurations, produced 
by the nobler and more exalted' paſſions, | 
Rs they could find as good ſubjects - . 
E e 2 in 


420 BRITISH Box III. 
in life to take them from, and had as fre- 

quent opportunities of obſerving them? 
From the ſame principles we may con- 
clude, that no other country in Europe 
can poſſibly produce real artiſts in that 
way. For as they can no where find 
grace, propriety and expreſſion, of action, 

attitude, and look, in living ſubjects, they 
can only ſearch for them in the remains 
of the antient artiſts ; and conſequently 
can at beſt be but copyiſts. The ſtandard 
of nature being now every where loſt, the 
remains of antiquity are the ſole arche- 
types to which the compoſitions of the 
moderns are referred : which obtain a 
comparative value in proportion to their 
near approaches to the ſtyle and manner 
of thoſe. Hence it will follow, that they 
who have the moſt free acceſs and fre- 
quent opportunities of ſtudying andobſery- 
ing thoſe originals, muſt ceteris paribus } 
obtain the firſt place, and that they who 
form themſelves only upon the works of 
theſe copiers, muſt be of an inferior rank. 
Every ſueceſſive impreſſion taken from an 
impreſſion, muſt be weaker than the 
former; and the eee of a copier 

5 taken 


Cnay. VII. EDUCATION. 427 


taken from one who was himſelf a copyiſt, 
muſt be conſidered as a reflection from a 
reflection, or an echo from an echo; every 
ſucceſſive repetition of which muſt grow 
fainter and fainter. And this may poſſibly 
ſerve as a ſolution why Italy has produced 
the greateſt number, and the higheſt claſs 
of hiſtory painters, of any country in Eu- 
rope ; and Great Britain the feweſt, and 
the leaſt conſpicuous of any, where that 
art has been at all cultivated. 

What has been ſaid in regard to paint- 
ing, will hold equally good with reſpect to 
muſick. As in the one, when artificial 
looks and geſtures are ſubſtituted in a 
country in the room of ſuch as are natu- 
ral, the painter can have no proper ſub- 
jects from which he can draw perfect re- 
preſentations of human nature; fo in the 
other, where artificial tones and ſounds 
are made to ſupply the voice of nature, 
the muſical compoſer can have no arche- 
types from which to borrow juſt and forci- 
ble expreſſion of the paſſions and fenti- 
ments. So that he is obliged either to 
give way to his fancy entirely in the vari- 
ous combinations of ſounds ; or, if he aims 

E e 3 at 


422 BRITIS H Bock III. 


at expreſſion, it can be only of the arti- 
ficial kind, which is uſed in his own coun- 
try, and which containing no natural 
power, will not appear to foreign ears to 
have any force. And this may perhaps 
be the reaſon why ſome of the French 
operas are heard with ſuch raptures by the 
natives, tho' they are even diſguſtful to 
ſtrangers. 

And as to poetry, beſides the —_ 
advantages which it might derive from 
oratory, it has been already ſhewn, that 
the perfection of the poet's inſtrument, 
in the refinement of language, muſt be 
entirely owing to the ſtudy of eloquence. 
Nor is it poſſible that 31 poet can be 
maſter of expreſſion in his numbers, who 
is unſkilled in that art. Poetical expreſ- 
ſion conſiſts in a proper combination and 
arrangement of ſyllables and words, which, 
if juſtly repeated, will e certain 
tones and ſoands; now, if the poet does 
not know how to repeat even his own 
verſes with propriety and grace (which 
is almoſt univerſally the caſe of all the 
modern writers) how is it poſſible that he 
can be a maſter of expreſtion i in numbers? 


Upon | 


char. VII. EDUCATION. 423 


Upon the leaſt conſideration it will ap- 
pear, that it was in the very nature of 
oratory to ſupply theſe deficiencies, and 
prevent thoſe deviations from nature which 
muſt of courſe affect the ſeveral imitative 
arts. The buſineſs of the orator was to 
move the paſſions of all forts of auditors, 
without which he could not accompliſh 
his end, Now it is eyident, that the 
energy of nature, muſt have much more 
efficacy in this reſpect, than the power of 
art. It was therefore incumbent on the 
orator to preſerve, as much as poſſible, all 
the various looks, geſtures, and tones, 
which nature herſelf has annexed to the 
ſeveral paſſions and affections, to be a 
univerſal language, intelligible by all ranks 
and orders of people, of whatever age or 
country ; and the whole employment of 
art was only to regulate theſe in ſuch a 
manner, as to exhibit them in their high- 
eſt degree of beauty and grace, without 
robbing them of their force. The manner 
of the publick ſpeakers would of courſe 
be imitated by their hearers, and the na- 
tural would become every where the fa- 
ſhionable action. Hence the artiſts in 
. E e 4 fluch 


424 BRITISH Box III. 
ſuch a country might every where find 
proper ſubjects for imitation ready ts their 
hands. The compoſitions in thoſe arts 
which imitate thro' natural media, ſuch as 
mufick, and painting, would be intelligi- 
ble not at home only, but in all other 
countries, and their beauty be every where 
perceived. Their poetry alſo, which imi- 
tates only thro' an artificial medium, and 
conſequently would be unintelligible to 
ſuch as were not acquainted with the ar- 
bitrary figns made uſe of to expreſs ideas 
in it, would, on account of the fame of the 
writers, be ſought after by all thoſe who 
had leiſure and oppertunity to acquire 
knowlege of thoſe ſigns; and they would 
find their labour well rewarded, not only 
in the propoſed end of underſtanding 
thoſe pieces, but likewiſe in the delight 
which the very means of atriving at that 
end would afford them; I mean the plea- 
ſure which they muſt take in the con- 
templation and ſtudy of a beautiful lan- 
guage, e «rn refined to the uta. 


CHAP. 


cf. VIII. EDUCATION. 32% 


CHAP, VIII. 
Of the encoitragements given to the ſeveral 


artiſts during the flouriſhing ſlate of 
- oratory. | 


HAT I have ſaid above naturally 
leads me to the conſideration of 
another point, which is of the utmoſt con- 
ſequence in bringing the liberal arts to 
perfection; I mean the encouragement 
given to the ſeveral artiſts, in the rewards 
which attended their labours. Theſe re- 
wards are of two kinds; fame, and profit. 
When conſidered ſeparately, the former is 
certainly the nobler motive to action, and 
the more likely to produce excellence in 
works ; but neither of them can operate 
with ſuch force diſtinctly, as when their 
powers are united, When fame is the 
motive, the more general and extended 
it is, the greater will it's influence be over 
the minds of ſuch. as aſpire after it for 
a reward. A love of fame is of all others 
the ſtrongeſt incentive to a generous 
mind, and is the. moſt boundleſs in it's 

5 8 deſires. 


424 BRITISH Boo III. 
ſach a country might every where find 
proper ſubjects for imitation ready to their 
hands. The compoſitions in thoſe arts 
which imitate thro' natural media, ſuch as 
mufick, and painting, would be intelligi- 
ble not at home only, but in all other 
countries, and their beauty be every where 
perceived. Their poetry alſo, which imi- 
tates only thro' an artificial medium, and 
conſequently would be unintelligible to 
ſuch as were not acquainted with the ar- 
bitrary ſigus made uſe of to expreſs ideas 
in it, would, on account of the fame of the 
writers, be ſought after by all thoſe who 
had leiſure and opportunity to acquire 
knowlege of thoſe ſigns; and they would 
find their labour well rewarded, not only 
in the propoſed end of underſtanding 
thoſe pieces, but likewiſe in the delight 
which the very means of atriving at that 
end would afford them; I mean the plea» 
ſure which they muſt take in the con- 
templation and ſtudy of a beautiful lan- 
guage, poliſhed and refined to the utmoſt, 


CHAP, 


cn. VII. EDUCATION. 328 


CHAP. VIII. 
Of the encouragemenis given to the ſeveral 


artiſts during the flouriſhing flate of | 
rer 


HAT I have ſaid above naturally 
leads me to the conſideration of 
another point, which is of the utmoſt con- 
ſequence in bringing the liberal arts to 
perfection z I mean the encouragement 
given to the ſeveral artiſts, in the rewards 
which attended their labours. Theſe re- 
wards are of two kinds; fame, and profit. 
When conſidered ſeparately, the former is 
certainly the nobler motive to action, and 
the more likely to produce excellence in 
works; but neither of them can operate 
with ſuch force diſtinctly, as when their 
powers are united. When fame is the 
motive, the more general and extended 
it is, the greater will it's influence be over 
the minds of ſuch as aſpire after it for 
a reward. A love of fame is of all others 
the ſtrongeſt incentive to a generous | 
mind, and is the moſt boundleſs in it's 
deſires, 


426 BRITISH Box III. 
deſires. An artiſt, animated by that, is 
not contented with the praiſes of his own 
countrymen, he graſps at the applauſe of 
all his contemporaries in the different coun- 
tries of. the peopled globe; nor does he 
ſtop here, but looks greedily forward to 
all future generations ; and nothing leſs 
will content him than a profpect of per- 
petuity to his works, or to his name. As 
fuch an unbounded view is the moſt likely 
to ronze and animate him to the utmoſt 
exertion of all his faculties, ſo nothing 
can ſo effectually induce him to labour 
and toil after the greateſt accuracy and 
correctneſs in his compoſitions, which are 
to paſs in review befare ſuch numbers of 
unbiaſſed judges. When the leſſer mo- 
tive of profit is prevalent with an artiſt, 
it need ſcarce be mentioned, that in pro- 
portion to the price which his works bear, 
he will be encouraged and ſtimulated in 
his labours. But in all rewards, whether 
of fame or profit, it is neceſſary that they 
ſhould be diſtributed with the niceſt 
. judgement, and the moſt exact impar- 
tiality ; without which, they not only loſe 
_ end, but become the higheſt diſ- 


COura ge” 


CAP. VIII. EDUCATION. 427 
couragements to real artiſts. The abbe 


o 


4 


EC. PPDPDPPGElIꝛ⁊ñ.. 99 qo, Wow... 


Du Bos, in ſpeaking of this ſubject, ſays : 
If a ſovereign diſtributes his favours im- 
partially, they are an encouragement to 
artiſts ; which they ceaſe to be as ſoon 


as they are miſplaced. Nay, it would 
be much better, were a ſovereign not. 


to diſtribute any favours at all, than to 


do it without judgement. An able artiſt 
may find means to comfort himſelf un- 
der the contempt and neglect into which 


his art is fallen. A“ poet may even bear 


with the diſreliſh people chance to have 
far poetry; but he is ready to burſt with 
envy and ſpite, when he ſees a prize 
given to works that are far inferior to 
his own performances. He grows deſ- 
perate at the ſight of an injuſtice which 
is a perſonal affront to him, and he re- 


nounces, as much as in him lies, the 


muſes for ever.“ 


As I have already proved that the ſeve- 


ral artiſts had the higheſt opportunities, 
during the flouriſhing times of oratory, to 
improve their talents to the utmoſt ; ſo I 


ſhall now ſhew that they had allo the 


We have a ſtrong inſtance of this in Milton. 


higheſt 


428 B R IT IS H Boox III. 

higheſt encouragements afterwards to diſ- 
play them: that the incentives were of 
the nobleſt kind; the rewards the greateſt ; 
and diſtributed with more judgement and 
impartiality, than could be expected in 
any other age and country. To begin 
with the higheſt of all incentives, that of 
fame. It has been already ſhewn, that 
they were not in this refpe& confined to 
their own country, but their works were 
every where fought after, and admired by 
the curious of all nations. Being tran- 
ſctipts from nature, they were intelligible 
by all people, of all countries, and thro” 
all ages. Even the imitations thro” arti- 
feral media, ſuch as the works of the 
poets, on account of the beauty and per- 
fection of the language in which they 
wrote, were likely to ſpread over the 
earth, and to laſt as long as ſun and moon 
endured, What a mighty encourage- 
ment was this to all ſuch writers as were 
actuated by a ptinciple of fame, and ex- 
tended their views to future generations? 
They alſo whoſe chief end was the en- 
joyment of preſent fame and honours; 


had! 5 nobleſt opportunities of being gra- 
tified 


Cup. VIII. EDUCATION. 429 


tifed to the utmoſt extent of their wiſhes. 


This matter has been fully diſplayed by 
the abbe Du Bos in the following paſſage. 


- 


c 
6 
0 
c 
c 
5 
c 
c 
c 
« 
4 
6 
6 
c 
* 
6 
0 
o 
C 
* 


The opportunities of receiving the ap- 
* plauſes and favours of great aſſemblies 
were very frequent in Greece, As we 
have congreſſes in our times, where the 
deputies of princes and ſtates meet in or- 
der to terminate wars, and regulate the 
fates of provinces, and the limits of 
kingdoms ; ; in like manner, there were 
aſſemblies formerly from time to time, 
where the molt illuſtrious perſonages of 
Greece rendevouzed, in order to decide 
the merit of the moſt eminent painter, 
the moſt moving poet, and the beſt 
wreſtler. This was the real motive 
which induced ſuch multitudes of peo- 


ple to flock to thoſe publick games that 


were celebrated in different cities. The 
publick porticos where the poets went 


to recite their verſes, or painters to ex- 


poſe their pictures, were places where 
the better ſort of company uſed gene- 
rally to meet. In fine, „the works of 


t great maſters, as Pliny obſerves, were 
5 not conſidered at the time here men- 


| „ tioned, 
8 


— 


4zo BRITISH. Book III. 
*« tioned, as common moveables deſtined 
* to imbelliſh a private perſon's apart- 
* ment; no, they were Iooked upon as 
ce the jewels of the ſtate, and as a publick 
tec treaſure, the enjoyment whereof was 
due to all the inhabitants.” The ar- 
* dour which painters and poets had in 
* thoſe times to improve their talents, was 
© not inferior to the eagerneſs which we 
© obſerve in the people of our days to 
* heap up money, and to attain to great 
* employments in the ſtate.” 

How muſt the hearts of artiſts in thoſe 
times have exulted, and how muſt their 
ears have been raviſned with the general 
and united applauſes, of the moſt auguſt 
aſſemblies * of the world ? And how muſt 
this have ſpurred them on to the utmoſt 
ſtretch of their faculties, in compariſon 
of the preſent cold approbation given in 
private, and the flow growth of reputa- 
tion from the ſuffrages of individuals ? 

* We may eaſily judge what an "= FIDE this muſt 
have been to men of genius, when we have it on record, 


that the 2 Themiſtocles, upon being received at the 
Olympick feſtival with the general ſhouts and applauſes 


of the aſſembly, ſaid, * This was the happieſt day he had 
« ever known, and that he then reaped the ſull reward of 
all his labours.” 


Eſpe- 


CAP. IV. EDUCATION. 431 
Eſpecially when it is conſidered that this 
did not end merely in fame, but the ar- 


tiſts who bore away the prizes, were im- 
mediately raiſed, perhaps from meanneſs 


and obſcurity, into great perſonages; ſo 


as to be conſidered of an equal rank with 
thoſe who were entruſted with the high- 
eſt offices. And it was often known that 
men of the nobleſt birth, and greateſt 
riches in Greece, did not think it a diſ- 
honour to marry their daughters to ſuch 
eminent poets, painters, and muſicians, 
as had diſtinguiſhed themſelves in an ex- 
traordinary manner on theſe occaſions. If 
the chief object of ſome was profit, it is 


evident from the great price which their 
works bore, and the large fortunes raiſed 


by ſeveral artiſts, how amply they might 
be gratified in this point alſo. 

But the higheſt incentive of all to the 
exertion of true genius, was the moral cer- 
tainty of rewards being diſtributed with 
{kill and impartiality. The multitude of 
judges effectually prevented corruption; 
and their {kill aroſe partly from a general 
good taſte diffuſed thro the whole body 


of the people; and * from the great 


5 oppor- 
4 


© 3 1 qo 
CS : 2 — „ ar —— . 8 = [IT ba. 7 . 
EA oat Be = >= __ 9 13 7 
2222 mm V.,. ̃ ..,... . ecrcemms 
2 , 4 .... _ —_ — ws * — — : - 
L — = G * 


ole |; 
7 
i; 
. 
* 
Wh 
pl, 
By, 
1 


& — — 2 wt 
n 


432 BRITISH Booxlll. 
opportunities, which all who were inclined 
to it had, of forming and fixing their taſte 
upon the beſt models, by means of the 


moſt excellent works of all kinds being the 


property of the publick, and conſequently 
acceſſible at all times, and by all perſons. 
On which accounts it is more than pro- 
bable, that a common illiterate Athenian 
might be a more competent judge of per- 
fection in all the liberal arts, than the 
niceſt and moſt pains-taking of our con- 
noiſſeurs. They had conſtant opportu- 
nities of comparing the copies with their 
true archetypes, with nature herſelf. 
They had daily before their eyes the great 
originals of grace and expreſſion, in the 
looks, geſture, and tones of their orators; 
and therefore could not fail of judging 
whether the copies were right. A man 
in thoſe days might ſay, that the turn of 
countenance, the attitude and action of a 
figure repreſented in a hiſtory piece, were 
juſt and expreſſive, becauſe he had ſeen 
ſuch uſed by a Pericles, a Demoſthenes, 
or a Demades, upon a fimilar occaſion, 
and in the repreſentation of alike paſſion 
or affection. He might paſs judgement 


like- 


Char. VIII. EDUCATION. 433 
likewiſe with equal certainty in regard to 
tones, ſounds and cadences in muſical or 
poetical expreſſion. Whereas a modern 
critick has no archetype to refer to but 
the works of the moſt celebrated maſters, 
He can only ſay that ſuch a picture is in 
the manner of a Raphael or a Rubens; or 
ſuch a poem, and ſuch a piece of muſick, 
is in the ſtyle of this poet, and that com- 
poſer. The utmoſt therefore that he can 
arrive at, is to form only a comparative 
judgement : and even in that reſpe&, in 
many caſes, an unlettered Athenian had, 
without ſtudy or application, great advan- 
tages over him, by means of the conſtant 
opportunities which he had of ſeeing all 
the greateſt works of the greateſt maſters 
publickly expoſed to view ; which muſt 
imperceptibly infuſe into him a good 
comparative taſte, tho' he ſhould be to- 
tally ignorant of all rules, and principles. 
Whereas a modern virtuoſo mult travel 
over all Europe, be at great pains and 
expence to get acceſs to the cabinets of 
the curious, and even then will hardly 
be allowed time enough to examine them 
ſufficiently, ſo as to form an accurate 

N Ff judge- 


- 


434 BRITISH Book III. 


judgement of the ſeveral works. And this 
was the true ſource of that general good 
taſte amongſt the antients, which we find 
ſo greatly celebrated. Hence it was that 
the Athenians obtained that remarkable 
character from Cicero; The judgement 
of the Athenians was ſo true and juſt, 
* that they could not liſten to any thing 
but what was pure and elegant.“ 

It muſt be allowed that an artiſt could 
no where find ſuch due encouragement, 
or have ſuch moral certainty of meeting 
with rewards proportioned to his merit, 
as from the ſuffrages of a free people, 
amongſt whom a general good taſte pre- 
vailed. Next to that, tho' far ſhort in- 
deed, is the countenance and favour of 
an abſolute prince, when he happens to 
be a man of {kill and integrity, or is ſerved 
by miniſters poſſeſſed of thoſe qualities. 
But in a country where neither the prince 
is abſolute, nor the people in general have 
a good taſte, it is hardly poſſible that the 
arts ſhould ever flouriſh. In the Engliſh 
conſtitution, which like the antient re- 
publicks has liberty for it's object, and 
wherein each claims a right of judging 


for 


Cray. IX. EDUCATION. 435 
for himſelf in all matters whatever, it is 
extreamly neceſſary that the people ſhould 
have proper opportunities of having their 
judgements rightly informed. For in 
proportion as a bad taſte ſhould prevail 
amongſt them, in proportion will the 
works of ſuch artiſts as flatter that vicious 
taſte be encouraged; and every encou- 
ragement given to the falſe, becomes a 
diſcouragement to the true genius. No- 
thing therefore can poſſibly raiſe the arts 
to any pitch of perfection amongſt us, but 
a general good taſte in the people ; and 
nothing can poſſibly create and diffuſe this 
general good tafte, but the ſtudy and 
practice of oratory, | 


. 


Ohection to the above hypotheſis, draton 
from the works of the modern artiſts; and 
anſwer to the objection. 


O all that J have ſaid in ſupport of 

my hypothefis, I know it will at 

once be objected, that the revival of the 
arts in Europe, and their moſt flouriſhing 


F f 2 ſtate, 


436 BRITISH Booxlll. 


ſtate, were brought about without any of 
the aids of oratory, which I have pre- 
tended to be ſo neceſſary to their perfec- 
tion. The boaſted ages of Leo X. and 
Lewis XIV. with all the great maſters 
which they produced, will immediately 
be quoted upon me. I am much deceived 
if a thorough diſcuſſion of this point, would 
not ſerve to illuſtrate and eſtabliſh my 
opinion, more clearly and firmly, than any 
thing elſe. But as this would lead me 
into too wide a field for the bounds of this 
work, and as I intend on another occa- 
ſion to enter into a more minute diſquiſi- 
tion of this whole matter, I ſhall content 
myſelf at preſent with touching only upon 
ſome of the principal points, in order to 
invalidate, in ſome meaſure, the objec- 
tions which may be raiſed upon this head. 
In the firſt place, nothing can be more 
clearly proved, than that the great artiſts 
during thoſe periods, borrowed their chief 
excellencies from the works of the an- 
tients, and conſequently that they were 
at beſt but imitators, and copyiſts. 
Secondly, that the ſuppoſed perfection 
of their works, has not been ſettled by 
any 


Cruaye. IX. EDUCATION. 437 


any ablou. a 
only. | 
Laſtly, that the few originals wu... 
have been produced fince the revival of 
the arts, have been indebted for their 

chief value to oratory. 

In ſpeaking to theſe ſeveral points, I 
would have it remembered, that I do 
not at all take into my account, ſuch 
works as depend merely upon the ſkill, 
and knowlege of the maſters in their ſe- 
veral arts, but only ſuch as have refe- 
rence to their great end, of repreſenting 
human nature in it's moſt exalted, and 
dignified ſtate. 

It was in the age of Julius II. and Leo X. 
that the arts aroſe out of the tombs in 
which they had ſo long been buried; 
and, during that period, ſome of them 
arrived at a degree of perfection, which 
all the endeavours of man have not ſince 
been able to keep up. But: they were far 
from going hand in hand together, and 
keeping an even pace, as they were al- 
ways obſerved to do in Greece and Rome, 
ſoon after their births; painting and ſta- 
ah left their ſiſters far behind, and 

1 reached 


dard, but by compariſon 


438 BRITISH Boo 1 
b. y and muſick 


3 Let us ſee how this 
aiverhity of the fate and progreſs of the 
modern arts, from thoſe of the antients, 
can be reconciled to reaſon : for in Greece 
and Rome poetry and muſick were the 
elder, and ftarted firſt; tho' they were 
quickly followed and overtaken in the 
race by their younger fiſters : and indeed 
in the natural order of things this muſt 
have been the caſe. Nor do I know upon 
what principle this difference can be ac- 
counted for, but that of plagiariſm, and 
a ſuppoſition that the modern artiſts bor- 
rowed their chief beauties from the works 
of the antients; eſpecially when we find 
that the ſolution of this difficulty will 
follow in the moſt natural manner from 
that principle. 

It is well known that it was owing to 
the great pains and affiduity of Julius II. 
and Leo X. in ſearching after thoſe con- 


reached the goal ww 


: 2 cealed treaſures, that almoſt all the pre- 


cious remains of antiquity, both of paint- 
ing and ſtatuary, which were buried under 
the ruins of Rome, were. brought to 
light. Theſe were collected and pre- 

ſerved 


CAP. IX. EDUCATION. 439 
ſerved with the utmoſt care by thoſe two 
paſſionate lovers of the arts. Their great 
liberalities encouraged all perſons of ge- 
nius to apply themſelves cloſely to the 
ſtudy of them : and, with ſuch advan- 
tages as they poſſeſſed, of having ſo great a 
variety of the moſt perfect models before 
their eyes, it is no wonder that the pro- 
greſs of the firſt artiſts was ſo rapid, and 
that their works far excelled all thoſe of 
their ſucceſſors. The painters particularly 
had patterns in theſe antient pictures, of 
grace and expreſſion, which were no longer 
to be met with in nature; an advantage 
which none of their ſucceſſors could have, 
as thoſe pieces in a few years, aſter having 
been expoſed to the external air, moul- 
dered away, and at laſt totally diſappeared. 
The * firſt painters had therefore the 
moſt perfect models in thoſe great origi- 
nals, which were immediate tranſcripts 
from nature; whilſt ſuch as were bred up 
under them had only copies to ſtudy in 
the works of their maſters, and conſe- 


: It need ſcarce be mentioned alſo what benefit theſe 
firſt painters muſt have received, from the large collection 


of ſtatues then to be ſeen together at Rome, 


F f4 quently 


440 BRITISH Boex III. 


quently were one degree farther removed, 
and could only ſee nature, as it were, in 
a ſecond reflection. Thoſe who were 
bred up under them again were ſtill more 
remote, till at laſt the object entirely diſ- 
appeared. And this perhaps may be found 
to be the true reaſon why hiſtory- painting 
has from that time to this been in a 
conſtant ſtate of declenſion, ſo that ſcarce 
the ſhadow of it now appears upon earth. 
In ſtatuary alſo the firſt artiſts had the 
advantage of finding a prodigious num- 
ber of the great works of antiquity col- 
lected together in one place; - whilſt 
thro' the negligence or want of taſte in 
the ſucceeding popes, thoſe immenſe 
treaſures have been ſcattered over the 
world, and muſt be ſearched for in the 
collections of many private perſons, as 
well as kings and princes, thro' the ſeveral 
countries of Europe. But as ſtatues and 
pieces of ſculpture are not made of ſuch 
periſhable materials as pictures, and as 
theſe models are ſtill in being, artiſts of 
genius may ſtill form their taſte upon 
them by pains and travelling ; and there- 


fore v we > have good ſtatuaries, and ſculp- 
tors 


Cnae. IX. EDUCATION. 441 
tors yet to be found in ſeveral countries 
in, Europe, according to the encourage- 
ment given to their ſeveral abilities; nor 
have we any reaſon to ſuppoſe that there 
will be any great deficiency of artiſts in 
this way, whilſt ſuch patterns for their 
Imitation remain, and whilſt ſuitable re- 
wards attend their labours. Nothing can 
ſerve more ſtrongly. to confirm this point 
than the ſucceſs of the academy of Lewis 
XIV. founded at Rome by that monarch, 
at an immenſe expence, in order to give 
young perſons of genius the utmoſt op- 
portunities of improving themſelves in 
thoſe arts. But fifty years care and coſt 
ſcarce produced one painter of note; 
whereas a large number of ſculptors was 
formed there, whoſe works far excelled 
all thoſe of their contemporaries. As the 
great aſſiſtance, which the maſters derived 
from the remains of the antients, in thoſe 
two arts, was a ſufficient cauſe of the 
rapidity of their progreſs; ſo the flow ad- 
vances made in muſick, and poetry, can 
be fully accounted for upon the fame 
principle, It is well known that the 


antient muſick was entirely loſt, ſo that 
| the 


442 BRITISH Boox lll. 
the men of genius for that art, having no 
fuch lights to guide them, as the others 
had, were a long time groping their way 
in the dark; and when they emerged 
into light, found themſelves at a vaſt 
diſtance behind their brethren of the 
other profeſſions. For this reaſon alſo, 
having none of the great maſters of an- 
tiquity to be their guides, they ſteered 
towards a wrong object, and made plea- 
fore their end, which by the antients was 
only ufed as the means. The poets in- 
deed were in a different fituation : they, 
like the painters and ſtatuaries, had the 
nobleſt works of Greece and Rome to 
ſerve them as patterns ; but their inſtru- 
ments were too poor to give a juſt copy 
of the grace, and beauty to be found in 
thoſe originals. The languages of Europe 
were as yet in a rude ſtate +. The Ita- 
lian, which was the leaſt corrupted of all 
thoſe derived from the antient Roman, 
was the firſt which gave any dawnings of 
1 That this was the true cauſe of the flow progreſs of 
poetry, and not any dearth of genius, may appear 

the ſeveral excellent compoſitions in Latin, inferior to 
none but thoſe of the Auguſtan age, which at that time 
were produced by  Sanizarius, Vida, e. "ag 


Car. IX. EDUCATION. 443 


elegance in modern poetry; and the French, 
ſoon after, with immenſe pains and induſ- 
try, poliſhed their language as far as the 
nature of it would admit, ſo as to exhibit 
ſome faint repreſentation of the beauties 
to be found in the works of the antient 
poets. But it is eaſy to be ſeen in the writ- 
ings of both countries, that their chief 
merit confiſted in an imitation of the an- 
tients. The Italians took the moſt dar- 
ing flights, and boldly ſoared into the re- 
gions of epick poetry; but, however 
lofty to a modern eye their excurſions 
might appear, they fell far ſhort of their 
great maſters : and it was clear that they 
mounted. only on borrowed wings, by 
the ſudden precipitate falls, and irregulari- 
ties of motion, whenever they truſted to 
their native vigour. The French, more 
conſcious of their weakneſs, and knowing 
that their wings were only faſtened with 
wax, dreaded the fate of Icarus if they 
approached too near the ſun, and there- 
fore never attempted any flights beyond 
the middle regions of tragick poetry. 
There too they followed the antients at 
a diſtance, and would yenture into no 
track 


444 BRITIS H Book III. 
track unmarked by them. As it is on 
their tragedies which the French value 
themſelves moſt, it is worth obſerving, that 
their chief merit ſeems to ariſe from a 
cold obſervation of the rules of the an- 
tients in the ſtructure of thoſe pieces; 
whilſt the chief point, a juſt repreſenta- 
tion of the perſonages of the drama, has 
been neglected. The great heroes of 
Greece and Rome, are all metamorphoſed 
into Frenchmen ; and Alexander, Cæſar, 
and Scipio, are become Monſieurs of Pa- 
ris. Upon the whole, if all that was 
borrowed from the antients by the Italian 
and French poets. were ta be reſtored, 
there would ſcarce any thing great -or 
noble remain ; and perhaps the only truly 
original thing they could boaſt of would 
be their rhime ; the full honour of which 
the antients would hardly envy them. 

It is indeed ſo evident, from the works 
themſelves, that almoſt all the valuable 
modern compoſitions are but copies of 
the remains of antiquity, that the point 
need hardly be farther inſiſted on. The 
plagiariſm of ſtatuaries, ſculptors, and 
poets, is the moſt viſible ; as the originals 
are 


nr. IX. EDUCATION. 445 


are in being, from which the artiſts have 
borrowed, and by a view of which the 
theft may be diſcovered. We can not in- 
deed know how much the firſt painter's 
borrowed from the pictures which have 
fince been loſt; but it is more than pro- 
bable that they were at leaſt as much in- 
debted to them, as the other artiſts have 
been to what have remained. Nor can we 
doubt from what ſtores their imaginations | 
were chiefly ſupplied, when we conſider 
how very improperly, on many occaſions, 
they have introduced ideas which could 
alone be borrowed from antient works, 
and were only ſuitable to their ſubjects. 
The abbe Du Bos has obſerved, © That 
Michael Angelo was univerſally blamed, - 
for having mixed the fictions of heathen 
poetry with the revealed articles of the 
* laſt judgement, in the repreſentation he 
* has drawn thereof, on the bottom wall 
of the chapel of Sixtus IV. He alſo 
takes notice, that Rubens in one of his 
pieces has drawn our Saviour in the atti- 
tude of a fabulous Jove, with a thunder- 
bolt in his hand, ready to dart it againſt 
the world. And in-another place, treat- 


ing 


446 BRITISH Boo II. 


ing of the ſame ſubject, he has the fol- 
lowing paſſage : * The picture in the gal- 


K 


EFT 


lery of Luxemburg, repreſenting the ar- 


rival of Mary of Medicis at Verſailles, is 


an hiſtorical compoſition. The painter 


intended therefore to repreſent the event 
agreeably to truth. The queen lands 
from on board the Tuſcan gallies. The 


lords and ladies, that accompany, or re- 


ceive her, are eaſy to be diſtinguiſhed. 
But the Nereids and Tritons, whom 
Rubens has repreſented ſounding their 
ſhells in the harbour, to expreſs the joy 
with which this maritime town received 
the new queen, make, to my fancy at 
leaſt, a very prepoſterous appearance, 
As I am ſenſible that none of theſe ma- 
rine deities aſſiſted at the ceremony, this 
fiction deſtroys part of the effect, which 
the imitation would have produced in my 
mind. Rubens ought here, methinks, 
to have imbelliſhed his harbour with or- 
naments more reconcileable to probabi- 
lity. Things that are invented, in or- 
der to render a ſubject more agreeable, 
ſhould always be conſiſtent with it's ex- 
iſtence.“ His obſervation is certainly 

4 Juſt 3 


Cuar. IX. EDUCATION. 447 


juſt; and yet do we not ſee the fame 
method practiſed in our poetry? The 
heathen divinities are ſtill the gods of the 
Chriſtian poets ; and Jupiter, Apollo, Mi- 
nerva, Cupid, and Venus, are daily in- 
troduced even upon modern ſubjects, tho 
at the expence of veriſimilitude, which 
ought to be the chief object in all the ĩmi- 
tative arts. But this, amongſt many 
others, is a clear proof from what ſtore- 
houſe the moderns have borrowed their 
ideas. This is ſtill more evident in ſta- 
tuary, wherein the artiſts have not only 
copied the attitude and expreſſion of the 
antiques, but adorned their modern 
figures with the very dreſs and ornaments 
of the Greeks and Romans. 

When therefore we reflect upon the 
progreſs of theſe four arts ſince their re- 
vival; that hiſtory- painting made it's 
quickeſt marches, and arrived at a higher 
point of perfection, than has been ſince 
known, during the time that the artiſts 
had an opportunity of ſtudying the antient 
pictures; and, ſince thoſe periſhed, it has 
declined, and is now almoſt vaniſhed: 
that _— reached it's ſummit whilſt 


8 the 


448 BRITISH Book III. 


the artiſts had the beſt opportunity of ex- 
amining the largeſt collection of antiques; 
and that the moſt admired works are ſtill 
produced by thoſe who have the beſt means 
of viewing thoſe models : that poetry in 
the ſeveral nations of Europe has made ad- 
vances towards excellence, in proportion 
as the Greek and Roman authors were 
more or leſs generally ſtudied amongſt 
them; and that the compoſitions in this 
way are more or leſs valued in proportion 
as they reſemble thoſe ſtandards : that 
muſick, which had no patterns from an- 
tiquity to imitate, has never yet attained 
it's end, and is only a mere ſenſual delight, 
without contributing to the benefit of man- 
kind: may we not boldly conclude, That 
* the great modern artiſts have borrowed 
their chief excellencies from the works 
of the antients, and conſequently that 
they are at beſt but imitators and co- 


« pyiſts r 


CHAP. 


Cnar. Xx. — 449 


CHAP. x. 


7 bat the ſuppoſed perfection of modern Shri 
has not been ſettled by any abſolute lan- 
dard, but by compar! yr only, | 


T i is evident enough that the watks of 
the greateſt modern artiſts in poetry, 
and ſtatuary, have but acomparative value, 
and that there is a twofold . judgement 
paſſed upon them. When compared with 

| thoſe of the antients, they fall far ſhort 
of the perfection to be found in them; 
and appear, relatively, mean in the eyes 
of all perſons of true taſte: but, when 
compared with the performances of their 
contemporaries, or ſuch as have ſucceeded 
them, the works of the moſt eminent ac- 
quire a ſuperiority above the reſt, as much 
as they themſelves are found inferior to 
thoſe of antiquity. Nor is there any reaſon; 
to believe, but that the caſe would be ex- 

actly ſimilar with reſpect to painting, and 
muſick, if the ſeveral compoſitions of the. 
great antient maſters. in thoſe arts, had 
been preſerved and handed down to us in 


G g the 


4.50 BRITISH Boox III. 
the ſame manner, as in the others. From 
the many wonderful accounts tranſmitted 
to us,. by perſons of undoubted authority, 
of the amazing effects produced by the 
muſical compoſitions of the antients, we 
can not believe but that they were of a 
kind far ſuperior to ours: and, tho' their 
paintings are loſt to us, yet ſome of them 
retain {till a kind of being in the elegant 
deſcriptions given of them by ſeveral au- 
1 ſo as to enable us to form a tolera- 
ble notion of their merit. Whoever reads 
Pliny's account of a picture drawn by 
Ariſtides, repreſenting a woman ſtabbed 
with a poniard, having a ſucking child at 
her breaſt; the praiſes which Auſonius 
beſtows upon the Medea of Timomachus: 
what Pliny and Quintilian both have ſaid 
upon the facrifice of Iphigenia by Timan- 
thes ; the excellent deſcription which Lu- 
cian gives of a grand piece repreſenting 
the marriage of Alexander and Roxana; as 
alſo the family of a Centaur drawn by 
Zeuxis, with-many others to the ſame ef- 
fect; can not but conclude that the painters. 
of antiquity. were maſters of the nobleſt 
and moſt accurate expreſſion, as well as 

Fad of 


Cunar. X. EDUCATION. ggt 
of the fineſt poetick and pictureſque com- 
polition. And indeed, when we find 
that all the antients, who have written 
upon thoſe ſubjects, are agreed in allow - 
ing that painting and muſick were in as 
high a degree of perfection as poetry and 
ſculpture ; we can not refuſe our belief to 
the teſtimony of ſuch exquilite judges. 
Here it muſt be obſerved therefore, that 
tho' the compoſitions in modern painting 
and muſick, be generally thought to have 
a more abſolute degree of perfection than 
thoſe of poetry and ſculpture; yet, in fact, 
they have only a comparative value. The 
whole difference lies in this; that as ſome 
of the nobleſt works of antiquity in the 
latter arts are ſtill remaining, the compo- 
ſitions of the moderns ſuffer much when 
compared with them; but, as all the traces 
of the former are loſt, the moſt eminent 
maſters of latter times can be only com- 
pared with ſuch as are inferior to them- 
ſelves ; and conſequently, by ſuch a com- 
pariſon, their works muſt always appear 
in the moſt advantageous light. Nay, to 
modern judges, they muſt of courſe be- 
come the ſtandards of perfection. But 
: 8 g 2 | were 


4532 BRITISH Book UI. 
were the maſterly drawings of the anti- 
ent painters ſtill in being, it is more than 
probable, that the hiſtorical pieces of our 
molt celebrated artiſts, would be thrown at 
as great a diſtance by a compariſon with 
them, and fink as much in their value, as 
the works of our poets and ſtatuaries have 
done. And could we hear the antient 
muſick performed in it's utmoſt perfection, 
our admiration of the modern would per- 
haps be changed into contempt, and the 
moſt excellent of our compoſers be con- 
fidered only as agreeable triflers. 

From this view it is evident, that how- 
ever the reputation of , the modern artiſts 
in painting and muſick may have been 
raiſed by the loſs of the works of the an- 
tients, yet the arts themſelves muſt have 
ſuffered amazingly ; and all true critical 
knowlege, with reſpect to thoſe, muſt 
have been proportionably leſs. For there 
can be no doubt, but that the curious en- 
quirers into poetry and ſtatuary, have 
much ſtronger, and more certain lights, 
to guide their judgements, in aſcertaining 
the real value of any production in either 
of thoſe arts, by means of the twofold 

com- 


CAP. XI. EDUCATION. 453 


compariſon; whereas they who have a 


taſte for muſick and painting can only 


judge by compariſon of the works of one 
modern with thoſe of another. 


CHAP. XI. 


That the few originals, which have been 


produced ſince the revival of the arts, 


have been indebted for their chief value to 
oratory. | 


HAVE already taken notice, that I 


ſpeak all along only of ſuch compoſi- 


tions in the imitative arts, as are of the 
more exalted and heroick kind. Of theſe 
we ſhall perhaps find very few amongſt 


the moderns which can be juſtly allowed 


to be originals. All that is called great 
and noble in ſtatuary, has been apparently 
borrowed from the antients; as alſo in 
hiſtory-painting. Nor has the ſublimer 
kind of poetry been leſs indebted to them. 
Every thing in our muſick indeed, mult 
be allowed to be original, as it was of pur 
own invention, and could owe nothing 
to antiquity ; fince that art had been 


G g 3 | wholly 


454 BRITISH Book III. 


wholly loſt. But this, according to the 
modern practice, muſt be looked upon 
rather as a mathematical ſcience, orna- 
mented by fancy, than one of the imita- 
tive arts. Throughout all the nations of 
Europe, Italy and England alone can have 
the honour of boaſting that they have 
produced ſome noble originals: Italy in 
painting, and England in poetry. The 
pictures of devotion, which chiefly em- 
ployed the maſters of the Italian ſchool, 
might probably vie with the greateſt pro- 
ductions of old, were they ſtill ſubſiſting, 
in point of force of expreſſion, ſublimity, 
and truth; becauſe the maſters had an op- 
portunity of taking theſe warm from life, 
in an infinite number of ſubjects daily to 
be ſeen in their chapels, in thoſe days when 
piety and enthuſiaſm were at their greateſt 
height. As praying' with devotion, and 
a hearty zeal, muſt be allowed to b: one 
of the moſt exalted ſpecies of oratory, and 
as nothing can be more ſtrongly charac- 
teriſed by the human features and geſ- 
ture; the modern artiſts muff have had as 
good ſubjects, and as frequent opportu- 
nities of drawing from the life, in this 
* re- 


CnAr. XI. EDUCATION. 43% 
reſpetct, as the antients had in others: ſo: 
that, ſappoſing an equality of genius and 
execution, there is good reaſon to believe, 
that the devotional pictures of the Italian 
painters may every way be equally ex- 
cellent with the hiſtorical pieces of anti- 
quity. This opinion will appear the 
more probable, when we conſider, that 
tho the hiſtorical pieces of the moſt emi- 
nent Italian painters have raiſed great ad- 
miration, when compared with thoſe of 
others; yet they are far from being al- 
lowed to "he the moſt excellent of their 
own works. It has been univerſally agreed, 
that the paintings on religious ſubjects of 
Angelo, Raphael, Titian, &c. are their 
moſt finiſhed pieces, and far ſuperior to 
their other performances. Let it be re- 
membered. alſo, that during the age of 
Leo X. and for ſome time afterwards, 
zeal for religion was carried to a much 
higher pitch, on account of the ſtruggles 
occaſioned by the ſeveral ſeceſſions from 
the church of Rome, begun and carried 
on in thoſe days, than it probably ever 
was either before or ſince. This muſt 
not only have made a greater number of 


G 8 4 de- 


\ 


456 BRITISH Book III. 


devotees, and afforded more frequent ex- 
amples of a warm expreſſion, but muſt 
likewiſe have rouzed the Italian * preach- 
ers, always allowed to be the moſt ani- 
mated of any in Europe, to the utmoſt 
exertion of their faculties; and conſe- 
quently have given advantages to the 
painters of thoſe days, in all ſubjects of 
this nature, over all artiſts of other coun- 
tries, as well as their ſucceſſors in their 
own. 

England has produced t two poets in the 
ſublimer kinds of writing, the epick and 
tragick, who muſt be allowed to be truly 
originals. But it would be no difficult 
matter to prove, that they were indebted. 
for the greateſt part of their excellence, 
and their undoubted ſuperiority over all 
the moderns of all nations, to their {kill 
in oratory. Whoever is converſant in the 
writings of Milton, muſt be convinced 
that he made that art his peculiar ſtudy. 
No other poet has ſhewn ſo profound a 
knowlege of the power of ſounds, or the 


Io this cauſe might probably be owing, the forcible 
expreſſion ſo much admired in one of the cartoons, where 


St. Paul is repreſented in the action of Preaching to the 
We | 


force 


Clan XI. EDUCATION. 457 


force of expreſſion from a proper arrange- 
ment of words. No writer of antiquity 
has ſhewn more perfect ſkill in the whole 
art of eloquence, than he has diſplayed in 


the ſpeeches of Satan and his fallen crew. 


Whoever examines carefully his account 
of the proceedings at the Pandemonium 
in his ſecond book, will find, that in the 
ſpeeches of Satan himſelf, of Moloc, Be- 
lial, Mammon, and Beelzebub, he ſeems 
to have taken in almoſt the whole com- 
paſs of oratory and that there is ſcarce a 
ſpecies of it, of which he has not given 
a noble and complete ſpecimen. Nor. 
could the ſecretary of Cromwell have 
wanted ſubjects to draw after the life from 
that great [maſter of perſuaſion. and his 
aſſociates; by whom that art was as much 
ceultivated, and to whom it was as uſeful 


in carrying their points, as the force of | 


arms, and military ſkill. 


Shakeſpear, whoſe towering. genius, : 
and uncommon reach of underſtanding, had 
endued him with an intutive quickneſs in 
his ſearches into human nature, had ac- 
quired from the very profeſſion in which 
2 was engaged, an habitual and practical 


know- 


vat or bes Afr. Ride, +; 


* - 4 24 4 4 — — — . 4 
or cnt COR EI Too fe ee — —— 


: 
| 
i] 
; 
; 


4538 BRITISH Boox III. 


knowlege of the oratorial art, far ſuperior 
to all theory. To be. convinced of his 
admirable {kill in this reſpect, we need 

only look over his ſhort piece of advice 
to the player in his Hamlet; wherein we 
can not but wonder how it was poſſible, 
that ſo juſt and comprehenſive a ſyſtem 
of rules both for action, and ſpeaking, 
could have been comprized in ſo narrow. 


a compaſs. It might be eaſily ſhewn, that 


the great ſucceſs of his pieces at this day, 
and the effects which they produce in the 
repreſentation, -have been chiefly owing to 
his ſkill in the art of ſpeaking. It was 
that which enabled him to form a true 
dramatick ſtyle, that happy arrangement 
and diſpoſition of his words, ſo perfectly 
adapted to his ſubjects, which throw ſuch 
2 luſtre on his ſentiments, and are ſo ad- 
mirably ſuited to the. mouth. of the 
ſpeaker. Theſe ate the heauties which 
particularly diſtinguiſh his plays, in the 


repreſentation at / leaſt, and ſufficiently 


make amends for all the irregularities of 


his drama. Whilſt the works of moſt of 


our other writers, who: have great advan- 
HO over him in other reſpects, thro! 
a Want 


Cnar.Xl. EDUCATION. 449 


want of ſkill in this eſſential art, are heard 
with languor, or diſguſt. "And this will be 
found to be the beſt reaſon why many plays 
ſtill give delight in the cloſet, which are 
inſupportable on the ſtage.” The ſame 
verſes may give pleaſure to the eye, which 
are tedious to the ear; the ſtyle which is 
not eaſy to the ſpeaker, becomes diſa- 
greeable to the hearet; and no man can 
write well for the em who can not 
ſpeak well himſelf. N 

To obviate all the objeRions which 
may be raiſed againſt the hypotheſis which 
T have laid down, and to invalidate the 
arguments of the many writers on this 
ſubject, would far exceed the compaſs 
and deſign of this work. I have con- 
tented myſelf at preſent with endeavour- 
ing to make this opinion appear not im- 
probable, and with curſorily taking no- 
tice of ſuch obvious objections as were 


moſt likely to occur at firſt view. I ſhall 


therefore leave the fuller proof to a future 
opportunity, and make no doubt but that 
the cloſer the examination is, the more 
will the opinion be juſtified. I ſhall con- 


clude my arguments upon this head, 
: 6 with 


— 2 _— ů· FFA . 2 ů˖ — * «oĩ Ä ͤů ů —— PP. A ̃ u Uu. y. P , P ͤ oe ] . Q ̃]⁰¹ A ˙¹m M ww 


460 BRITISH Book III. 
with one which to me, at leaſt, appears an 
unanſwerable proof that the imitative arts 
borrowed their aids from oratory, not 
oratory from the imitative arts: that js, 
ſuppoſing that the maſters in the imitatiye 
arts copied from the orators and their 
auditories, the various expreſſions of paſ- 
ſion, &c. it is clear that they immediately 
took them from life, from nature; whereas, 
on a ſuppoſition that the orators borrowed 
their {kill from the compoſition in the imi- 
tative arts, it is clear that they did not copy 
from nature, but from artificial works; 
and conſequently could -not have arrived 
at ſo perfect an imitation in their way, 
as the other maſters ; a point contradicted 
by fact, and the concurrent tek of 
their contemporaries. 

But whether the hypotheſis be Gow 
to be right, or not, it is at leaſt to be wiſh- 
ed that it were ſo; and more particularly 
by the people of Great Britain than any 
other nation upon earth. -Becauſe from 
the very nature of their conſtitution, and 
their happineſs in being poſſeſſed of fo fine 
a language, they are now the only people 


. the ſun capable of carrying the ora- 
torial 


Cnar. XI. EDUCATION. 461 
torial art to as high a degree of perfection 
as the Greeks and Romans; and conſe- 


quently the only people who have it in- 


their power to bring: the imitative arts to 
maturity. This, if believed or known, 
would be no little incitement to induſtry, 
and no ſmall inducement to apply with 
the utmoſt aſſiduity to the ſtudy of elo- 
quence ; an art of itſelf fo deſirable, and 
attended with ſuch immediate benefit to 
the poſſeſſors, but which would acquire a 
new value, and become a national concern, 
if it were known to be productive of ſuch 


noble conſequences, by it's influence on 


the other arts. Whereas, on a contrary 


ſuppoſition, ſhould the opinions hitherto 


delivered upon this ſubject be eſtabliſhed, 
that genius is a caſual production ariſing 


from ſome lucky circumſtances of air and 


climate, which have an influence upon 


the animal ſpirits, and from a happy con- 


formation of the organs of the brain, &c; 
it is evident that all induſtry muſt be diſ- 


couraged, as labour muſl prove ineffectual: 


in all countries not poſſeſſed of ſuch a 
bappy climate, and in all perfons who may 
not 1 themſelves formed with that 

| lucky 


| 
| 
| 


* - a: 8 —2 
r 


N n e F a mn 7 4. : ee F er — — _ 


. 


462 BRITISH Book III. 
lucky ſtructure of the organs. However 
advocates for ſuch opinions may ſhew their 
own ingenuity, by the invention of many 
ſpecious arguments to' ſupport them, I 
| ſhould be glad to know what benefit man- 
kind is to reap from their labours ? or 
what reward they ſhould expect, even if 
they were capable of demonſtrating prin- 
ciples, which indeed, in their own na- 
ture, can be founded upon nothing but 
conjecture; and which, if believed, might 
be productive of great miſchief, and could 
not poſſibly do any good? For upon a 
proof of their ftem, whole nations, as 

well as individuals, muſt lay aſide all at- 
tempts in the liberal arts, from an utter 
deſpair of "—_ with ſucceſs. 


CHAP. XII. 


Good conſequences 70 Great Britain, ould 
che above opinions be founs to be true. 


\N a ſuppoſition that my hypotheſis 
is well founded, and that the per- 
fection of eloquence would neceſſarily 
0 on the periection of the liberal arts, 


I can 


Cu Ar. XII. EDUCATION. 463 
I can not help here indulging myſelf in a 
view of the many glorious advantages 
which would reſult from it to Great 
Britain. Let us only ſuppoſe that the arts 
were in as high perfection here as at Athens, 
or Rome, (and I ſhall hereafter ſhew 
from certain diſcoveries and adyantages, 
which time has given us over the antients, 
that they may be carried to a much higher 
pitch) what muſt neceſſarily be the con- 
„ to this country. -_ 
Had we amongſt us ſuch excellent hain- 
ters and ſculptors as thoſe of old, their 


works would ſoon call upon the attention 


of the publick to have ſuitable edifices 
raiſed to be the repoſitories of theſe trea- 
ſures. - Upon proper encouragement there 
would not be wanting men of true genius 
and capacity in architecture, who applying 
themſelves wholly to the ſtudy of that 
art, might rival thoſe. great antients, the 
ruins of whoſe works excite in us ſuch ad- 
miration. * A propoſal for building a par- 
liament-houſe, courts of juſtice, royal 
palace, and other publick edifices, ſuit- 
able to the dignity of the natidn, would 
p. of Clone. 


. Not 


464 BRITISH-'Boox III. 
not then be laughed at as a vain affair; 

but theſe would be conſidered as works of 
neceſſity, and of the utmoſt benefit to the 
country. If all the publick buildings as 
well as private palaces (for ſuch may ſeve- 
tal houſes of our nobility be termed) had 
been raiſed in the true ſtyle of architecture; 
and if theſe were every where adorned with 
pieces of painting and ſculpture, exceeding 
thoſe of all other countries; would not 
London be the grand emporium of arts, 
as ſhe already is of commerce? Would 
not perſons flock hither from all parts of 
the world to ſee and admire theſe works ? 
Does not her very ſituation, and the eaſe 
with which her ſhores are acceſſible to 
-people from all corners of the earth, give 
England a natural right in this reſpect 
over all other countries in the World ? 
And has not France raviſhed this from 
her merely by art and induſtry ? Can it be 
doubted, conſidering our great advantages 
in point of natural beauties, if we excelled 
the French alſo in thoſe 'of the artificial 
kind, but that London would be more re- 
ſorted to by travellers from all parts of the 


earth than Paris? Nay, ſhould we not draw 
over 


Cay. XII. EDUCATION. 465 
over the French themſelves in as great 
abundance as the Engliſh now travel into 
France? Would not this be the ſureſt 
means of increaſing the wealth and power 
of England ? Her wealth, from the money 
brought in by ſuch a concourſe of foreign- 
ers, and from the diſpoſal of the moſt 
valuable of her commodities, produced 
by the ingenuity of her artiſts (an inex-: 
hauſtible fund) over the whole earth: 
her power, from the great figure ſhe muſt 
make, and the high eftimation in which 
ſhe muſt be held by all other nations; a 
point of more real conſequence than ex- 
tent of territory or number of forces; 
which has been ſufficiently exemplified in 
the little commonwealth of Athens. 
All the commerce which Great Britain 
carries on in it's ſeveral branches, does not 


contribute in any degree to her advantage. 


! 


ſo much as a ſingle traffick would do in 
ſueh commodities, as are neceſſarily pro- 
duced by a proper cultivation of the liberal 
arts. Nor could any thing ſo effectually 
promote her wealth, her power, her glory, 

and let me add, her ſafety. To be convinced. 

of this, we need only take a view of the. 

H h cauſcs 


—ͤ — N 


P . ̃ ! %¶—ͤ‚mKm. —  o——__” a TS, K- — Y 8 


% + * 


«Gn 4 


| 
b 
| 
| 
' 
j 
| 
- 


46h. BRITISH Boon Ik 


cauſes of the preſent ſplendor of France. 
Is ſhe not indebted for her flouriſhing 
ſtate chiefly to her attention to the arts ? 
By giving due encouragement to painting 
and ſculpture, ſhe has produced many 
maſters, at leaſt of comparative excellence, 
in the arts of deſigning, colouring, engrav- 
ing, chaſing, &c. And how greatly by this 
means has ſhe. enhanced the price of her 
manufactures, in ſilks, laces, ornamental 
plate, all ſorts of toys and faſhions ? That 
it is merely owing to a fuperiority in point 
of faſhion, and defign, that the French: 
commoditics are ſo much ſought after, is 
evident from this circumſtance, that the 
Engliſh artiſans are univerſally allowed-to 
exceed them in point of goodneſs of work- 
manſhip; and had they the advantage in 
other reſpects alſo, what infinite ſums 
might be ſaved to this nation, that are 
now carried into France to enrich our ene- 
mies? and what large treaſures might be 
brought into this iſland from the other 
countries of the world, and even from 
France herſelf, to purchafe ſuch commo—-— 
dities as ſhould be confeſſedly ſuperior to 
theirs? Would not this be the true way to 
10 bring 


Cnar. XII. EDUCATION, 467 
bring down the power of France, by cut- 
ting off the ſources of her wealth? Would 
not this be the means of leſſening the ad- 
miration of her neighbours, and of raiſing 
the glory of Britain upon her ruins ? And 
would not the weakneſs of France be the 
ſafety of England ? Let us therefore ſup- 
poſe that architecture, ſculpture, with the 
ſeveral arts dependent on it, painting, poe- 
try, and muſick, were in as high a degree 
of perfection here as at Athens, and con- 
ſequently ſo far ſuperior with regard to 
their ſtate in France that there could be 
no ſort of competition; would not England 
in this caſe be the country reſorted to by 
the travellers of the whole world ? Would 
not our language be learned, and our noble 
authors ſtudied by the people of all na- 
tions? Would not the perfect /knowlege 
which muſt then be ſpread of our noble 
conſtitution, of our religion, of the glori- 
ous writings of our philoſophers, and di- 
vines, ſtrike them with awe and venerati- 
on, and make them acknowlege an un- 
doubted ſuperiority in us over all other 
countries ? Would not London in this caſe 
become the capital not of England, but of 

1 7 H h 2 the 


468 BRITISH Boox II. 


the world; and England be conſidered as a 
queen among the nations? On the con- 
trary, what would be the ſtate of France 
in this caſe? Would ſhe not ſink propor- 
tionably low as England ſhould be raiſed? 
Should ours come to be ſtudied and univer- 
ſally known, the poverty of their language 
would, upon compariſon, bring! it into con- 
tempt, and of courſe into negleck. They 
would no longer have ſuch crowds of fo- 
reigners reſorting to their capital, whoſe 
reſidenee amongſt them contributes ſo 
largely to their wealth. They would no 
longer give the laws of faſhion to Europe, 
but receive them from us. Their fantaſ- 
tical pieces of workmanſhip, calculated to 
captivate the ignorant and capricious, 
would no longer ſtand the teſt, when com- 
pared with ſuch as were ſuperior in point 
of true taſte founded upon good ſenſe. 
Thus that kingdom would be reduced to 
the degree of weakneſs, which is the ne- 
ceſſary confequence of too large extent of 
territory without a ſufficient number of 
inhabitants. The bulk of the people 
would be poor and-wretched thro' want 
of N_ which would of courſe flag 
with 


Car. XII. EDUCATION. 49 


with commerce; and the ſ pirits of the 
better ſort would decay with the glory of 
their country: ſince nothing has contri- 
buted ſo much to excite in them their 
high notions of honour, as the fancied 
greatneſs of their Monargue, and the ap- 
2 ſuperiority which their country 
has gained, by great art, in many points, 
over their neighbours. But ſhould the 
ſpells and charms by which ſhe has faſci- 
nated all the nations round her, once be 
broken; ſhould the ſuperior genius of Bri- 
tain prevail, and ſhine forth in all it's 


ſplendor; the boaſted glory of France 


would vaniſh like a miſt before the morn- 
ing ſun, When the eyes of Europe bould 
be opened, and the true light ſhine before 
them, they would wonder how they could 
have been ſo long impoſed upon by falſe 
appearances, and tipſel gliſtening. . Thus 
ſank in the eſtimation of their neighbours, 
the French would ſoon ſink in their own 

and i in a ſhort time, far from thinking of 


e they _ Ge oh 


FT cc 


Wy h 3 point 


470 BRITISH Boon III. 
point of glory, and power, above all her 
neighbours; neither would it contribute 
Jeſs to her domeſtick order, health, and 
happineſs. Theſe depend upon the mo- 
rality of a nation ; and it can be demon-- 
ſtrated, that the morality of a people 6 
eircumſtanced as we are, and under ſuch 
a conſtitution, muſt in a great meaſure 
depend upon a proper cultivation of the 
arts. This I ſhall attempt to do in the 
following manner. From the nature of 
our ſituation, which has brought on an ex- 
tenſive commerce, much wealth is neceſ- 
farily pouted in upon us. This, from the 
nature of our conſtitution, is more equally 
diffuſed thro' the inhabitants, and becomes 
more certainly their property than under 
any other form of government. A fuper- 
fluity of wealth of courſe increaſes a de- 
fire of pleaſure (fo natural to man) as it 
' furniſhes thoſe who are poſſeſſed of it 
with the means of gratifying that defire. 
Now it may be confidently aſſerted, that 
no nation upon earth, in proportion to the 
number of it's inhabitants, contains ſo 
many individuals poſſeſſed of more wealth 
than i is requiſite to ſupply the — 
9 


Crar, XII. EDUCATION. 471 


of life, as England :- conſequently, that 
there is no nation where a defire of plea- 
ſure is likely to be ſo epidemick. Upon 


the right direction of this deſire therefore - 


will the morality and happineſs of: the 


people in a great meaſure depend. 
| Pleaſures are of three kinds; imellev⸗ 
ry which ariſe from the culture of the 


_, Vnderſtanding 3 ſenſitive, from the gra- 


© tification of the appetites, and paſſions : 25 


and reflective, from the powers of the 
imagination. To obtain the firſt, re- 
quires cloſe ftudy, labour, and applicati- 
on; they are likely therefore only to be 
purſued by-ſueh as have their fortunes to 
make: the ſecond are common to all 
men, as well as to brutes: and the laſt 
ſeem to be particularly calculated for 
thoſe, whoſe independent fortunes render 
it not neceſſaty to take the pains requiſite 
to arrive at the bigheſt degree of intel- 
leQual pleaſure and yet whaſe reaſon 
may be ſufficiently improved not to give 
themſelves: wholly ap te ſenkual grantor 
tions. Q bat 

The bigheſt ene af imagination 
ariſe from the imitative arts. It is of the 


Tu H h 4 | ut- 


aa & „ 
— 
r 


— — 4 2 5 4 by ae T - = D So 
poet On — do Try —— — SI —_ 
= * 4 = 


472 BRITISH Boon III. 
utmoſt conſequence therefore to an opu- 
lent nation, that they ſhould be in a proper 
degree of perfection. Theſe pleaſures, 
being of a middle kind between the rati- 
onal and ſenſitive, and partaking of both, 
are productive of good or bad conſequences, 
according as they incline moſt to one or 
the other. 

When the rational is 3 they 
cherten the road to wiſdom, and exhibit 
virtue in the moſt amiable light; they 
enlarge the underſtanding, and better the 
heart. But, when the ſenſitive prevails, 
they become bawds to the paſſions, and 
only ſerve to extend the empire of vice 
and ignorance. 

The truth of this will cifficiently: aps | 
pear, upon conſidering the different effects 
produced by the arts, according as they 
are employed in the cauſe of virtue, or of 
vice. Nothing can convey ' inſtruction 
with delight, ennoble the mind, or en- 
large the heart ſo much, as good poems, 
plays, pieces of oratory, painting and 
ſculpture, repreſenting great and glorious 
actions and perſons. Nothing can ſo ef- 
ſaually debauch the mind and corrupt 


the 


Cn. XII. EDUCATION. 4573 


the heart, as the proſtitution of theſe arts 
tolewd and ſenſual purpoſes. 
The morality of a nation depends there- 


fore more upon the right direction of the 


imitative arts than is imagined. The ex- 
ample of the nobility, gentry, and perſons 
of independent fortunes, is ever followed 
by the lower claſs of people: and, when 
that leads to ſenſuality, the whole nation 
will of courſe be corrupt. Nor can ſee; 
as matters are circumſtanced, but that the 
rich muſt, by a fatal neceſſity, be plunged 
into vice. Wealth of courſe makes plea- 
ſure their chief object. That of the ra- 
tional kind, is too laborious, for perſons 
whoſe minds and bodies have been ren- 
dered effeminate and indolent,' from the 
eaſineſs of their circumſtances. Whilſt 
they are impelled to the ſenſual by paſ- 


fions from within, and are allured by ex- 


citements from without, they naturally 
fall into gratifications of this kind, from 
the caſe with which they are obtained. 
If; therefore, the pleaſures of imagination, 
which alone could hinder them from be- 
jng abſorbed in thoſe, by filling up their 
time with delight, inſtead of being of the 


ſame 


474 BRITISH Book III. 
fame fide with virtue, ſhould become con- 
federates with vice; would not all re- 
ſtraints be taken off from their unruly ap- 
petites ? would they not be plunged into 
ſenſuality by double violence ? would they 
not be allured to it by double charms ? 
If we compare the ſtate of England 
with any other country, we ſhall find, 
from the very nature of our conſtitution, 
that the cultivation and proper direCtion 
of the pleaſures of imagivation, are more 
eſſential to us than to any other people 
upon earth. In deſpotick governments 
people may be reſtrained by fear from in- 
dulging too much in ſenſual pleaſures &, 

to the prejudice of ſociety and govern- 
ment. In republicks, rewards, honours, 
and emulation, may ſpirit up perſons of 
the higheſt, birth and fortune to lahori- 
ous ſtudies, and to dedicate, themſelves 
chiefly to pleaſures of the rational kind 4. 
But in Britain, where the rich need not 
fear puniſhments, and where rewards are 
not the neceſſary conſequences of im · 


* Of: this there is a remarkable inſtance ia. the abſii- 


nence of the Turks from wine. 
1 The hiſtories of the Greek and Roman republicks 
| abound with ipflances of this fort. 


proved 


Car. XII. EDUCATION. 475 
proved abilities; nothing can poſſibly 
hinder perſons of independent fortunes 


tom hying themſelves out chiefly for the 
gratification of their fenſual appetites, but 


a true taſte for the liberal arts, and a right 


enjoyment of the port of W 
tion. 

Nothing elſe can form a ſufficient bar- 
rier againſt the devaſtations of luxury, 


and the inevitable deſtruction which is 


ever it's attendant. A learned luxury 
does not add ſo much to the ornament, 
as the ſtrength of a nation. It ennobles 
the mind, and excites an ardor for 

and heroick atchievements. It gives a 
higher reliſh for liberty and virtue, and 
teaches men how to ſet a true value ou 
thoſe ineſtimable bleſſings. It is an an- 


tidote againſt the poiſonous qualities of 


exceſſive wealth, and makes ſuperfluity 
ſalutary to a nation. There is no fear that 
money can be poured too faſt into a coun- 
try, or be productive of any bad effects, 
where the arts flouriſh, and a general gobd 
rafte for them prevails.” In ſuch eaſe, the 
endeavours" to merit reward "would in- 
nd in Proportion? to the power of res 
ward - 


2 tn * 8 

— —_—_— - — — — - 
— CERT = 5 8 
>» —_— _ 


— 2 — — — — — . — 
. 1 — — — — PR PR * 
—— 2 


warding ; the number of artiſts, to the 
number of encouragers; and no fund of 
wealth, can be more copious or inexhauſti- 
ble, than the fund of genius. Let us ſup- 
poſe this to be the ſtate of Britain; let us 
ſuppoſe a ſufficient number of real artiſts, 
and a ſufficient quantity of true taſte in 
the people; how. gloriouſly might the ſu- 
perfluity of the rich be employed in re- 
warding merit, in encouraging genius, and 
in purchaſing their nobte productions ? 
How much more delightfully to them- 
. as well as beneficially to their coun- 

try, might their time be employed in the 
ſtudy of theſe. agreeable arts, and in the 

rational enjoyments which they beſtow ; 
| thay, fn, gaming, drinking, ang. all the 
other modiſh amuſements? 

It was to the want of pleaſures of this 
kind, that all the great empires of the 
world chiefly owed their deſtruction. 
When conqueſt introduced wealth, and 
| wealth ſtimulated a deſire of pleaſure, 
the rich had none to chuſe but of the ſen- 
ſual kind; Intemperance debaſed their 
minds, and enervated their bodies. Thus 
they ah an eaſy: prey to the firſt. warlike 
-bidm 80 


Cnae. XII. EDUCATION. 477 
people that attacked them. Their con- 
querors in their turn, allured by the ſame 
delights, were diſſolved in voluptuouſneſs, 
and met with the ſame fate from ſome 
more hardy people. Thus fell the mighty 
empires of the Aſſyrians, Perſians, Medes, 
Ægyptians, &c. If it be ſaid that Athens 
and Rome alſo fell, tho' the liberal arts 
were carried in both places to the higheſt 
perfection, it can be ſhewn that their ruin 
was not owing to- the ſame cauſe. The 
ſtamina of thoſe ſtates were bad, the vitals 
were unſound ;_ and, far from wondering 
at their diſſolution, we ought only to be 
_ ſurpriſed how they laſted ſo long. It can 
be ſhewn, that the cultivation of the arts 
contributed much to prolong their date ; 
but no remedy could have been effectual, 

when the diſeaſe was mortal. With re- 
ſpect to Athens, it is well known that ſne 
was indebted for her riſe, and the great 
figure ſne made in the world, to the arts; 
but her ambition increaſed with her flou- 
riſhing ſtate, and far exceeded her power. 
The extreme jealouſy which the Athe- 
nians had of their liberty, by it's exceſs, 
degenerated into a vice; and the oſtra- 
">| eiſm 


478 BRITISH Book III. 
ciſm introduced by it, often brought them 
into danger, by depriving the ſtate of it's 
ableft guardians. It is true that the em- 
pire of the ſea gave Athens a power, to 
which ſhe was not at all entiled from the 
ſmall extent of her territories. The ob- 
ſervation made by Monteſquieu upon this 
head, is well worth the attention of every 
Engliſhman: The paſſage is this. But 
© this Athenian lordſhip of the ſeas, de- 
< ſerves to be more particularly mentioned. 
Athens, ſays Xenophon, rules the ſea ; 
< but as the. country of Attica is joined to 
the continent, it is ravaged by enemies, 
< while the Athenians are engaged in 
« diſtant expeditions. Their leaders ſuf- 
© fer their lands to be deſtroyed, and ſe- 
© cure their wealth by ſending it to ſome 
* iſland, The populace, who are not 
© poſſeſſed of lands, bave no uneaſineſs. 
© But if the Athenians inhabited an iſland, 
©. and beſides this, enjoyed the. empire of 
the ſea, they would, as long as they were 
poſſeſſed of theſe advantages, be able to 
© annoy others, and at the ſame time be 
© out of all danger of being annoyed.” 
Monteſquieu's obſervation upon the above 
7 paſ- 


CnAr. XII. EDUCATION. 279 
paſſage from Xenophon is this; One 
- * would imagine that 1 Was 
« ſpeaking of England.” 

Herr we may fee that the naval pony 
of Athens muſt have received continual 
checks from the nature of her fituation; 
and that her victories at fea might at any 
time be ballanced by the deſtruction of 
her territories, and even her city. In this 
reſpect therefore it will at once oocur what 
an amazing advantage Great Britain has 
over her. But when'weiconfider the {mall 
number of her :oitizens, which ſeldom 
amounted to more than twenty thouſand, 
we ſhall rather have occaſion to wonder at 
the degree of power to which her ftate 
was raiſed, and that ſhe was able ſo long 
to maintain it, than at it's deſtruction. The 
utmoſt activity in each individual was ab- 
folutely neceflary to the preſervation of ſo 
fmall a body. When therefore the ſtudy 
of philoſophy became pretty general a- 
mongſt them; when the contemplative 
was preferred to the active life ; When per- 
ſons of the greateſt abilities among them 
withdrew from publick affairs to the con- 
fideration of their own private*Hhappinefs ; 
the 


430 BRITISH Boon III. 
the ſtate was of courſe. deprived of the 
beſt heads to direct it, and the braveſt 
hearts to defend it. ' And this alone was 
ſafficient to bring on the ruin of Athens. 
If ' we even add, that the very means 
which raifed them to greatneſs, if not 
properly reſtrained, muft produce their 
deſtruction; that the too great indul- 
gence to a love * of the liberal arts muſt 
have had as bad effects with reſpect to the 
ſafety of ſuch a ſmall body, as the love 
of vice in larger ſtates: if we allow that 
a learned luxury, becoming epidemical 
amongſt a few thouſands, might as effec- 
tually diſqualify them from the activity 
neceſſary to the preſervation of their coun- 
try, as that of the ſenſual kind amongſt 
millions; the argument will not be con- 
cluſive againſt the arts themſelves, but 
againſt the abuſe of them: nor ſhould it 
be any diſcouragement to the cultivation 
* The love of the arts muſt have got to a moſt vicious 
height, when the le expended larger ſums in the de- 
corations of their theatre than in a long war; and when 
they would not conſent, even tho* reduced to extremity, 
that any part of the fund raifed for the ſupport of their 
publick diverſions ſhould be applied to the exigences of 


the ſtate, und voted him an enemy to his country WhO 
mould make ſuch a motion. 122222 - 
of 


CAP. XII. EDUCATION. 481 
of thoſe arts in another country otherwiſe 
| circumſtanced. The ſtate of Athens in 
this caſe mult as neceſſarily become a 
bankrupt, as a man' of a private fortune 
who would endeavour, in theſe ſorts of 
expences; to emulate a prince. But we 
may ſay that the eſtate of Britain, with 
reſpect to that of Athens, is immenſe ; 
and that ſhe may afford to lay out in ſu- 
perfluities what would have beggared the 
other. Were a number equal to the 
whole body of the citizens of Athens em- 
ployed here wholly in the liberal arts, 
they would not be miſſed in the ſtate; 
and there would ſtill be many millions 
left, out of which guardians might be 
choſen for the publick ſafety, both in 
point of counſel and valour. 

Vet we ſee, under all their diſadvan- 
tages, what noble efforts this poliſhed 
people made for their liberty (efforts never 
known in thoſe undone by ſenſual luxury) 
and how long their fate was deferred by 
the oratory of one ſingle man. 

The deſtruction of. the Roman 5 
lick was alſo owing to a conſtitutional diſ- 
caſe. The eſtabliſiment of the tribunitial 

I I autho- 


482 BRITISH Bock III. 
authority was an incurable wound in the 
very vitals of this ſtate. This is admi- 
rably explained by the all- piercing genius 
of our N where he makes Corio- 
Janus ſay, 
+* And my ſoul akes 
* To . when two authorities are u 
Neither ſupreme, how ſoon confuſion 
May enter twixt the gap of both, and 
take ay 

* The one by the other.” | 

This was the ſource of perpetual feuds 
and conteſts ; and the people at length, 
grown weary of ſuch an unquiet and tur- 
bulent life, were prepared to welcome 
any change of government. Every one 
who is acquainted with the ſtory of Sylla 
muſt ſee, that tyranny might have taken 
place ſooner, had it not been for his ex- 
traordinary moderation. And it is well 
known, that, as Demoſthenes for ſome 
time reſpited the fate of Athens, fo did 
Cicero, by his eloquence, that of Rome; 
which otherwiſe, inſtead of a Cæſar, might 
have owned Catiline for a maſter. But it 
is well worth obſerving, that Rome never 

t Coriol. act iii. ſcene 3, 


ap- 


Cnap. XII. EDUCATION. 483 
appeared in ſuch gloty, never enjoyed 
ſuch happineſs at home, nor was ſo much 
reſpected abroad, as during the time that 
the arts flouriſhed in their higheſt degtee 
of perfection. When they diſappeared, 
ſenſuality alone dock place, produced the 
ſame effects at Rome as in other great 
empites, and brought about her total de- 
ſtruction. She depended on her con- 
queſts, and univerſal dominion, for her 
preſervation ; but the empire periſhed by 
it's own unwieldineſs, and Rome fell by 
her own ſtrength. Here we may take 
notice of the advantage which Great Bri- 
tain has over thoſe two famous nations, 
from her very ſituation, As an iſland, ſhe 
is free from the dangers to which Athens 
was always expoſed ; and as an iſland alto, 
ſhe is reſtrained from that fatal deſire of 
extending her conqueſts, which has ever 
proved the ruin of all ambitious coun- 
tries. 

Since therefore. the arts OY be of 
ſach advantage to the proſperity of Bri- 
tain ; ſince we might enjoy all the benefits » 
reſulting from them, in as high a degree 
as the Athenians did, without any danger- 

a "SY ous 


484 B R IT IS H Book III. 
ous conſequences to be feared from them; 
ſince they might contribute to our glory 
as much as they did to that of Rome, 
whilſt they reſided there, without fear of 
their vaniſhing ſo ſoon, as the native ex- 
cellence of our conſtitution affords ſtrong 
hopes of it's preſervation ;z what cauſe can 
be aſſigned that they have hitherto made 
ſo ſmall a progreſs in this iſland ? Is there 
any thing in the ſoil not congenial to 
them? Is there an impoſſibility of their 
flouriſhing here ? This is worth enquiry, 


CHAP. XIII. 


Whether it is not probable that the arts 
might arrive at as high a pitch in this 
country, as at Athens or Rome? 


T has been before obſerved, that to 
the perfection of the imitative arts 
four things are chiefly neceſſary ; viz. 
genius, application, proper ſubjects, and 
ſuitable inſtruments. . Let us ſee. how the 
people of Great Britain ſtand with reſpect 
to theſe four articles. And firſt, as to ge- 
nius. 


The 


EIN XIII. EDUCATION. 4385 
The inſtances of the force of genius in 
the natives of this country with regard to 
the imitative arts, are too many and too ap- 
parent to need any enumeration. Where- 
ever they have had living ſubjects to draw 
from, they have not failed to produce the 
ſtrongeſt reſemblance, and the moſt for- 
Cible expreſſion. If they have failed in, 
the more' exalted views of human nature, 
it is becauſe there were no where proper 
objects in life to be found, from which 
they might receive the impreſſion. Ho- 
garth has admirably repreſented ſuch na- 
ture as he found. Our writers of co- 
medy have out-done all the reſt of the 
world in the variety as well as exact draw- 

ing of the characters from the life. Our 
tragick authors indeed, one only excepted, 
for the above reaſon have fallen very ſhort 
in theirs. Mr. Garrick muſt be allowed 
to be inimitable in the repreſentation of 
ſuch comick characters as he has an op- 
portunity of obſerving in the world; nor 
does he fall ſhort of equal perfection in 
ſuch parts of tragick characters as can be 
taken from life. The forcible and na- 
tural a of his madneſs in Lear 
| Ii 3 could 


436 BRITISH Book III. 


could hardly have been repreſented in 
ſuch lively colours, had he not borrowed 
it from the {choal of nature, from Bedlam. 
This reminds me of the excellent figures 
of the two lunaticks, done by Cibber. 

Nor can it be doubted, from the place 
where they ſtand, and. the opportunities 
which he muſt have had, but that the 
admirable expreſſion to be ſeen in thoſe 
ſtatues was taken immediately from life. 
This is the more likely when it is con- 
ſidered that none of his other works con- 
tributed much to his honour, in which, 
like the reſt of his fraternity, he proba- 
bly contented himſelf with copying other 
maſters. | 
But tho there never had been ay in- 
ſtance of this ſort, tho' there never had 
been any production in the arts worthy of 
admiration, I ſhould not ſtill heſitate to 
conclude, that Great Britain has abounded 
more with genius than any other country 
in the globe, however it has been ob- 
{cured for want of encouragement, or bu- 
ried thro' want of opportunity to diſplay 
itſelf : for this unanſwerable reaſon ; that 
the perfection of the imitative arts is more 
neceſ- 


8 


car. XIII. EDUCATION. 487 


neceſſary to the well-being of Britain, 
than to any other nation upon earth 3 and 
providence furniſhes all countries in the 
moſt liberal manner, with whatever is 
moſt neceſſary to their well-being. But 
wie do not want inſtances ; no, by the im- 
mortal names of Milton and Shakeſpear, 
we do not want inſtances of the nobleſt 
kind! When we conſider the hiſtory of 
theſe men, and the concurrence of won- 
derful circumſtances which produced their 
admirable writings ;: there appears to be 
| ſomething miraculous throughout. As to 
Milton, it is well known that he paſſed 
the moſt vigourous of his years in = af- 
fairs, and diſagreeable controverſies. Had 
he not outlived Cromwell, we ſhould 
neyer have known him as a favourite of 
the muſes. After the reſtoration, if his 
life had not been preſerved by extraor- 
dinary means, when he was particularly 
marked out for deſtruction ; the Paradiſe 
Loſt had never been written, and that firſt 
of poets would never have thrown ſuch a 
luſtre on the Engliſh nation. And un- 
der what circumſtances was this great 
work performed? Diſtreſſed in his affairs, 
deprived of his ſight, advanced in years, 

114 tor- 


488 BRITISH Boox III. 
tormented by the moſt acute diſorders, 
ſurrounded with perils, and the obje& of 
hatred and contempt to the greateſt part 
of his countrymen. Under ſuch circum- 
ſtances was the nobleſt poem that ever ap- 
peared in any age or country, begun and 
finiſhed. What but the moſt vivid genius 
that eyer animated a human breaſt could 
have inſpired ſuch an undertaking, or 
ſupported him in the proſecution of it ? 
But when we conſider the poor reward 
which attended his labours, the cold re- 
ception which his work met with in that 
taſteleſs age; that it lay for a long time 
on his bookſeller's hands as waſte paper; 
what ſhall we ſay to his perſeverance un- 
der theſe diſcouragements, to his writing 
other pieces inimitablein their kind, and 
only excelled by his own great work ? 
Can it be accounted for on any other prin- 
ciple than that he was favoured with a 
larger portion of etherial fire, than ever 
. yet was beſtowed on mortal? 

| * "The ſtory of Shakeſpear is well known. 
That he had but a ſlender education, and 
ſeryed an apprenticeſhip, in a country 
town, to a mechanical trade, in which 
occupation he might probably have con- 
; tinued 


Cray. XIII. EDUCATION. 489 


tinued all his days, had not the danger in- 
curred on account of a youthful frolick in 
deer-ſtealing forced him to fly to London. 
There chance and want, not any ſpur- 
rings of genius, led him to the ſtage. At 
that time it was the cuſtom to act plays 
in the day-time, and perſons of, faſhian, 
inſtead of going in coaches, uſed to ride 
to the theatre. The firſt employment of 
our Shakeſpear was to hold ſome of their 
horſes for hire; which for a time afforded 
him a livelihood. Being often obſerved 
by ſome of the performers i in this low of- 
fice, and having ſomething promiſing in 
his aſpect, he was at length introduced be- 
hind the ſcenes in quality of prompter's 
boy. Such were the beginnings, ſuch 
was the introduction of that great genius 
into that field of action, where he after- 
wards diſplayed his powers in ſo aſtoniſh- 
ing a manner. Here is another glaring 
inſtance of the ſuperiority of Engliſh ge- 
nius over that of all other countries. For 
by the force of that alone, without edu- 
cation; without opportunities of improve- 
ment, without the excitements of fame, 
or conſiderable profit, when the ſtage 


Was 


490 BRITISH Book III. 


was as yet in it's infancy, and the national 
taſte univerſally bad; has this man out- 
done, in the — eſſential points of his 
art, all the great writers of Greece and 
Rome, who were amply: ſupplied with all 
le means of- cultivating their talents 
to the utmoſt, who were ſtimulated to 
diſplay them in the higheſt perfection, by 
the' moſt ample rewards, that ambition, 
love of- N or deſire of wealth could 
graſp at. on 
Theſe two gent men blen to lis been 
placed by the hand of Providence upon an 
eminence, like two large beacons, to il- 
luminate the land; that his goodneſs 
might be ſeen by all, and his ways juſti- 
fied to man: to ſhew his parental care 
over his creatures, in ſupplying them with 
whatever is needful to their happineſs : 
to give an evident proof of his juſt diſtri- 
butions; that as Britain ſtood more in 
need of genius than any other country in 
the world, ſo he had ſupplied it with a 
larger ſhare. But, tho' the Almighty may 
ſometimes work wonders, in - compaſſion 
to our weakneſs, and to aſſiſt our blind- 


neſs; ; yet, when our "_ are opened, and 


Pro- 


CA. XIII. EDUCATION. 491 
propor information received, all is done 
on his part; and we are left to ourſelves 
to make a proper uſe of the grace which 
he has vouchſafed to us. Tho two have 
ariſen amongſt us who ſeem to have been 
inſpired, and to have been conducted to 
their point of perfection by means pre- 
ter natural; yet it is from application 
and encourag alone that we can 
hope to ſee many ſuch. For want of 
theſe, who can tell how many Miltons 
may have been loſt in the purſuits of 
worldly intereſts and grandeur ; and how 
many Shakeſpears may have been hid be- 
hind counters? If we continue in - the 
ſame inattention to ſuch material points, 
who can tell how many preſent, and fu- 
ture genuiſes, capable of contributing to 
the benefit and ornament of this country, 
in the higheſt degree, may be wholly ab- 
ſorbed in worldly purſuits? 
- Upon the whole it may be concluded 
with certainty, that it is not for want of 
genius that Britain has not excelled all 
other countries in the liberal arts, but 
ſomething elſe : what that is let us now 
en- 


* 


492 BRITISH Box III. 
enquire. The next point to be confidered 

is application. 
Application in one country is as ranch 
conſtitutional, as indolence is in another. 
The difference of climates is the cauſe of 
theſe different effects. A happy tempe- 
ratuxre of air produces the one, extremes of 
heat or cold the other. Tis as painful to 
the people to be without employment in 
the firſt, as it is to them to enter upon or 
continue in action in the laſt. In the one 
they ſet themſelves to work, in order to 
avoid uneaſineſs; in the other, they muſt 
be allured to labour by reward, or driven 
to it by puniſhment. Perhaps there never 
was a people in the world ſo conſtitu- 
tionally induſtrious as the 'Engliſh ; nor 
can all hiſtory produce ſo many examples 
of great works, wherein the mental 
powers are diſplayed in the moſt extraor- 
dinary manner; undertaken and carried 
on with ſo little aſſiſtance or encourage- 
ment. Their labours ſeem to have been 
the reſult of an internal active principle, 
and to have been but little influenced by 
external cauſes: If therefore to this con- 
ſtitutional 


Cray. XIII. EDUCATION. 493 
ſtitutional activity, there ſhould be added 
all the aids neceſſary to quicken their pro- 
greſs, and all due encouragement to chear 
and enliven their ſpirits in their fatiguing 
purſuits ; can it be a matter of doubt whe- 
ther the Engliſh would exceed all other 
nations, antient and modern, as much 1 in 

application as they do in genius? 
Proper ſubjects come next to be con- 
ſidered, It has been already ſhewn, that 
proper ſubjects for the imitative arts, 
which are calculated only for the uſe and 
delight of man, muſt be ſuch as can con- 
tribute moſt to his advantage and plea- 
ſure : and that therefore views of human 
nature, in it's moſt exalted and beautiful 
ſtate, are the fitteſt ſubje&s for imitation, 
as being moſt likely to anſwer thoſe ends. 
To know. what that ſtate is, we need only 
enquire into thoſe points which particu- 
larly diſtinguiſh the human from the brute 
creation, and give man the great ſuperi- 
ority over all other animals. The moſt 
obvious diſtinction of all, is that of ſpeech, 
without which reaſon would in a manner 
be uſeleſs to us. By ſpeech I do not here 
mean the mere articulation of words, a fa- 
culty 


494 BRITISH Booxlll, 
culty which ſome birds have as well as 
we; but the power of communicating our 
thoughts to each other in their full force, 
and impreſſing them ſtrongly on the 
minds of the hearers, by means of ſuitable 
and concomitant tones, geſtures, and 
looks. It is this ſort of ſpeech which dig- 
nifies man above all other ' creatures, and 
which places him in the moſt conſpicuous 
point of view. Atchievements in war, 
and deeds of arms, may excite our won- 
der, and aſtoniſh our fancy; but views of 
this ſort are only of human nature de- 
formed, and degraded; as the higheſt 
courage, ſhewn on theſe occaſions, does 
not exceed that of brute beaſts. - Reaſon, 
and the power of communicating it, are 
the great characteriſticks of man; and it 
is from the proper exerciſe of theſe talents 
alone, that uſeful and delightful views of 
human nature can be taken. A complete 
orator, when he ſpeaks inpublick, preſents 
at once to view, all the perfections both 
of mind and body with which it hath 
pleaſed God to adorn man, and which are 
never ſeen together in equal force or 
beauty in any other perſon, or upon mY 
other 


Cap. XIII. EDUCATION. 495 


other occafion. Here then alone is to be 
found the true pattern for the ĩmitative 
arts, the only juſt model for the poet, the 
muſician, the painter, the ſtatuary to copy 
from. If we therefore are more deficient 
in ſubjects, than the artiſts of Athens and 
Rome, it muſt be our own fault; fince 
our talents can not be ſaid to be inferior, 
and ſince we have every excitement to the 
ſtudy of oratory which they had, and ra- 

ther in a ſtronger degree. 
The laſt point to be confidered was that 
of fuitable inſtruments. In this reſpect it 
can not be doubted but that we have 
amazing advantages over the antients. 
With regard to muſicalinftruments, from 
a view of the ſtructure of theirs, it is im- 
poſſible they could have been fo per- 
fe& as thoſe of later invention. In paint- 
ing we are poſſeſſed of all the colours 
which they had, and have many ſuper- 
added, by our commerce with the Eaſt and 
Weſt-Indies, which muſt have been un- 
known to them. All inſtruments uſed in 
ſculpture, graving, &c. are with us in the 
higheſt degree of perfection: and were 
mn 1 language properly cultivated, 
it 


9. 


496 BRITISH Boox III. 


it would be found to be a much more com- 
plete inſtrument for the uſe of poets than 

what they were poſſeſſed of. | 
If therefore upon the whole we excel 
them in genius, application, and inſtru- 
ments; 'what can there be wanting to 
make the arts flouriſh more here than 
ever they did in Athens or Rome, but pro- 
per ſubjects, and due encouragement ? It 
has been already ſhewn how proper ſub- 
jets are to be obtained ; and due en- 
couragement, from the very nature of our 
conſtitution, can proceed only from a ge- 
neral good taſte in the people; which 
muſt ariſe from the ſame ſource as the 
ſubjects. The quantity of the one will 
neceſſarily increaſe in proportion to the 
number of the other. 
When we conſider that the cultivation 
of the arts is abſolutely neceſſary to the 
well-being of this country; that the 
means are proportioned to the neceſlity ; 
that, as luxury muſt be a neceſlary diſeaſe 
here, and likely to rage with more vio- 
lence than any where elſe, the grand phy- 
ſician increaſed the quantity and power of 
the medicine; that there was an uncom-. 
mon 


CAP. XIII. EDUCATION. 497 
mon ſtrength of conſtitution given to 
ſtruggle with the diſorder, and the benign 


influence of the pureſt religion ſuperad- 
ded: we can not but conclude, that this 
nation has been more peculiarly favoured 
by Providence than any other upon earth. 
When we confider, that from our very 
ſituation we are leſs liable to be attacked 
by enemies than any other great people 
ever were ; and by the fame means we 
are alſo precluded from the folly of ambi- 
tion in endeavouring to extend our domi- 
nions by conqueſt, which has ever ended 
in the ruin of the greateſt empires; that 
the intellectual faculties were never diſ- 
played i in ſo high a degree as by the na- 
tives of this country in their ſearches into 
philoſophy, and all manner of ſcience ; 
that the people ſeem to be born with the 
beſt natural diſpoſitions, and are above all 
others remarkably brave, generous, cha- 
ritable, and humane; why does not Bri- 
tain at this day, eclipſe in all things, all 
other nations that either do or have ex- 
iſted ? why may ſhe not promiſe duration 
to her ſtate till time ſhall be no more? 


Ek - . can 


498 BRITISH Boo III. 


CHAP. XIV. 
T he hf * ;forders of Britain traced to one 


481 75 


HY ſhould we look for any other 

cauſe of the decay of religion, 
but the contempt of the clergy? and the 
contempt of the clergy is ſufficiently ac- 
counted for, from their incapacity to diſ- 
charge the principal duties of their office, 
through a material defect in education. 
The decay of morality has in all coun- 
tries ever followed that of religion; and 
this muſt be more particularly the caſe, 
' where the perſons appointed to be it's 
teachers and guardians are ſo meg to 
the taſk. 

Want of knowlege, and a quantity of 
falſe knowlege, far worſe than none, are 
the neceſſary conſequences in a country, 
of not ſtudying and underſtanding the 
language which is moſt generally read. 

The low ſtate of the arts is owing to a 
falſe taſte; and falſe taſte proceeds from a 

Want 


Cit Ar. XIV. EDUCATION. 499 
want of uſing the proper means, eatly in 
life, of procuring a true one. 

If our legiſlators have at any time added 
wrong, how could it be otherwiſe ex- 
pected, when there is no care taken in 
their education to qualify them for the' 
diſcharge of ſo important an office? 

If the bulk of our nobility and gentry. 
give themſelves up to luxury, 1s it' any 
wonder, when their affluence ſets them 
above the more laborious inveſtigations 
of reaſon ; when they are not ſupplied 
with the rational pleaſures of imagina- 
tion; but on the contrary, are debauch- 
ed by the corrupt ſtate of thoſe, and till 
more ſtimulated to | gratify fenfual + 
tites ? 

Is it wy wonder that the reſt of the 
nation ſhould follow their example? 

The infinite variety of opinions is not 
at all ſurprifing, nor that there ſhould be 
as many ſects of philoſophers in England 
as ever have appeared in the world ; 
ſince great pains are taken, in the educa- 
tion of youth, to make them acyuainted 
with all theſe; and, at the moſt dange- 

K k 2 rous 


oo, BRIT IS H 'Beox III. 
rous time of life, when the judgement 
has leaſt power, they are left to them- 
ſelves to adopt what opinions they pleaſe, 
and to ſtick by ſuch as are moſt agree- 
able to them. Is it any wonder that 
their raw and weak underſtandings, be- 
wildered in ſuch a maze of ſyſtems, 
ſhould make their eſcape from them 
into the leſs perplexing regions of mop” 
ticiſm? 

That this iſland ſhould hs more 
in ſuicide than any other country upon 
earth, will no longer appear ſtrange, when 
it is conſidered, that nothing brings on 
the tædium vitæ ſo much as want of em- 
ployment: and no education in the world 
qualifies men leſs for the active life than 
ours; though, from the very genius of 
the people, and the nature of our conſti- 
tution, that ought to be it's chief end. 
When perſons, born with, a reſtleſs active 
diſpoſition, do not. find proper employ- 
ment, or are engaged in ſuch as is not 
ſuitable to their genius; life becomes a. 
burthen to them. This is a. more ra- 
tional way to account for the frequency 

of 


Caf. XIV. EDUCATION. 501 
of that crime, than to attribute it to the 
peculiar qualities of our air, &c. Why is 
ſo fair a plea offered; why are any ar- 
guments urged to palliate ſo atrocious a 
crime? Why is the climate arraigned, 
and Providence blaſphemed, 'to excuſe 
ſelf- murder, upon a principle contrary to 
reafon and fact? It is to be ſuppoſed that 
our climate has been always the ſame, 
and yet there was a time when that crime 
was as little known here as in any other 
country. In the reign of Elizabeth, 
when all found employment, it was 
hardly heard of; and the great frequency 
of it has been but of a very ſhort date, 
and ſince many people have had little to 
do, A gentleman, in a well-known re- 
cent inſtance, gave the true reaſon why it 
is grown ſo common, in a letter which, 
juſt before he ſhot himſelf, he wrote to 
his friends, who were then waiting for 
him at a tavern wherein he ſaid, that 
he. was grown weary of buckling.and un- 
buckling his ſhoes every day. 

Why is the climate called in upon all 
occaſions, as a general ſolution for all 


ſuch 


coz BRITISH Boox III. 


ſach difficulties as are above the capaci- 
ties of our minute philoſophers ? Why is 
it to the changeableneſs of that, and to 
liberty, that the variety of manners, diſ- 
poſitions, tempers, and humours in indi- 
viduals, the infinite number of ſects in 
philoſophy, religion, and politicks, are 
imputed ? The climate has not always . 
produced the ſame effects in this coun- 
try; nor has liberty; done it in others; 
why may they not all be referred to their 
true ſource, education? By that our opi- 
nions and notions are formed; and by 
thoſe our actions are governed. 

How is it poſſible that the Britiſh 
conſtitution can flouriſh, when the edu- 
cation of their youth is neither ſuited to 
it's end, it's nature, or it's principles? 

In Athens and Rome there were two 
ſyſtems of education, which prevailed at 
two different æras; one in their flouriſh- 
ing, the other in their corrupt ſtate. In 
the firſt, oratory and philoſophy were 
united ; and the youth were. trained up to 
be not only wiſe, but active members of 
ſociety. In the laſt, philoſophy became 

the 


Cuay. XIV. EDUCATION. 50 


the only ſtudy; the active was changed 
for the contemplative life; their time 
was chiefly employed in empty diſquiſi- 
tions, and diſputes about trifles ; they, 
for the moſt part, became wiſe -only in 
their own conceit, and were utterly in- 
capacitated from being of any uſe to the 
publick. By this latter education chiefly 
was Athens deſtroyed ; and this was the 
ſyſtem which was adopted at Rome 
when in her ſtate of ſlavery and corrup- 
tion. 

Britain had her choice of theſe two 
methods. She has choſen the latter. 
What conſequences are to be expected 
from it? 

But beſide her preference oſ the worſt 
mode of antient education, ſhe has adopt- 
ed into her ſyſtem all the worſt of the 
modern. Every thing that is bad in the 
French, is ſtudiouſly imitated by us; every 
thing that is good in their inſtitution, 
wholly neglected. 

Monteſquieu, in ſpeaking of the dif- 
ference between antient and modern 
ee, ſays, Another advantage 


their 


BRITISH Book III. 


$04 
C their education had over ours; it was 
never effaced by contrary impreſſions. 
© Epaminondas, the laſt year of his 
© life, ſaid, heard, ſaw, and performed 
the very ſame things as at the age when 
© he received the firſt principles of his 

education. | 

In our days we receive three diffe- 
rent or contrary educations, namely, of 
our parents, of our maſters, and of the 
c world. What we learn in the latter, 
* effaces all the ideas of the former. 

If this be really the caſe, how hope- 
fully has the prime of life been em- 
ployed ! 

To give a ſanction to the ſentiments 
which I have delivered upon this head, I 
ſhall ſubjoin a few queries of the biſhop of 
Cloyne, extracted from a pamphlet called 
the Queriſt. 

Whether a general good: taſte in a 
people would not greatly conduce to 
their thriving ? and whether an unedu- 
cated gentry be not the greateſt of na- 
tional evils ? 


Whe⸗ 


\ 


CHAP. XIV. EDUCATION. gog 

Whether our - peers and gentlemen are 
born legiſlators ? or whether that faculty 
be acquired by ſtudy and reflection? 

Whether to comprehend the real inte- 
reſt of a people, and the means to pro- 
cure it, doth not imply ſome fund of 
knowlege, hiſtorical, moral, and politi- 
cal, with a faculty of reaſon improved by 
learning? 

Whether a wiſe ſtate hath any intereſt 
nearer heart, than the education of youth? 
What right the Aden ſon hath to the 
worſt education? 

Whether it ſhould not ſeem worth 
while to erect a mart of literature in this 
kingdom, under wiſer regulations, and 
better diſcipline than any in Europe? 
and whether this would not be an infallible 
means of drawing men and money into 
the kingdom ? 

Whether in any order a good building 
can be made of bad materials? or whe- 
ther any form of government can make 
an happy ſtate of bad individuals? 
Whether it is. poſſible that a ſtate 
ſhould not thrive, whereof the lower 

L RE” part 


part were induftrious, and the upper 
wiſe? | 

Whether Homer's compendium of 
| education, 


Moher 7s ynrng eher TeweTHge 76 6g yer, 


would not be a good rule for modern edu- 
cators of youth ? and whether half the 
learning and ſtudy of theſe kingdoms is 
not uſeleſs, for want of a proper delivery 
and pronunciation being taught in our 
ſchools, and colleges ? 

Upon a review of the whole it muſt be 
allowed, that our ſyſtem of education is 
extremely defective, and that too in ſome 
of the moſt eſſential points. Firſt, in 
not providing properly for the ſupport of 
religion, by neglecting to inſtruct thoſe 
who are to be it's guardians, in the moſt 
neceſſary qualification of all to the diſ- 
charge of their ſacred function; as alſo 
for the ſupport of our conſtitution and 
civil liberties, in not taking care to train 
up the youth deſtined to compoſe the au- 


This is 4 line from a ſpeech of Phœnix to Achilles, 
in the gth book of the Iliad; and may be thus tranſlated; 


'Train'd up alike in eloquence and arms. 


guſt 


Cray. XIV. EDUCATION. go7 


guſt body of our legiſlature, in ſuch arts 7 


and ſtudies as can alone render them ca- 
pable of filling that important poſt. Se- 
condly, in making the paths af know- 
lege difficult and uncertain, by a total 
neglect of our own. language. Thirdly, 
in omitting all care of the imitative arts, 
ſo eſſential to the well-being of this 
country. How far the revival of the art 
of oratory may contribute to remedy theſe 
defects, is ſubmitted to the judgement « of 
the reader, 