
A course of lectures on elocution. By Thomas Sheridan, A.M.
E L 0~ C UT T r10 NY LOCUTION. A NEWV EDITIONS By THOMAS SHERIDAN, A.M, Printed at PRO VI DENC E (Rhode-find) by CARTER and XV I L K INSO N and fold at the Providence Book-Stcre, oppo~fte the Market. T,. c c. ×c V\ .
·. a j6· s; A - · K.
INTRODUCTORY DISCOURSE. "IHERE has been no r.axim more frequently) in- culcated, or more generally assented to, than that human nature ought to be the chief study of human kind; ancd yet it is, of all fubjcts_ about which the busy mind of man has been employed, that which has been least attended to ; or with re- gard to which, the fcweft difcovcrics have been made, founded upon any certain knowledge. Is it not amazing to reflca-, that from the creation of the world, there w-as no part of the human mind clearly delineated, till within the last sixty years ? when Mr. Locke arose, to give us a just vicw of .one part of our internal farme, ' the underitid- ing,' upon principles of philosophy, founded on reason and experience. The chief cause of the very erroneous or inaccu- rate views, given of th;at part of our nature, before his time, was, as he himfcif confeiT'c, accidentally lifcovered by Mr. Locke, long after he had begun ½is work; and not 'till he had found himfclf in- -angled in many perplexities, during the pursuit of i3 fliibje&; when lighting accidentally upon this ue, he was happily guided through all the mazes f that labyrinth, in which so many had fruitlefly wandered or beecn loft before. lis difcovcry was, that as we can not think upon A 2. any
any ablraEt fubjc&t, without the use of abfira. terms; and as in general we fubfitute the terms. themselves, in thinking, as wec!ll a fpeajking, in the room of the complex ideas for which they tland; it is impoitible we can think with precision, till we first examine whether we have precise ideas ann, xed, to such terms: and it is equally impoiible to com- municate our thoughts to others with exa;anefs, unless we are first agreed in the exaR meaning of our words. Accordinglyf this acu:te philosopher entered into. a scrupulous examination of all the terms he used, for his own purpose, in private meditation; and -afterwards gave clear definitions of those terms, for the benefit of others, in communicating to them his thoughts. His labouis were attended'with iuccefs, It mufi be evident to all who examine his work, with care, that he has treated his fubjca with the utmofl precision and perspicuity ; and that all whc are properly qualified to read his effTay, wil'l, witi due attention, agree in comprehending his meaning exa&ly in the fame way, But in this age o.f speculative philosophy, the) -^^-T gri. thoughts to writings of that fort, seem to have no other objca in view than that oa merely acquiring knowledge; without once confi dcring how that knowledge may be rendered ufefu to society. From the mafRery of one fpeculativw point, they run to another, with the fame kind o avidity that miters pursue the accumulation c wealth; and much to the fame end : the one n joi.cing in his hoard of concealed .knowledge; tE other in ,his heaps of hidden gold ; though both ai equally useless to themselves, and to the world. Even Mr. Locke himself seems to have been totally absorbed in pursuits of that fort, that he h not in any padt of hi.s works Fponted out to us hu
his discoveries might turn out to the benefit of man- kind, by any pratical plan to try their effe&.s. And accordingly, little or no advntage has hitherto resulted from them, excepting the fatisfcaion they have given to men of a speculative turn. After having shewn that mofi errours in thinki:ng arose from an abuse of words; and that most ccn- troverfies and disputes, which have been carried on without coming to any conclusion, were owing to the want of clear and precise ideas being affixed to the terms used by the difputants ; the only remedy Mr. Locke fuggcfis, is, that men should carefully examine the meaning of each word, and use it etcadi- ly in one fcnfe.. And thet upon any difference of opinion, the parties should define such terms as are capable of ambiguity, or are of most importance in the argument.. But he might have judged from the great diffi. culty which he himself found in accomplifhling this point, and from his own experience of the great care and pains it cost, to separate ideas from words to which they were early associated, and cemented by long use; that this was a task not likely to be performed by many. One would imagine that a phlofopher, before he prcfcribed a cure, woul'i have traced the disorder to its source. Nor had hei far to seek for the source of our impropriety in the use of words, when he should reflec that the fludy of our own language has never been made -part of the education of our youth. Consequently the use of words is got wholly by chance, according to the company that we keep, or the books that we read. And if neither the companions with whom we con- verse, nor the authors whom we consult, are exad in the use of their words, I cannot fee how it is to be expe&ed that we thould arrive at any precision in that refped. A3 If.
If then irregularity and disorder, in this cace, as in all others, must necessarily follow from negleaE, and leaving things.to chance ;: regularity and order, as in all other cafes, can proceed only from care and method. The way to have clear and precise ideas affixed to the use of words, would be to have man- kind taught from their early days, by proper maf- ters, the precise meaning of all the words they use. The rising generation, so inflruaed, would be uniform in the use of words, and- would be able to communicate their ideas to each other with ease and perspicuity. Nor would their understandings be clouded, in private meditation,, by the mists of ob- fcurity ;- nor- their sentiments, when delivered in converfalion, perplexed by the intanglements of verbal, disputation. And this might easily be effea- ed, if only a fourth part of that time were dedicated to the study of our own tongue, which is now wafl- ed in acquiringa smattering in two dead languages, without proving either of use or ornament to one in a hundred to inftruacd. It is true, Mr. Locke, in his Essay on Education.- grievously complains of our neglce of studying our mother-tongue. But he lays the fault at the wrong door, when he imputes this neglct to the mailers of grammar schools, and tutors at the unive fities. This is. not part of their province. They neither profess to teach it, nor do they know how. No- thing effeaual can be done, without making that a diftinci branch of education, and encouraging pro- per masters to follow it as. their sole employment, in the fame way as the several maiters in the other branches do. A-nd certainly,, whether we confider the difficulty of the thing, or the great ends which might be answered by it, the masters in that branch .ught to meet with as. great encouragement as thof~ in any other, To
To the want of an infiitution of this fort is it owing, that Locke's noble Essay on the Human Un- dcrftanding, has hitherto proved of so little benefit to the world, It has indeed afforded fuclh a gratifi- eation to men of a fpeculative.turn, as mathematical itudies do to those, whose enjoyment is bounded by the mere contemplation of truth.. But do men think or reason more clearly than they did before the publication of that book ? Have we a more pre- cife use of language, or are the number of verbal difputcs lessened ? Let those who have examined the many controversial writings since published,. fay, whether the chief cause of these endless disputes. be not Rill the fame,. £ an abuse of words.' Upon the cloiftc examination, indeed, it would appear,. that. little or no benefit, in point of prac- tice, has.refulted from a display in theory, of the only part of the human mind, which has hitherto been laid open with acc-uracy,. upcn. principles of true philosophy. But still there are two other parts of the human mind, with regard to which the world is at this day as much in the dark, as they were with refpea to the whole, previous to the publication of Mr, Locke's. essay : the one,.. the feat of the passions; for which we have no. name, as existing in the mind, unphilofophically referring it to the organ of sensation, the heart : the other, the feat of the fan- cy ; which is called the imagination. Upon a right regulation of these parts of the mind, .and the faculties belonging, to them, all that is noble and praise-worthy, all that. is elegant and, delightful in man, considered as a social being, chiefly depends. Yet. so far are we from having any just view presented to us.of those important parts of our internal frame, or any well-founded knowledge of the principles by which the faculties belonging
belonging to them ought. to be regulated ; that every day we fee some new hypothesis advanced upon that fubjca, designed to overturn all that went be- fore, and laying in the fame claim which all that preceded it had done, that of being the only right one. The variety of treatises which have lately been. published on the paflions,. and the number of essays- on taste ; in which the writers widely differ from each other in their principles, and are far from agreeing in their definitions or descriptions of them ; fufficiently thew how far we are flill from having. any certain knowledge of tha.t part of our nature to which these bclong. And in ;.-his fitte must the world for ever continue, whilst the vanity of in- genious men ihall prompt them to think that they can do that by writing, which is beyond the power of writing to accomplish ; and whil-r readers fiall: continue to search for that in books, which it is be- yond the power of books to teach. Nor are the *writers of such treatises employed about a work less absurd, than would be that of endeavouring to com- municate new fimnple idecs by definitions; or that. ,of attempting to paint founds. All writers seem to be under the influence of one common delusion, that by the help of words alone, they can communicate all that paifes in their minds. They forget that the paflions and the fancy have a lan- guage of their own, utterly independent of words, by which only their exertions can be manifested and communicated. Now if this language be whol- ly negle&ed by us;. if we have taken no care to re- gulate its marks, or fettle the use of them with any ?precision; it will follow that the difficulty will at least be as great, to treat with accuracy of thofi parts of the mind to which that language bclongs, as it was of the underalanding, previous to the pro- p;."
per adjustment of words. But when added to this, it is considered that this language is in a very poor and defedive Rate amongit us, and that out of the rrumberlcfs emotions whereof the-human mind is capable, there are but a few that have any peculiar maiks belonging to them as their symbols; it will be found that the difficulty of treating justly of the passions and fancy, must be much greater, than of the understanding; whose language was fufficiently copious, and wanted only regulation; whereas in the other cafe, we must wait for the gradual increase of the language itself, till its deficiencies are sup- plied, before we can attempt to regulate it proper- ly, in order to have a comprehensive and just view of the poweis of the mind. And indeed till that be done, those nations that have no names for num- ber beyond three, might as well pretend to display all the wonders of arithmetic, as we to delineate'the imnmenfe field of mental emotions, without a fiuffi- cicnt number of maiks to fRand as their symbols. But I will not anticipate upon this head, what the ;reader will find fully explained in the course of there lectures. It will be allowed by all persons of refletion, .that there is no speculative point more ardently to be wished for, than to have it in our power to con- template those parts of the human mind which are flill concealed from us, or falsely viewed thro' the mists of enror, with the frme clear fatisfadion that we find in examining Mr. Locke's view of the understanding. But at the fame time, if the means were pointed out, of rendering both these views .prcEtically useful, by fhewing how a general spirit of good sense, and clearness of reason, might be .propagated thro' the natives of this country; by thewing how the passions hurtful or dangerous to (£ciety may be auppreffed.. and those of the nobler
and social kind, calculated to promote the general. good, may be. brought forward, invigorated, and carried into due exertion; by fhewing how the- powers of the imagination may be so regulated as to diffufe a general good taife thro' the nation ; a point essential:ly ncccffary to promote some of the noblest ends that can be anfwercd by the two other powers, those I mean of a refined understanding, and delicate sensibility: it must be allowed, that the execution ofi tch a plan would tend more to the real benefit of this realm, than all the uninspired books that have been w\ritten from. the creation of -the world to this hour- But it will be said, how, or from- whom, is this to be expected ? Are not these the very points about which the mo{l eminent of our writers have em- ployed their labours, hitherto to little purpofc ? Have not there been the chief objects in the works. of our most celcbrated divines, moralilfs, metaphy- ficians, critics, writers of eliays, &c. and have we any reason to believe that this age will produce writings in those several ways.fuperiour to what have hitherto appeared ? Such are the questions likely to be asked by those, who-le minds have been nar- rowed by an early faife bias given to us in our sys- tem of education, and afterwards continued thro' life ; I mean that extravagant idea entertained of the power of writing, far beyond what in its nature it can ever attain. But suppose it be aiferted, that this is the very cause of the failure in the attempts made by so. many men of dinRinguifhed abilities to reform mankind.. Suppose it be asserted, that they have all used an initrument, which in its very con- tiruation was incapable of accomplilhing the work Ithey were about.(1tin {hort, that bmrne of our great- N left men have been trying to do that with the pen, "Jwvlhich can. only be performed by the tsngue; £o produce
produce effe&s by the dead letter, which can never be produced but by the living voice,)with its .ac- companiments. This is no longer a mere assertion; it is no longer problematical. It has been demon- ftr-ated to theentire fatisf;:&ion of some of the wifeat heads in these realms ; and readers of but moderate uiifcernment, will find it fully proved in the sixth and seventh lctures, on Tones and Gesture. ^But that the bulk of my .reiaders may not enter" upon the difcuflion of this point, with all their pre- judices about them, they are desired to rcflet, that / languageis the girat instrument, by which all the faculties of the mind are brought forward, mould- ed, polished and exerted: and that we have in use two kinds of language; the fpokcn and the writ- ten. The one the gift of God; the other the in- vention of man.) Which of -these two is most likely to be adapted .to its end, that of giving the human mind its proper shape, and enabling it to display all its faculties in perfcEtion ? If they want to judge by effe&ts prodiiced in our own times, "how far the.one language has the ad- vantage over the other, let them only reflect on a recent instance of a late minifler, who by the mere force of cultivating the language bestowed by the Deity on human kind, as far as he could carry it by his own pains, raised himself to the sole dire6tion of affairs in this country: and not only so, but the powers of his living voice shook diflant thrones, and made the extremities of the earth to tremble, WVhen it is well known, that had the fame senti- ments been delivered in the language of men; -had they been sent out into the world in a pamphlet; they would proLably have produced less effects upon the minds of a few readers, than tliofe of some hire- ling writcrs. (And we have many flagrant instances v in our methodist preachers; of the power which words
words acquire, even the words of fools and mad- men, when forcibly uttered by the living voice. And if the language of nature be poffeffed of fiuch power, in its present negle&ed and uncultivated Riate, how immense must be its force, were it car- ried to the fame degree of perfection that it was amongst the ancient Greeks and Romans ? J Had the Greeks or Romans been blert with the light of revel t;on ; had they been poffeffed of such a religion, and f;ich a constitution as ours, together with ibme discoveries which time has produced; they would have carried ':1l the power-s belonging to human nature to the utmost degree of perfe&ion; and the Irate of focietv amongst them would have approacbhed as nearly io that blissful fate, to which we are taught to look forwaids, a fellowship with angels, as th? boundaries of the two worlds would permit. And would not this necessarily be our cafe, were we pofTeffed of those articles, in which the Greeks and Romans confeffedly excelled us? WVe want only, their arts added to our sciences. Their arts, are essentially necessary to render the nobleit discoveries in modern philosophy, practical- ]y useful to focietv. Their arts, are essentially ne- ceffary, to difFufe those benefits thro' all ranks of people, which such a religion, and such a con- flitution as our's. are in their own nature capable of beftowing. In short, their arts, are essentially necessary, to our making a right use of all those blessings, which Providence has fh1owercd down with a more liberal hand on this country, than on any other in the world. Now they had no arts whatsoever, in which they excelled us, that did not take their rife, either immediately, or confe- quentiallv, from the pains bestowed upon the cul- ture of the language of nature, the living fpecch. WVhat is there wanting then amongst us, but to cppli
apply ourselves with .iriduftry to'the fame..means" in order to attain the'fame ends ? I know there are few capable tf tracing a-fpecUo lation of this fort, thro' all its steps, so #s: l perceive the juftncfs of the dedu&ibn. But I am now littl. solicitous about what judgement:fhall be pals upon the theory, since the time is approaching of trying it experimentally. A few sensible effets produced from pra&tice, will carry more convidtion to the bulk of mankind, than a thousand fpecula- tive arguments. It is with true fatisfation of heart I hail the approaching day, when all that I have advanced upon this fubje&L will be put to that test. Whoever attended the course of le&ures during their delivery; or whoever shall look at the numerous lift of subscribers preceding this book, will be convinced that things are now ripe for ex- ecution, and that due encouragement will not be wanting to him who ihall establish a fucccfsful me- thod of teaching the art of Delivery in this country. The constant attendance of the subscribers during the course; the profound attention with which the le&ures were heard ; the general fatisfacaion ex- pressed by all who were present at their delivery; and the many personal applications to the author, from those who looked upon themselves as con- cerned in the event, either on their own or their children's account, to begin as soon as poilible upon some pra&ical plan, in order to answer the ends pro- posed; fufficiently confirm the truth of this after- tion. And with refpe& to numbers, the printed lilt prefixed to this * book will be far from flhew- ing the real number of subscribers to the course, as many chose not to set down their names, and as some of the lifts were accidentally 1oft. But when B the ': This lift wls ren'ei.e to tha nrft editira of tChk "-ok-. b:;£ is aw omittt.s,
the world is told, that the number of subscribers th this, and a former course of the fame nature, was not less than seventeen hundred, and that these were all volunteers, as there was not the least so- licitation used on the part of the author to promote the subscription; it will probably be allowed, that such a general, free encouragement, has hardly 'been given to any single proposal in this age Some may be furprized to find to few names of .persons adorned with titles, or dignified by station, in the lift of subscribers; but they who are ac- quainted with the Tfate of things for some time pait, will not at all wonder at this, when they are told that the subscription was utterly unsolicited, Voluntary patronage amongst the great, has long been out of fashion. It is too frequently the cafe that the nobility, and pcrfons in high station, mo- del their behaviour by that of the Minister; and till within a very Jhortfface., there has not been an in'tance of any Minister during the las fifty years, ,who gave the fmalleif encouragement to any art or science in this country, to any work of genius or literature; or who .countenanced any scheme cal- culated to improve the minds, or better the hearts of British fubje&s. The la·l name mentioned of a patron-Minifter, is that of the Earl of Oxford, in the reign of Queen Anne; and the last design he had in hand, for the general good of these realms, was, as we are in- formed by Swift, a plan for corre&ing, improving and ascertaining, the English tongue. A design which would probably have taken effect, as Swift also informs us, had the Queen lived a year or two longer. Yet, unexecuted as it was, the very in- tention of setting about so noble a work, has made his name more generally known and talked of, and has don~e .him more honour, than all the other ac- tions
tions of his life. Nor was there any article which put his charaaer in so high a point of light, as the praise which Swift beftows on him, in the begin- ning of his letter addressed to him upon thate head. Tho' the passage may be known to mo{t read- ers, yet as it deserves to be attentively confideredc by all, I flall make no apology for inserting it here. \Vhat I had the honour to mention to you: g Lordship some time ago in convcrfation, was not 6 a new thought, just then started by accident or occasion, but the result of long refeibon, and I ' have been confirmed in my fentimcnts by the opinion of some very judicious persons, with- 6- whom I confuitcd. They all agreed, that no- * thing would be of greater use towards the im- ' provement of knowledge and politencf,. than. r some efflcual method for corrcting, enlarging - and ascertaining our language; and they think it 6 a work very possible to be compassed under the 6 protec&ion of a Prince, the countenance and en- ' couragement of a Ministry, and the care of pro- ' per persons chosen for such an undertaking. I ' was glad to find your Lordfhip's answer in so dif- 6 fercnt a flyle, from what hath commonly been 6 made use of on such like occasions, for some years Spaft ; " That all such, thoughts must. be deferred to " a time of peace :" A topic which some have carried ' so far, that they would not have us by any means ' think of preserving our civil or religious confli- s tution, because we are engaged in a war abroad. ' It will be among the distinguishing marks of your 6 ministry, my Lord, that you had a genius above ' all such regards; and that no reasonable proposal 6. for the honour, the advantage, or the ornament ' of your country, however foreign to your more $ immediate ofice, was ever negleCted by you.' Bz '2What
What a glorious eulogium of a British MinifIcr does the last sentence contain ! How unhappy has it been for this country, that it never since could be applied with truth to any of his successors! But let it rejoice the heart of every one poffefed of genius and talents out of the common road; of every one who has any reasonable proposal to mal.e, for the honour, the advantage, or the ornament of our country, that we have at last got a Minifcer, whole conduat, when opportunities ofer, will probably entitle him to this eulogium, and who is not likely to negleft any of these points, however forcign to his 'more immediate ofice. Of which he has already given proofs, during the short time he has been in power, and amongst others, one striking one : that when a plan upon the fame fubjet as that of Swift's was lately laid before him, he, like Lord Oxford, did not make the usual answer, ' That all such thoughts r mufi be deferred to a time of peace :' but at the very juncaure when he was engaged in a greater variety ofbufinefs, than probably has fallen to the lot of any one Minister; in a most critical situation of affairs, both foreign and domestic ; he made leisure to ex- amine the plan with care, and declared his intention of giving it all due countenance and encouragement. Before I quit this fubjeat, I ihould be guilty of great ingratitude, if I did not acknowledge my ob- ligations to one nobleman : who, when he was ac- cidentally made acquainted with the nature of Mr. Sheridan's undertaking, and had read some of his writings upon that fubjeEt, did not wait to be fol- licited, but fought out the author, honoured hirm with his countenance, and by more than words en- couraged him to proceed in his design. It will be hardly necessary to acquaint the reader, that this no- bleman's title is to be found prefixed to this work.* July 10, 1762. - The Brit;ish pditin is dedJca.td t-o the Erl of Northumberland.
LECTURE I. H AT a general inability to read, or speak, Swith propriety and grace, in public, runs through the natives of the British dominions, is ac- knowledged; it thews itself in our senates and churches, on the bench and at the bar. That Divine Service in general is not performed with that solemnity, diftintnefs and propriety, which the nature of such service demands; nor discourses delivered from the pulpit, with such pow- ers of persuasive, or forcible elocution, as alone can make them produce their intended effects, is also generally allowed. In short, that good public reading, or speaking, is one of the rarest qualities to be found, in a country, where reading and speaking in public, are more generally used, than in any other in the world; where the doing them well is a matter of the utmost importance to the state and to society ; and where promotion, or honour to individuals, is sure to attend even a moderate share of merit in those points, is a truth which can not be denied. When therefore we reseat, that such powerful motives, as a sense of duty, of honour and of in- terest, have not since the revival of letters (as far as we can judge) produced any improvements in those articles; we should be apt at first view to imagine, that the inhabitants of these countries .B 3 are
are born under some natural incapacity, of arriving. at any degree of excellence, in the great article of delivery: and that our Creator, when he furnished us liberally with all the intelledtual powers, did not in suitable proportions supply the means of' displaying those powers to our fellow-creatures. But, as we have never been. without a few in- Qlances of men, who by some lucky circumifance in their early culture, and by taking proper pains; themselves to improve their talents for elocution, have railed great admiration in their hearers, of their abilities in public speaking, we have so many proofs at leaf,r that we are under no national curse: of that fort. And as w.e have daily demonifration in private life,, that most people speak justly, and: forcibly in company, upon topics wherein they are nearly interested, we may conclude with certainty;.. that there are no natural impediments in their ways.. to do the. fame in public also. If any itranger in China, observing the uncom-- mon smallness of feet in all the women; or, irt. some favag. countries, the uncouth shape of the- head in whole nations of Barbarians, some formed.; into a conical figure, like that ofa sugar-loaf, others. flattened at the top and' rendere uard fuare; hould not be acouainted vwith the causes of these extraor- dinary appearances, he would be apt. to conclude that they were defecs and blemimhes of nature. But when he ihould be told, that the feet of the former were bound in the tightest manrner with bandages from childhood, on purpose to prevent. their growth ; and the skulls of the latter, from the hour of the infant's birth, -whilfi yet they were un- Jlofcd, and yielded to imprrficn, were induftri- eufly moulded into thofce forms, from a mifaken idea bs beauty ; hbw-¢ would he wonder at the folly of na- lons, that could perfevcre in £fth abrsrd cufoms? " ctr
Yet much more to be wondered at,. would the sonduSt of a civilized people be,. who should, per- revere in a cufftom far more fatal ; that of binding up and contracting from: early childhood, and moulding: into, unnatural: forms,, the faculties of speech,. whicharc amongst t-he moW noble, ufefut,. and ornamental, that. are poifeffed by man ;. by which, he is in. a more: especial, manner diftinguifi-. ed from: brutes.;: and without the perf.c& use. of which,, he can not,, in many cafes, as he ought, dif- c~harge- hi&.duty to, his neighbour,. his country, or his God.. If it can be.- proved that we are under the do- minion of such a cuffom, the caufc of the generl defect complained of will be apparent : and it muft' be obvious that. whilst, the influence of that custom. continues,.. it- m-ufr produce the fame effeas, and no. amendment: is to be expe&ced, That a general deficiency in point of public read- iing and speaking, prevails in these countries, is allowed.. This deficiency, muff arise either from. natural or artificial causes, That there are no natu- ral impediments in our way, has been proved; con- fcquently they mufft be artificil.l What those arti- ficial impediments are, which prevent our making a progress towards perfe&ion in those essential: arti- cles, is the point now, to be enquired into. There can not be a better clue to guide us to the source of the malady complained of,. than a due at- tention to an observation before made: " That t" there are few persons, who, in private company, "( do not deliver their sentiments with propriety -' and force in their manner, whenever they. speak " in earneRt." Consequently here is.a sure itand-: ard fixed for opopriety and force in public speaking ;- which is, only to make use of the fame manner in-. the one..as in. te.k other..,. And this, metn certainly, wvould;
would do; if left to themselves; and if early pains were not taken, to fubtfitute an artificial method, in the room of that which is natural. Of this there could not be a fironger proof given, than if upon trial it were found, that after a person had delivered his extemporaneous thoughts upon a point in which he was interested, with due force of emphasis, properly varied tones, just cadences and pauses, accompanied with suitable gesture, and exprcffive looks, the fame individual words which he had uttered were written down, and given to him to read; if in that cafe, I fay, it mhould be found that he would change his whole manner; so that neither emphales, tones, or cadences mhould be the fame ; but in their room, he should fubifitute such as he was taught to read with; and that all gesture, and expreflion of countenance should vanish. And if this should be the cafe when a man reads his own sentiments, (as indeed in general none read worse than authors) how much less likely is he to do justice to the sentiments of others ? Here then is to be found the true source of the bad manner of reading and speaking in public, that so generally prevails: which is, that we are taught to read in a different way, with different tones and cadences, from those which we uife in speaking; and this artificial manner, is used infRead of the natural one, in all recitals and repetitions at school, as well as in reading. VWhen therefore we confider that the fineRl arti- ficial tones in the world, and the most musical ca- dences can never fland in the place, or answer the ends, of such as are natural, or appear so by being always used in discourse; as may be seen by com- paring the Italian recitative in operas, with a well a&ed scene in one of our plays; what are we to ex- pect from such artificial tones, as are discordant in- ficad
flead of being harmonious ? or of such a method of fpe~king introduced, as fhlall make use only of a few of those bad tones and cadences to express all manner of things; instead of an endless variety, furniflhed by nature or custom, to manifest and com- municate not only all the ideas which pass in the mind, but also all its operations, affecions, and paflions ? Is it to be wondered at that such an un- natural manner of delivery, should either produce but little effc&t in the hearers, cr excite disgust ? When we refleLt that the end of public speaking is perfuaiion. (for the view of every one who ha- rangues in public is to bring his hearers into his way of thinking) ; and that in order to persuade others to the belief of any point, it must frft ap- pear that the pcr'fon who attempts it is firmly per- fuadcd of the trutli of it himself ; how can we sup- pose it poilible that he should eiTefc this, unless he delivers himself in the manner which is always used by persons who speak in earncft ? How shall his words pass for the words of truth, when they bear not its flamp ? Till therefore a way fhali be found cut to coun- teraa for the prcfent, and destroy hercafter, the bad custom which has given rife to this unnatural man- ner of reading and speaking, we shall in vain hope, for the many excellent effects which might be pro- duced by good elocution, in a country, where there is such an absolute necessity for it, to the support of our conflitution, both in church, and fiate. I shall thcrefore confider, in the first place, how the power of this eufiom may be counteraated, for the immediate relief of such as are labouring under the effe&s of its bad influence ; and afterwards Ihew how it may be wholly subverted ; so that the rising and future generations may no longer be taint- ed by it. As the first of these is the point in which my
my hearers are more immediately concerned,, I fialli chiefly in tile present course dwell upon that.. In order to counteract and get the better of any bad habit, it is necessary in the fit f place, that the person who is under its influence,, should be con- fcious that he is so ; in the second, that he flhould know how, and'by what means this. bad habit grew upon him, that he may know how to avoid those means, and unlearn what was faulty ;. which is the' £rft. necefifry frep towards improvement. Sincerssi m c; nft vas quwodcuniqe infundis acefcit, And lastly, that he {hould. be made acquainted with' the method of attaiiining what is right, in order that a good habit may fuccced to a bad one. For as ha- bit only can get the better of habit, and a man wher,. he has parted with one manner, mutl necessarily acquire another ; unlcls he knows what is i:iglht,. he may only change one bad manner, for another, or perhaps for ohe which is worse. To accomplish therfe points,. I shall first lay open. the sources of our errours and faults in the art of reading; partly arising from the unfkilfulncfs of . mnafters, and partly from defecs and imperfe&ions in. the very art of writing itself,, And then, I shall shew how., and by what means,. i' may be in the power of every one to acquire a. right manner, by proper- pains and. pracice. Before I can make these points clear, it will be. necessary to recollet, that we have in use two dif- ferent kinds of language, which have no fort of as- finity between them, but what cuffom has efta- b!ifhed; and which are communicated thro' differc ent organs: the'one thro' the eye, by means of writ- ten charaders ;- the other thro' the ear, by means of articulate founds and tones. Bat these two kinds of aqnguage are to early in life aiTociated, that it is dif- ficukl
icult ever after to separate them.; or not t6 suppose that there is fame kind of natural connetion be- tween them. And yet it is a matter of importarnce to us, always to bear in mind, that there is no fort of affinity between them, but what a-rises from an dhabitual association of ideas. Tho' we cannot so easily separate them in our own minds, yet when we come to confider them in relation to others; we fee clearly enough their utter independan'ce of each other; as is obvious in the -cafe of men born blind, or deaf ; the former of whom may be perse& masters of the language which is spoken, and the latter of that which is written; tho' neither of them can form an idea .of the other's language, or of the man- ner, by which a communication of thoughts may be made thro' the sense which they want, And indeed any communication of that .fort, between the deaf and the blind, is impoflible. All men who are wholly illiterate, are in the fame circumstances with regard to language, as they who are born blind. And as they have no conception of words, independant of founds, so can not they com- prehend how it is poflible for them to be made vifi- ble to the eye ; and therefore reading, in its infan- cy, was looked upon.as a supernatural gift; and the few who were maters of that art, confideredby the vulgar in the light of magicians. On the other hand, they whoare born deaf, when taught to read, have no other ideas of words, but what arise from their visible marks ; and can as little conceive, how it is poflible, that they should be made obvious to anv other sense, but that of feeing. Hence it comes to pass, that the man wholly illi- terate, who has no other ideas of language, but what he has obtained thro' his ear, always uses a variety of tones in speaking, such as are customary in his country; according to the sense of the words, or
or the emotions of his mind. On the contrary, the deaf man, when taught to speak, (as many have been) always delivers his words in one uniform tone, without the least variation. In an interme- diate state between these, the reading men, in pro- portion to the attention which they give, to the one kind of language or the other, either approach nearer to the monotony of the deaf man, or the variety of the iiterate. On this account it is, that the moit bookilh men are generally remarkable for the worst delivery : as reading therefore by means of the press, is become almost universal amongst us; and as the chief errours and defets of our delivery, arise from a faulty manner of reading; there can not be a matter of more im- portance, than to explain fully, how this faulty manner muff neceff:.rily prevail, not only from the unfkilfulnefs ofmafters, but also from the imperfec& irate of the art of writing itself, until a proper remedy be found. For this end, let us confider the purposes which may be anliwered by reading. They are chiefly three. The acquisition of knowledge; the assist- ing the memory to treasure up this knowledge; or the communicating it to others. The first two, may be done by iilent reading; the lafft requires reading aloud. Let us now examine how far the art of writing, (under which head I include print- ing,) is in its present ifate fitted to answer the fe- veral purposes, and how far, and in what refpets it is deficient. VWith regard to the sirs point, that of conveying knowledge, it is plain enough, that the written lan- guage is in a fufficient ftatebf perfeCtion, as any'one who is once master of it, can read an author who writes clearly, so as fully to comprehend his mean- ing, with almost the fame celerity that his eye can take
take in the words. And the fame must also be al- lowed with regard to the second use of written lan- guage, that of assisting the memory. To answer these two necessary ends there has been fufficient· care taken in the ftruaure of written language; but as the third, that of reading aloud to others, was by no means a necessary obje&; on the contrary, as every purpose to which that is applied, might be much better answered, by giving due attention to the second use of writing, that of imprinting words on the memory, so a.s that they might be delivered without any use of notes, there has been no manner of regard paid to it in the whole art of writing ; which does not contain one single vifible.mark, that can give us any alfiftance, in the moit important articles of a good delivery, as I thall presently {hew. The Greeks and Romans made use of this art only to anfwver the two first purposes; that of silent reading, and that of afifting the memory; for we never hear of its being uLfd amongt them in public reading, as all their fiudied orations, poems, &c. were recited from memory ; consequently, they had no occasion to carry the art :of writing farther than was necessary to answer thofc ends. When therefore we, who have taken the model of our written language from them, would apply it to a third use, for which it never was intended, and to which it is not by any means adapted in its nature, shall we be furpriifd if it fails to answer that end, and wonder that reading aloud fhouid in general be tb ill performed ? To prove that our written language is by no mcans calcubltfed to an!wivr tlhis tnird purpose, of reading aioud, it will be only necelaIry to shew, that it con- tains no vi.1lce m:arks, of articles, wylich arc the mofl important of o tf ~i Oers, to a jus delivery. A jufR deliverv coniiits in a diltimCe: artictulation of words,. pronounced in n proper tn.3s;, suitably varied C tI
to the sense, and the emotions of the mind; with due observation of accent; of emphasis, in its fe- veral gradations; of rests or pauses of the voice, in proper places and well-meafured degrees of time; and the whole accompanied with expreflive looks, and iignificant gesture. Now of all these ingredi- ents, not one of which can be spared from a good delivery, there are but two, that are at all regarded in the art of writing ; and these are, articulate founds or words, which are marked by letters; and flops, or pauses of the voice, which are marked by little figures and tittles. And even in these points, mnuch greater regard, has been paid to the two first uses of written language than to the lift ; to the si- lent reader, than to him who is to read aloud to others: as may be seen by examining, in the first in tance, in what manner words are tpelt ; in which the derivation and meaning of the wovds s s often more considered, than any diredtion of the proper founds resulting from the arrangement of the let- ters. In this refpec& indeed, we are so exceedingly loose and irregular, that even where no end can be answered by it, the words in general, as prefentcd to the eye, would be so far from producing the true founds, that if they were pronounced cxatly as they are written, we should not know them to be of our language. And as to the second article, that of- points or flops, I shall presently shew that they are. by no means fitted to the natural rests and pauses of discourse ; and, as they are managed, have proved the chief cause of some of our greatest irn- perf&aions in reading. But with refpe&c to the other articles of tones, accent, emphases, and gef- tuie, there are no visible marks to serve as guides in thef:. And as these latter, must be allowed to Le the sources, of every thing which is pleasurable, or forcible in delivery ; and to contain in them, all thie powers of firongly imprediiig tia n mind, cap- tivating
tivating the fancy, rouzing the passions, and de- lighting the car; it mufR also be allowed, that the most efi'entia articles to a good delivery have becn_ wholly left out of the graphic art. It may be said, that there is no occasion to have any marks for theIe, as the view of the words on paper, will excite in the mind the ideas for which they ifand ; and of course, all the accessary circunm- stances of delivery, which are ufially associated with those ideas in the mind: and that as loon aS we perceive by the help of the eye, the full mean- ing and import of any sentence, we shall be able to express that meaning to others, in the fame man, ner, and with the fame propriety and force, as if it proceeded from the immediate ieutimrents of our own minds, It were to be wished indeed that this assertion could be made good, for in that calc, there would be few bad readers in the world : but the abundance of those, which are every ,where to be found, fufficiently refutes this opinion. And in- deed by examining the process of such, as are most expert in the art of reading, we {hall be fully con- vinced tJaat the opinion is erroneous: every one of whom will allow, that he can not deliver any piece of written composition, ib well at fight, or on the firil reading, as on the second: nor on the second as on the third; and so he continues im- proving in his manner, every time, as the words grow more familiar to him. Nay he will allowS that he cannot approach nearly to the manner of delivering them, with the fame propriety and force, as he would his own sentiments, 'till they as it were become his own, by being so perfcktlv imprcff- ed on the memory, that the mind may be wholly at liberty to attend only to the delivery; without being called off to another office from any difficulty of recolle&ion. The less the mind is difirated by attention to diffeient operations, the more it can C z colle4t
molile& all its vigour to display any one. We may every day fee that the person who attempts to re- peat things which he has not perfecly by heart, has his faculties so abfoibed in the aRt of recolleAion, that he cannot attend to the manner of his reciting, which becomes proportionally defecive. And in extemporaneous speaking, they who have a fluency of expression, and an easy command of words, have proportional advantages in point of delivery, over those who are obliged to hesitate, flop, and suspend their discourse, whilst the mind is, as it ·were, sent out of the way, upon another office, that of searching for proper words and phrases, which ought to have been ready at a call. Were it reqdifite to enter into a philosophical examination of the nature of reading, it would appear, that there are to many, and such various als of the mind, neceffarv to perform that office4 as would fufliciently {hew us, that it is impoffibie such a portion of attention can be given to the man- ner of delivery, as it ought to have, to answer itS end, if we confider it as the fuhbftitute of extempo- :ane..ous speaking. For in that cafe, as it is necessary that it should be performed in the fame space of time as the other, how is it poflible this can be done, when there are so many more a&ions of the mind, requisite to the one, than to the other ? And tho' we should allow, that thro' skill and ha- bit, a reader, by the quick motion of his eye, may comprehend the full meaning and import of the words. and even have just ideas excited, of the manner in which they ought to be delivered., in ,he fame space of time only, that would be taken up in speaking those words, yet it by no means fol- low? '-at his execution should answer his concep- tions, or that the exad tones, and other accompa.- nhnents of discourse, Ihould be ready at his will. For th®' they spontaneously flart ferth, when we fueak
speak our own conceptions, being the immediate result of feeling; yet, as we are not so easily inte- rested in the sentiments of others, and as feeling must in a great measure be blunted or deftroycd, by the attention which the mind is obliged to give to so many different points, in the aR of reading; so, muff we suppose, that the best reading, must fall short of the power of speaking, in all articles which depend upon feeling. And of this a well-known proof has already been given, in the inflance of any good reader, who in proportion as his attention is taken off from the words, by making them familiar to him, or fixing them in his memory ; and his feeling increased, by adopting the sentiments, is able to deliver them in a manner approaching nearer to that which he would use if they were his ow'n. Of this we have fufficient examples in comedians; whose profeflion it is, to speak from memory, the sentiments of others; and vet to deliver them, as if they were the result of their own immediate feeling. But it is not at the first, second, third, or even twentieth reading of their parts, that they are able to hit upon the exat manner, in which the words are to be delivered: they mufft first have them perfeftly fixed in their memories; and even then, it is only by repeated trials, and constant pracice in rehearsals, that they are able to associate to them, the just tones, looks, and gestures, that ought naturally to accompany them. Indeed there is nothing could put the difficulty of reading pro- perly, in a stronger light to any man, than his at- tempting to read aloud a scene of a comedy : in which, tho' there are- no tones to be used, but what are known to him, and which he acknowledges as such, when used by others, yet can he by no means command them at his pleasure; and he muff be obliged to own, that to conce'..'r and to execute, are two diffetent things : the f;ri,: -a.y -r'i from tr .... .^
study and observation, the last, must be the effe& of pra&ice. That the great difficulty of reading with proprie- ty, and in suitably varied tones and cadences, arises from the want of fltfficient signs and marks, in the art of writing, to point them out ; and were there but a fufficient number of those marks, reading juffly at fight, might be rendered almost as easy and as certain, as singing at fight, is a.matter which might unquefftionably be proved,. were it to be attended by any advantage. But as that would be merely a speculative point, inasmuch as there is lit- tle likelihood that any change will be made in the art of writing, it will be more immediately to the purpose, to enquire how the art of reading may be inmproved, whilst that of writing continues in its present itate. Hitherto I have considered the difficulty of read- ing well, aloud, as arising from its own nature only, and the imperfe& frate of the written lan- guage amongff us, which does not seem by any means calculated to answer that end. I have shewn how hard, nay impracticable it is, to arrive at due perfe&ion in that point, even on a supposition that the readers have all proper qualifications Tor the talk, and should not be under the influence of any false rules, or bad habits.. But as that is not the cafe of one reader in ten thofiand, I inhall new lay open the more general source of that impropriety and badness of reading which is so prevalent. Beside the ignoranc:e of masters who teach the first rudiments of reading, and the want of skill, or negligence in that article, of those who teach the lerncd lknguages beside the erroneous, manner, which untutored pupils fall into, thro' the want of early attention in masters, to correct small faults in the beginning, which increase and gain strength with years ; beside bad habits, contracted from imi- tation
'tation of particular persons, or the contagion of example, from a general prevalence, of a certain tone or chant in reading or reciting, peculiar to each school, and regularly tranfmitted-from one genera- tion of boys to another : beside all these, which are fruitful sources of vicious elocution, there is one fundamental errour, in the method universally uf-d in teaching to read, which at first gives a wrong-biafs,. and leads us ever after blindfold from the right path, under the guidance of a false rule. It was before observed, that we have no visible marks in writing, but for words, and pauses or rests of the voice. With regard to words, it was shewn that they are more calculated, from the man- ner in'which they are spelt, for the use of the silent reader, than for the affifance of him that reads aloud. But tho', on account of the manner of spelling words, the difficulty of learning to read them at fight is increased, and for that reafcn, more time and pains are required, than would otherwise be necessary ; yet, by time and pains, we find that the point is generally accomplished; and we come by habit, to acknowledge words, whose founds we are pre-acq-uainted with, at light, and to give them their just pronunciation, however ill adapted, the order of the letters which compose such words, may seem, to produce iuch founds. This branch of reading, has been brought to perfeLtion, from ne- ceffity; for were words to be pronounced as they are spelt, and not according to the manner used in discourse, they could not be known or underflood; and all passages so reed mult appear to be nothing but jargon. But with regard to the other article of written language, I mean the visible marks of the pauses and rests of the voice, the masters have not only been more negligent in perfe..ing pupils in the right use of thefc, but in tl:eir method of teach; ing, have laid down. ioml faife rules, under the influence
influence of which, it is impossible that any one can read naturally. In the firif place it is not known, (tho' it be certainly true) that the marks for pauses and stops, in writing, are not more accu- rate,, with regard' to pointing out such as are used in discourse,. than the words are, by the spelling, to point out their found; consequently it ought to be the care of a master, in the one cafe,. as well as the other, to shew wherein the difference consists; and to supply by oral inftru&tion, and habit, any' deficiency or errour which may be in the art of writing, with refpet to pointing, as well as with regard to spelling. Indeed the use of pointing, as was before observed with regard to spelling. is much more calculated to assist the silent reader, in readily comprehending the meaning of fen- tences, than in observing the .due propoktions of time, in reading aloud. But betide that t-he art of pointing,, has not been managed in such a way, as to make it answer, what ought to be its chief end, it has an office assigned it quite so- :eign to its nature, and which it is in no shape fitted to discharge; for whereas it must be apparent that the art of pointing in its pref.nt {tate, ought to have reference to nothing, but either the gram-. matical conftru&tion of sentences, or the different proportions of pauses in point of time; thro' want of others, the masters have made us, of the flops as marks of tones also. How little fitted they are to auvfwer this end, we may judge,. by considering that the tones preceding pauses and rests in difcource. are exceedingly numerous, and various, according to the sense of the words, the cmotions of the mind, or the exrtions of fancy; each of which would require a diftinci mark, and can not be rep'l.fentcd by so finall a number as four or five, which are used as stops. The masters therefore, have taken a short cut, to give what they call proper tones to their , pupil
pupils in reading, by annexing artificial tones to the flops, which no way correspond to those which are used in discourse ; and which may justly be call- ed the reading tones, in opposition to those of the speaking kind. Of these tones in general there are but two ufcd; one which marks that the sense is not completed; another, which shews that the fen- tence is closed.. For they have not even invented so many tones, as there are visible marks of pauses. The comma,, semicolon, and colon, are pronounced in the fame tone; and only differ in point of time,. as two or three to one; whiit the full flop is mark- ed by a different tone. As the one consists in an uniform elevation, and the other in an uniform de- pression of the voice,, we need no longer be at a loss, to account for that difagrceable monotony,. which so generally prevails in reading ; and which nieceffarily defeats every purpose of book-delivery, as the attention of all auditors muff, not only soon be wearied and dcftroyed by it,. but in such as have any taste, it mufn occaiion the highest disgust.; Here then is the chief source laid open of that, unnatural manner of reading which so universally prevails; and unless a person knows this, he can never amend his errour; for the fight of the stops, as naturally excites the tones which he was early taught to associate with them, as the fight of the words excites their pronunciation; and thus the habit of reading, will only serve to confirm him,. in the faulty manner which he has acquired. In this cafe, we may apply to reading, what Montef- quieu has observed of the laws; where he says, ' There are two forts, of' corruption, one, when 6 men do not observe the laws, the other, when 5 they are corrupted by the laws: an incurable s evil, because it is in the very remedy itfelf.' And indeed as in that cafe, the evil must be in- qurable, whilfi the infl.uence of the laws remains s.
to in the other, 'till thie false rules are abrogated, and just ones established in their room, there can be no hopes of amendment. It must be obvious to the slightest enquiry, that the most effet.ual method of introducing a general good manner of reading, 'would be the giving due encouragement, to a sus- ficient number of skilful malters, to teach that. art, by a well digcfted yfftem of rules, according to the praUice of the ancients ; inftcad of leaving it to old women, or the lowest and moit ignorant of mankind in the first rudiments, or to such as do not coniider it as part of their province, and who in- deed in general know not how to teach it; which is the cafe in most grammar schools : the confe- quence of which has been, that most boys, are either perverted by false rules, or having no rules to guide them, take up any manner which chance throws in their way, or imperceptibly yield to the influence of bad example. But as a scheme of this kind, would be ofbenefit only to the rising generation, and as my present ob- je& is, the improvement of such as are more ad- vanced in life, I shall in the progress of this course, endeavour to point out a method, by which the adult may get the better of bad habits, and at the fame time lay down such rules to guide them, in ac- quiring a just and natural delivery, as will enable them to compass their end, provided they take suitable pains; and afterwards proceed in order, to pronunciation, accent, emphasis, pauses or frops, pitch and management of the voice, tones and gef- ture ; which wili comprehend the whole of what I have to offer on that fiubjea. LECTURE
LE CTURE II. B EFORE 1 examine the several parts of e!.o- cution, it will be neccffary to define the mean- ing of the term. Elocution is the juit and graceful management of the voice, countenance, and gesture, in speaking. Under this head, I shall confider every thing necessary to a good delivery. I shall treat of the voice and gesture separately, and include what re- fpe&ts the countenance in the latter article. And first of the voice, so far as the organs of speech are concerned, SA good delivery, in this sense of the word, de- pends upon a due attention to the following ar- ticles. Articulation : Pronunciation : Accent : Empha- sis: Tones or Notes of the speaking voice: Pauses or Stops : Key or Pitch, and Management of the voice. Of each of there in their order. And firRf of AR T I C U L A T IO N. A good articulation, consists, in giving every letter in a syllable, its due proportion of found, ac- cording to the mofitapproved cufom of pronouncing it; and in making such a diflin&ion, between the fyllahles, of which words are composed, that the ear fhail without difficulty acknowledge their num- ber; and perceive at once, to which syllable each letter belongs. WVhere there points are not ob- served, the articulation is proportionaily defeEtive. A good
A good articulation is to the ear, in fpeakingy what a fair and regular hand is to the eye, in writing; and exaEnefs in founding the words rightly, corresponds to propriety in spelling; in both cafes, the understanding can comprehend what is offered to it, with ease and quickness, and with- out being obliged to have recourse to painful at- t-ention. Fairness and exaEtnefs of hand is not thought a necessary qualification of a gentleman; and is expe&ted only from writing-mafters and clerks. Nor is it a disgrace to him, even to write such a hand, as is scarcely legible. The more irre- gular the hand is, the more time and pains indeed it will cost the reader, to make out the words; but then he may do this at his leisure, as the marks are permanent. \With regard to articulation, in which the marks of the words vanish as they are fpokcn, this is not the cafe ; and therefore it should be so diftinr, that the hearer, may with ease, go along with the speaker, at the fame pace. For if he should flop, to set any thing right, that is amnifs in t-he speaker, whilst Ilis attention is employed on that point, he loses irrecoverably, all that is said during that time. It is therefore in itself, a mat- ter much more cffentially necessary, that a speaker, hnotdd have a clear and diftin& articulation, tliain that a writer thould be malter of a good hand. But it is a difgracc to a gentleman, to be guilty offalfe spelling, either by omitting, changing, or. adding letters contrary to custom ; and yet it stall be no disgrace to omit letters, or even ifyVlables in- speaking, and to huddle his words to together, as to renderf"hem utterly unintclligibe. Yet surely, exa&nefs in the latter, is a point of much more im- poitance than in the former article, in whatever light we view it. The writing of a gentleman ii fubmitteel bfrt to one reader at a time ; who may examine it at his Icifuie, supply any decits of oi- tihography
thography, and decypher thle meaning, tho' the -charadters be ever so irregular. But the words of one who fpea'ks in public, whether delivered, or read from notes, may be, at one and the fame time, addre4ssed to many hundred hearers; who must lose the benefit or purposed end of the discourse, ii proportion as it is indiftinaly pronounced. - The reason of the ,unequal judgment past by mankind in this cafe is, that written language is taught by rule, and it is thought a fha: e for any one, to transgress *the known rules of an art, in which-he has been inftrucfed. -Bu-t spoken lan- .guage Cs not regularly taught, but is left to chance, imitation, and early habit: and therefore like all -,ther things left to chance, 'or unsettled principles, is liable -to innumerable irregularities and defc&ts. And in this cafe, mankind reciprocally claim, .and allow indulgence to each -other. That this is the true reason, will be evident from this ·confidera- tion ; that amongst the Greeks and Romans, where -speaking was regularly taught, the fmialleft errour committed in pronouncing, was equally disgrace- ful in men, as faife frelling is with us. tHence it comes to pass that faults in articula- tion, e..ly ccn:;'rated, are fufrered to gain firength by habit, and to grow fb inveterate by tima, as to be incurable ; pertly thro' want of attention to the point in early years; and partly thro' want of fkil- ful persons to remedy 'the evil after it has been sus- f'iered to take .roo~t. Parents do not think it neceffarv, 'to afrft their 'infants, in the'r- fir1 attempts to arlticulate words; 'or to make them proceed regularly, in the forma- 'tion of ibch fou-nds only, as are most. easy, and re- quire least exertion of the organs; but by fuffering t'lerm to -try to pronounce any words whatsoever, or D evei
even often urging tl'em to speak such as are too dificult, they givaea. wrong biafs to their weak tender organs, which.- it would require much pains .to et right. rence: often :uifs fLuttering, lisping, and a total, inability to pronounce certain: letters, The child being urged; to utter a found, which ..he ifinds either dificult, or irnpoffible, of'courfe hefi- tates,; or fbRtittrs another letter of more cafy pro- nufnciation in the room; or wh:olly omits it, and only pron:'nmces the remaining letters of the word; and this he afterwards does habitually, never using any endeavours of his own, to alter a pronunciation which he finds caf4 to himself. 'TIe parent, by being accuRopmed to it. underAfands perficcy the child's meaning, in this faulty manner of pronoun- cing; ;:nci too often, frr fronm end'-avour. n to cor- rcf itr, encouriages hIm to piroced in c t, by talk- ing to him in his own childimn w;;y ; ,fur wh-:c he acquircs a fort of fondir is, accountitJIg the bicmnih a prettineis. Thenfiri'after, (or rzthcr mircefst, th3s charge is generally con'fiQn ed to old women) into v..'hcie hands he is put to lekrn .to re:;d, is u:ttc;-y iignora.nt of als ilrcs, v;ith rc:ird to the- rt of peaking, or pronunciation.. :ie micrAble drucges profess -ornly to teach the xv'rittcn lph'b-t, a.n d to 'pll and put syllables to ¾thicr properly Is V tey re ulually writtcn. But if a boy br ;ns any i'pa!:7'lm.ent with him; if he ifutters . Li:s, or is def, tCcve in the pronunciation o any t;adter, v 'ec ither piofels nr know how, to c.re, ny of thef ; Lto: conceal thcr i.norance, vthey c ".i, tem ;i tuo-.1 impedi- m nns, or fde-1a in the orgaris -of ,p-ch, and tihe child is.permn.itte to go o0. in. his, ovwn way, as in- c-i ibD . I ; Whicn. he. is; fen to the Latin school, the office of
of the mapler there. is n6t to teach him to articu- late; in which point he expects that he should come ready prepared to hin:. He thinks his duty dif- chr.g<-ed,' if he makes him understand Latin and Greek well, and w rite correa exercifas. The art of d.livery is not part of his province ; in which it is iighly pobable.., that !e is not ,nyi ut-teriv urr- skilled, but very def.ive himilf. Thus a vicious articulati on caught perh':aps frC-4 a nt ifeo, of- favourite fcrvrntI," often infecs a man:s diucourfe thro' lif. . The exn.mples of lif-ing and rammering. are fre- auent; and the inabilitv to pronounrce cerrtin let- ters much more so. Srr.:;ller defets in articulation, are to gcnelal, that they paTs nnroticed. I dare boldly aflirm, that of the multitude cf in- hiances which ol-er, of a vitiatcd r 'iculati n, there is not one in a thouiand, which proceeds from .,ny n'tu-aral dc.f.'-T or impediment. Of tLis point I haI many proofs in the ichool where I received my first rudiments of learning ; and where the master made pronunciation a chief objet of his attention ; in which I never knew, a single inflance, of his fail- ing to cure, such boys as came to him with any de- fefts of that kind, tho' tihere were numbers, who lilped or fluttered to a griatc degree, on their first entrance into the fchoo l; or wvio wi ere utterly un- able to pronounce iobne letters, and othrs very in- diftintl!y. When D,emdfhehes firfl spoke in public. it was ebjed .ed to him tha-t he could not evern pronounce the fitfi; letter o0 his art, R/htoric; and to this day people arc told that this was a natural dfci & in his organs: but .-d th:;at been :hc c;:i, it would have been imporfible that he fhouid have ever : got the better es it ; which we are tuld he did, by indefati- D z gab2e
gable pains, even a long time after he had arrived; at the age of manhood. So that it was clearly owing to early bad habit, and to the want of due pains,. in corre&ing it in time, And, indeed we are also told, that thro' the avarice of his guardians, this cuitomary, and, as it w2as then thought, ,necessary branch of education had been omitted. The letter. R is veity indiftint&ly pronounced by- many; 'nay in feveral-of the northern counties of England, there are scarce any of the inhabitants, who can pronounce it at all. Yet. it would be firange to suppose,. that all those people, fhpuld be !b unfortunately diftinguifled, from the reft of the natives of this island, as to be horn with any peculiar defe&t in. their organs ; when the matter is to plainly to be accounted for, upon th.e principle- of imitation, and- habit., I have dwelt the longer on this head, because rnmof defcts and imperfe{tions, in the other articles. of delivery, proceed from the fame source,, and are curable only by the fame means. As also because good articulation is the foundation of a good de- lijvery, in the fame manner as the founding the fim- ple notes in music with exaStnefs, is the foundation. of good singing.. The grosser faults of articulation,. such as. flutter.. ing, hesitation, lisping, and inability to pronounce. certain letters,. can never be cured by precept., alone ; these require the confiant aid of a person, {killed in the cau1es of those faults; who hby teaching each individual how to use the organs of fp'eech rightly, and by ihewing him the proper position of the tongue, lips, &c. mAy gradually bring him to a just articulation. . I shall confine myself to the moro general faults; which tho' less observed, on account Qs their frequency, anrd their not being so obvious a-s,
as the others, do nevertheless so spoil and corrupt delivery, as to make it disagreeable to the ear, and irksome to the understanding. The firif, and moat essential point in articulation, is diftin&nefs; and therefore its opposite is the greatefr fault. Indiftin&nefs, to a certain degree,. renders the speaker unintelligible; or demands a more than ordinary attention, which is always pain- ful to the hearer. The chief source of indiflinatnefs, is too great precipitancy of speech.. And this takes its rife in England, chiefly from a bad method of teaching boys to read. As the principal obje& of the master, is to make boys perfetIy acquainted' with written words, so as to acknowledge them at fight, and give them a ready utterance; the boy, who at first is flow in knowing the words, is flow in uttering them-; but as he advances in knowledge, he mends-his pace; and not being taught the true beauty;. and propriety of reading, he thinks all ex- cellenee lies in the quickness and rapidity. with' which he is able to do it.. The prize to boys, who have made any proficiency in reading, seems to be destined to the swift ; they set out at a gallop, and- continue their speed to the end, without regarding how many letters oi fyiiables they drop by the way; or how many words they jutle into one another.. This habit of'reading is often transferred into their discourse; and is but too frequentI.l confirmed at the Latin fchcols, where the masters, in general;. having no points in view, but to make their fchol- ars repeat th ii- lessons by heart, or construe them. in such a waiy.: as to {hew that they underifand them, care not how hastily these exercises are done; or rather inde'-.d, are obhlged to urge them to a fpee- dy m:nner of doing them, otherwise, it would be impoffibic, to get tiro' the number of boys they D 3 have
have to teach. This bad habit afterwards gather" {Lrength, because the boys are neither conscious of their own defeas, nor receive any intimation of them from others. Nor do they suddenly find any disadvantages ariling, from such imperfe& utter- ance. For their masters, companions, and relations, by being used to their manner, understand them perfccay ;. in the fame way as the prattle of children is undacriood by their parents and nurses ; or as a very bad hand is read by those who are accutomed to it. Such blemishes and defe&ts, are obvious only to irangcrs, and they in good manners will not mention them. Thus the evil remains irreme- diable thro' life. It must be evident that the putting any confiraint on the organs of speech, or urging them to a more rapid a&ion than they can easily perform in their tender fRate, muff be produtive of indifin&ncfs inr utterance; for in that cafe, the children mui"l either drop some letters, or give them fainter founds than they should have. And as some letters, are in their owin nature more difficult of pronunciation, thant others, and Pill more so in their different combina. tions, when they form syllables, it is in those chie& ly the impnerfeion will fhewx' itself. '; To this haily delivery, which drops some lettcer and pronounces others too faintly ; which runs fyllabies into each other, and clusters words toge. tner; is ow'ing that thick, mumbling, cluttering utterance, of which we have too many examples, The greatefi orator of antiquity, we arc informed, had this fault, in a remrk.bloe degree, even when be ventured fir. f to speak in pvic ; on which ac; count his fpecch was exploded by the whotl aTfemr bly. But we -are eho told thJ cauie of t.his: which Sth.at e d ha"e tle guidorune, »ub br in tnher d?3a.y
days, of not having been trained in the art of ;.Speaking. In all accounts of Demosthenes, we are inform- cd, that to cure foine impediments in his speech, he used to exercise himself in declaiming with peb- ble-:fones in his mouth. What those impediments were, or how so uncommon a method, should con- tribute to their removal, is left 'to conje&ure ; nor can I find that there has been any attempt made, to explain this point. But the difficulty will immediatelyv be solved, if we suppose, that the im- perfcc-ion which he wanted to remedy, was, an indiftin& articulation : that owed its origin to a too great precipitancy of utterance: for the pebble- fioncs in that care, properly placed in the mouth, would impede the uful velocity in the ation of the tongue, and bring it in time to a due degree of slowness: besides, they would be a conflant me- morandum to himself, to avoid any rapidity of-ut- terance, which otherwise, from custom, without some memento of that kind, he would be apt to fall into. The example of this prince of orators, affords the highest encouragem nt, to all men who labour un- der imperfe&ions of ipeech, to endeavour their cure; as by diligence, and using proper means, they have reason to expe&t fuccels. For perhaps. there was not any one of his age, who laboured under to many defcis in that way, even after heq had advanced ieverai years in manhood ; and yet he -not only got the better of all those, but arrived at fiuch a pitch of rc ....ne.r?, delicacy, and power of delivery, as {oon threw ah competitors at a dif- nCe ; tho' elocution had '- rivad at such perfec- tion in his days, that it :rigl:t jjPAly be called the ag.o ceators... An. allthis his as weare informed was chiefly
chiefly accomplished by his own labour and affidui ity. This of all others is the mofl encouraging cir- cumfihnce in these times, when a man can have little affifiance from others, and mutt chiefly, rely. upon himself, and his own endeavours, te apply closely to the cure of any ill habits cf delivery, and not to despair of success. To cure any imperfetions in speech, arising origi- nally from too quick an utterance, th~ mofi es- fectual method, will be,. to lay aside an hour every morning,, to be employed in-the pra&ice of reading aloud, in a manner, much flower than is necessary. This should be done in the hearing of:a friend, or- some person Mwhofe office it f'nould: be, to remind the reader, if at anytime he fhou!d perceive him mending his pace, and falling into his habit, of a quick utterance. Let him found all his syllables full, and have that point only in view, without reference to the sense of the words; for if he is attentive to that, he will unwarily fall into his- old habit: on which account, that: he may not be under any temptation of' that ort,. I would have him, for some time, read the words of a vocabulary, in the-alph.betical order. In this way, he will Loon find cut, what let ters and fvl!ablesj he is-.apt. to iourd ter fair ly, and slur over. Let-him make a lift of those words; andI be sure to pronounce them over ciPftinaly, -rvery lorr'ng, before he proceedls 'o others. Let him accufltrn nimfelf also, when alo,',. to pck hi; thcaghtts aloud,.in the fame nfow i:vnner a .d with the it.me view. Other-' wile, the' he: may ret a h :bit, of liading more flowv- ly, he .i1l ? ii into :,.f uf-.a1 r.mancr, i-i discourse : and this habi: c :~ aking aloud; wvhen ali:ne, will not cmilvx 'ri ng im 0o ". mor. diti-&ic' utterance, but prodL.ce . ~.-il-y Lfexpre<tion, in which silent thinkers, .a gencraily dcieicve, There
There. is one cause of indiftin&C articulation, which is almost universal, and which arises from the very genius of our tongue; so that- unlcfs great care be taken, it is scarcely possible, but that every one should- be affeted by it, in some degree. Every word,, composed of more syllables than one, in our language, has one syllable accented, and peculiar- ly diftinguifhedd from the reft; either by a smart percussion of the voice, or by dwelling longer up,: on it. If this accented syllable be properly diftin- guifhed,. the word will often be fuiciently known,. even though the others are founded very confused-. ly. This produces a negligence, with regard to the articulation of the other syllables; which tho' it may- not render the sense obscure, yet destroys. all, measure and proportion, and consequently all harmony in delivery. This.fault is so general, that I would st-rongly recommend at first, the pratice of- pronouncing the unaccented syllables. more fully, and dwelling longer upon them,, than is necessary,. as the only means of bringing those, whose utter- ance is too rapid, to a due medium. It is true there are some, who thro' the misfortune of' bad in- ftru&ion, or. prevalence of early bad example, have. a tedious drawling utterance, dwelling almost equal- Ly on all syllables (of which I shall speak more under. the head of accent) ; but as this is neither confo- nant to the genius of the tongue, nor the cultomnary manner of speech in this country,, there iS no-greate danger of erring on that. fide. P RO N U N C I A.T. I;.O N. The next article which I, propose to-treat of, is,. pronunciation. This word, which had such a comrn pr.ehenfi e meaning amongl the ancients, as to take I ' ,' " i .
in 'the whole compass of delivery, with its con-.. comitants of look and gqzi:ur, : is confined with us to very narrow bounds:, and refe'rs only to the man- nrer o foluncding our wor! This indeed is the only article relative to elocution, which clkias a~y part of our attention. The re son of which cA iS . to be this. In all other points of elocutian, :i11 ranks and orders cf men, wherever born, -or in whatever situation of life, are equallyf iable to the fame defEts, and to fall into the: f me crrours, AmongoP those bred at the univeility, cr -t court; ,s well as amongic mechanics or ru iics; pamoingri thoc' who speak in the fenate-h ouf , pnlpit, or at the bar,s a well s mongR mc in iprivate life : we find rammrerers, lilpers, a mIu.mbling indif'inr t c tter- ance; ill management of the voice, by :pichi:.!.; iL in too high or too loxw a key; speaking too lo'ud, "or !o softly as not to be heard ; and uiing dikorda;nt tones, and false cadences. Thelf being, i- fy, common to all .ranks and .classes of men. have not any marks of-difgrace put upon them, but on the contrary meet with general indulgence, from a gen-. eral corruption. But it is not so with regard to pronunciation ; in which tho' there be as great a difference betweeo V men, as in any other article, vet this differece is not io much betxween individuals, as whole bodies of men; ' inhabitants of different countries, and fpcaking one common language, without, agreeing in the manner of pronouncing it. Thus not only the Scotch, Irish, and Welifh, have each their own a idioms, which uniformly prevail in those countries, but almost every county in England, has its pecu- liar diale~ . Nay in the very met0opolis t wo cif- ferent modes of pronunciation prevail, by which ti4e inhabitacnts of one pa.ct of the town,. rre dif- tin .o.L.iijed
inguifhed from those of the other, One is cur- efit in the city, and is called the cockney ; the )ther at. the court end, and is called the polite pro- iunciation. As amongst these various.diale&s, one nufi have the preference, and become fafiicnable, t will of course fall to .the lot. of-that vwhich pre- 7ails at court, .the source of fashions of:all kinds. \11 other clialefts, are sure marks, either of a pro- ;inci.al, rultic, pedantic, or. mechanic education ; mnd therefore have some degree of digrace annexed ;o them. And a.s the court pronunciation is no 'vhere methodically taught, and c .i be acquired jnly by conversing with people in polte lif'- it is Sfort of proof that a person has kept good company, ?nd on that account is fought aftr by all, who wilh o be condcered as fTlh:ionaable peopei, or Tmiembers of the be.u monde. This is the t0uLc reafaon that the article of pronunciation has been the chief, or ra- thor only oobjet of attention, in t',"Ce rwhole ff;ril of delivery. et to' ts is ts ite s attainment of wvh ich is ardently deiired by. zn infinite. number of individuals. there are few who fccccd in the attenp t, thro' T.w. nt of met.'..od, rnle7l. ' nd a{Gftance of maitLrs ; without which old habits cannot cailyi be removed IThe dcifcultics to those wvho endeavour to cure themfClves of a provinci,? c: vicious p.ron.unciatio are chiefly threc. ift, The want of k;lnow:inr ex- ary whcre the f.ault lies. ~dly, W~ant of method in removing it, and -of du1 e , ; plication. , 3d1i, -.ant of" conicioufnlC' of hliir de(iEc&s in this point, The way of gett~'ing ac thcfe di~7iculties I fhali endea- Vour Lo point o.w,. A\s to the fiic. al ic, te waont of k'o"ing ex- a'tly w.hrcie:- the. fou.-Sk>; mrol persons who have a provinca d~ali-,cc" - cin. tihat ini every feIaenc" i. ' *he tn~cy'
they utter, there are many things 'to be reprehend* ed, are apt to imagine that their whole speech is infeed; and therefore look upon a total cute, against the strong power of early habit, as imprac- ticable: whiereas were they to examine into the source cf this irregularity, they would find it to arise perhaps, only from a different nmarrer of foundIng lome of the vowels, which occurring ge- neri!vy mi every fcntence, fcems to infcft their '*,whol.3 c:: rf.-ri, ih-,.c. .-.C g'l-ntlemn of Ircla.'d f_: :nib inbnaC dif- ser fIorr! .-'T.e of EnTli;*nd, chiefl, in two of the founds belorghg to th.e vovwels i and ,, o-unded by them a and Eu a--::i ev,en vrwith regard 'to oth:of aifo ?not always, but only in certain wo.'s. In many of which they give te found tto the fnir vow-l where it is pronounced 1, anid rIhe foiriad- to the second, whtre it is pronounced e, hus m" e words patron, matron, are pronounced by ithe: pFatron. matron, the a being bfounded a~r; it is in iatl"r; fe- ver, sea, please, are prcnounced like favoul, fAy. plays. Theyv soon become confc>:ois of this d"cvr- hity of found, and not knowing cxt.v in wh t words it is used, in order to imitate ;he . Lngih pro- nunciation, they adopt the *found ee in all words without difhnaton ; in'fcad of ;reip- they Liy greet, for occasion occeefion, dysL dec, &c. Now this miifake is evidely cwing to. want of method: for VerC tlh::r a voccabu!ar r mi::de, con- taining ail the words in I,:rp:_l- i ,caI o:rder, in which the Erlifn pronu'ncinati. d icrs from the Irish with regard to thcic twvo foud s, their num- ber wVoald not be very c. :fidera .- a"nd all might by moderate prn&ice, in a thort ti:nc make them- felves'completely ma'e1s of the pointe pronuncia- tion; for they i:carccvl dieir in an;y other points,
or at leaRt the exceptions are so few, that they might be brought into a very narrow compass. This brings me to the consideration of the fe, cond impediment in the way of such as would be desirous of getting rid of a provincial dialc&, the want of method ; often the source of want of due application. As there is no method ready to his hands, each individual must form one to himself. Let him in the irft place employ his attention in discovering the particular vowels in the founding of which the provincial manner differs from the polite pronun- ciation. Let him by the help of dia9ionaries and vocabularies, make out a lift of the words, in which those vowels are to be found; and get some friend to attend him whilst he reads those words over, and mark their particular founds, diftingui hing those which differ from the general rule. WVhen by these means he is able to found them all right, let him pra&cice them daily over by himself, and let him fele& such words ;: he finds most difficult of pro.- nunciation, and form them into fentenccs, verfies, or anagrams ; which he may get by heart and fre- quently repeat. Tho' this may fctem laborious at firiPC, the talk in the progress will be found cafier thani is imagined, and he who makes use of thisi method will be encouraged to proceed, from the certainty of faccefs which will attend every fltp of his progress. Whereas they who attempt to alter their pronunciation without method, only plunge from one errour into another, and soon grow weary of fruitless pains. Betide such as have a provincial pronunciation of certain letters, perceptible in all words wherein those letters are founded, theic are few gentlemen of England who have received their educetioa aE
country schools, that are not infeded with a False pronunciation of certain words, peculiar to each county. It will not be difficult for them to coll.-t all such words, as they seldom are numerous; and after having collcted them, if they will daily re- peat them, till the tongue gets a hlbit of pro- nouncing the new founds with cafe, they will icon take place of the others in their common ipeech. And surely every gentleman will think it worth while, to take some pains, .to .get rid of such evi- dent marks of rufficity. Hlow cafy would it be to change the cockney pronunciation, by making use of a proper method:! The chief difference lies in the manner of pro- pouncing the ve, or u consonant as it is commonly called, and the w; which they frequently inter- -changeably use for each other. Tnus they call veal weal, vinegar winegar. On the other hand they call winter vinter, well veil. Tho' the con- verting the w into a v is not so common as tha ichanging the v into a w. Whoever will allot a certain portion of time every day, to read aloud in the hearing of a friend, ali words in the di(aionary beginning with those two letters, will find in a short time.the true pro- nunciation become familiar to him. In children this errour might in a great me.iure be prevented, if when they are taught to ipell, the letter were called by the name which marks its power, ve in- (tead of u consonant ; for in that cafe the very .found of the letter would guide them to the true oronunciation ; whereas in the other the found it- .teif confirms them in the vulgar one. A child might be ioon made sensible of the absurdity of feunding v ea i weal, tho' it is impoflible he .iould
should perceive any impropriety in pronouncing u e a 1 in that manner. Another vice in the cockney pronunciation is, the changing the found of the lat syllables of words ending in ow, wherever it is not founded like a dipthong,<but like a fimppl o, (which is always the cafe when the la f!yllabcl is un.acccnted) into cr- as feller for fellow--bceler., holler, foller, windrer, -for bellow, hollow, follow, window. As also adding the letter r to all proper names ending in a. unaccented, as Belindar, Dorindar, for Belinda, Dorinda. But the words in our language which come under either of the above cafes are so few, that a lift of them might soon be made, and the vi- clous habit give place to a just one by the method of pratice before recommended. WVith refpe~ to the rustic pronunciation, pre- vailing in the several counties, I mean amongf the gentry, and such as have a liberal education, there does not seem to be any general crrour of this fort;3 their deviations being for the most part, only in certain words, fiounded in a peculiar manner by each county ; and which probably owe their picfent pronunciation, to the continuation of the old cuf- tom; which like other antiquated modes, changes more slowly in proportion to their distance from, or want of communication with the court. And these deviations not being very numerous, as was before observed, may easily be set right. But there is one defe& which more generally prevails in the counties than any other, and indeed is daily gaining ground amongftl the politer part of the world, I mean the omilion of the aspirate in many words by some, and in most by others. Were this custom to become general, it would deprive our tongue of one great fund of force and expression. I>_ lo
For not only certain words have a peculiar energy, but several emotions of the mind are strongly mark- ed by this method of shooting out the words (if I may be allowed the expression) with the full force of the breath. As in the exclamations what . when ? where ? why ? how ! hark ! h:'lt !-In the words hard, harsh, heave, hurt, whirl, whisper, whifle. If any one were to pronounce the fol- lowing sentence, Hail ye high minifr:ers of Heav'n ! how happy are we in hearing these your heavenly tydings ! without an aspirate, thus-Ail ye igh mi- nifters of eaven! ow appy arc we in caring thcfo your eavenly tydings ! who does not fee that the whole exprefion of triumplh and exultation would be loft ? And the iame mr;: he observed with regard to the opposite exprior: c.r bhorrence and detef tation, if the fo,,llowic :: *.hco, .uHow I hate. lhov I abhor such hcil-i.L-ds ! were procunceed in the f me manner, ow I ate, ow I albcr {such eli-oundso But let no one im-a!gine, that becauf e h would not pronounce many ifutc,: ive woiId, ar,_ a i icwho fen.- tence in t.uis manner, he is tl.eiefor: en:tilc,' free , from dcfcf& in this point ; for I have met with bLut, few inilances in the courle of my experience, and those only in the mofi correft speakers, of persons who have not been guilty of omitting the aspirate from some words, or giving it too faintly to others. The best method of curing this will be to read over frequently all words beg.inning with the letter H and thoTe beginning with W7. in the di&ionary, and push them out with the full force of the breath, 'till an habit is obtained of aspirating strongly: nor need any one so circuma-nced be apprehensive of falling into an extreme on that-ide, as the old habit will pull as firongly en the opposite lide, and in this, as in all other -oints, reduce it to a medium, Thern
There is another article which has produced fre- quent disputes with regard to pronunciation, as whether the word should be pronounced con'cord- ance or concor'dancc-ref'ratory or refrac/tory-- but points of this kind come more properly under the next head which I shall treat of, that of Ac- cent. There are some other words also of dubiou's found, such as goold or gold, wind or wind; pro- nunciations of this kind have their several advo- cates, and there is no impropriety in using either. In cafcs of this nature all who have an opportunity of being informed of that pronunciation moss used by men of education at court, will have the best authority on their lide ; as that is indeed the only ifandard -we can refer to, in critical cafes, as well as others. I come now to speak of the lafl, and chief Qb- ftacle in the way of those who are desirous of changing a vitiated pronunciation for a right one I mean a want of consciousness of their defects and errours in that point. And this is either total, or partial. Total, when men think they have no faults to amend; partial, when they know they have faults, but are not conscious of them at the time they commit them. The former, whilfl they remain under the influence of this vain opinion, are incurable; the latter, stand in need only of method and information, to be set right. I have known many inflances of both kinds, in persons who have come to London with a provincial dia- lec. At firit, the difference of pronunciation in many words, can not but strike them ; but as they know not any method by which they may acquire that which is right, they leave it to time to bring about a change ; not confi.ering that early habit E 3 caz
can not be dislodged, but by much pains and prac- tice. When their ears have been, for any length of time, familiarized to the new pronunciation, they no longer perceive the diftintion ; and in- stead of attributing this to the true cause, they are apt to flatter themselves, that it is owing to a gradual change wrought in their own pronuncia- tion to the falhionable one. There are others, who take some pains to find out their faults, and to be informed of the particulars in which they differ from the eftabliftled mode; and think the business is accomplished, when they have obtained this knowledge. But they do not confider that to know, and to praLice, are two different things ; and that early cuifom will ever prove too ifrong for the former, if the latter does not come to its aid. Nothing is more frequent than instances of persons conrf!ntly mispronouncing several words, not thro' ignorance of the right way, for they will immediately correc themselves if put in mind of it ; but thro' want of confcioufiefs at the time that they use the false one, to which they have been habituated. And in proportion as this want of confcioufiefs takes place, the habit mult for ever gain strength. This will fufficiently explain the reason that so many provincials have gr9wn old in the capital, without making arny change in their original diale&. No man can amend a fault, of which he is not cor.fcious; and confciouitefs can not exert itself, when barred up by habit or vcnity, In these circumit:nces it is not from ourfclves, but from others, that we are to learn when we commit a fault; and perhaps there is no civilized country in the woi ld where people find it so dcil-i- cult to get information on this head, as England. Here it is cuitomary enough to laugh at foreigners, 1nd
and ridicule provincials, for errours and defe&s in pronunciation; but to inform them of their faults- when they commit them, or to attempt to corre&" them, would be thought the heigh't of ill manners, In confeqle.nce of this mifPcken notion, they also who have mofl need of aid, confider it as a fort of infi{t when it is offered, and will not patiently- submit to correftion ; more eipecially such natives of England as have any faults of this kind, who think they na1turally pronoun'ce their mother tongue right. By fhoitting their ears against information, they inda!ge themselves in the vain opinion that they have no faults ; like the foolish man who shut his eves that no one might fee him. How much more ra-tional is the behaviour of the French in this point.. They know that strangers. ard pro-- vincials muff nm'ceil;:rily commit faults in pronoun- cing their tongue.; and therefore do not think that a thing which is naturally to be expc&ed, is a pro-. per subj. & of laughter or ridicule. On. the contra- ry, they are always ready, with the utmost polite- ness, to let people right, whenever they fall into any mifbi:kcs. But as no aid of this kind is to be ex- pce&ed in England, and as the re&ifying bad habits depends upon OLLr COnfcicufnefs of them at the time we fall into them, and confcioumfnes can Ibv. awakenecd only by information ; all who have -, mind to get rid of such bad habits, mufr endeavour to prevail upon their intimate friends ,nd acquaint: ance, never to let any opportunity flip of putting them in mind of anv fault thlv commit. Tho' this may el ily be complied with in private, yet as it is, contrary to custom to attempt it in mixt comna- ny, a private sign agreed on will be a fuflicient hint. in that cafe, LECTURE
LECTURE IIIo A C C E N T. H A V IN G.treated in my former of articulation and pronunciation, I come now to confider the third article, that of Accent. The meaning of that term was very different amongR: the An- cients from what it is with us. Among:rt them we know that accents were marked by certain inflexions of the voice like musical notes; and the gramma- rians to this day, with great formality inform their pupils, that the acute accent, is the raising the voice on a certain syllable ; the grave, a dcprcflion of it ; and the circumflex, a railing and deprefEon both, in one and the fame syllable. This jargon they constantly preserve, tho' they have no fort of ideas annexed to these words; for if they are fkled to shew how this is to be done, they can not tell, and their prm-&ice always belies their precept. The truth is, the Ancients did observe this distinction, because we have it on the authority of all their writers, who have treated on the fubljet; but the manner in which they did it must remain for ever a secret to us ; for with the living tongue, perished the tones also, which we in vain endeavour to seek. for in their visible marks.. Yet such was the abfur- dity of masters of grammar schools on the revival of ancient litei-ature, that tlo' it was impofrmble for them to difcov:.r the true use of the accents amongfI the Greeks, rather than acknowledge their igr:o- i 11CC,
rance, or that those marks were become utterly use- I'efs, they fell into a pratice as absurd as could pof- sibly have entered into the heads of the most igno- rant Barbarians; for obstinately and pedantically retaining the marks, notwithstanding their evident- inanity, to iupport this pracice, they determined. to apply them rather to a false use, than to none at all. And finding it imuoffibie to come at the leafi knowledge of the accents as used amongst the An. cients, they determined at all events to adopt into- their pra&cice the modern use of them ; tho' that term has quite a different signification amongfl us.. This praEtice is jufL as wife, as if the fame term which signified man amongst the Greeks, signified horse amongil us, and we were to reason from: names to things, and conclude therefore thai a horse was a rational creature. And indeed it had pretty much the fame eF-cLs in point of reading Greek, producing the moaf manifest absurdities. For who- ever read Greek in that way, necc farily defirovcd all quantity and mcafurc ; and therefore they were obliged to read the f-me individual words in a dif-. fcrent manner in verse, from what they did in prose. Amazing ! that such an absurdity did not at once. convince them of their errour. But as some emi- nent masters, of more enlarged minds, have lately aboliihed this pra&ice in the chief of the public schools, and as a few editors have ventured to pub- lifh ftme Greek books without those insignificant marks, it is to be hoped that a reformation in this article will soon be made. general. Thus much I thought necessary to premise, that any person who has early imbibed confused notions of the term accent in the ancient languages, may banish them from his mind, and only be prepared to con{i.der what the use of it is amongfb us. The
The term with them, signified certain inflexiors. of the voice, or notes annexed to certain f11llables, in fiich proportions ns probably contributed to make their speech mulical. Of these they had chiefly three in gener.al use, which were denominated r.c- cents, and the term used in the plural number. The term with us has no reference to inflexions. of the voice, or musical notes, but only means a .peculiar maicinner of diftingu}fihing one syllable ofa word from the ref, denominated by us accent mnd the term for that. reason used by. us in the fingu- lar number.. This diltinrion is made by us in two ways ; ei, ther by dwelling longer upon one syllable than tlh refi ; or by giving, it a smarter percuflion of the- voice in utterance. Of the first of thefa, we have inifhncs in the- words, g/rl.', father, ~ly ; of the last in BAT'FrLEt, HAB/IT, BOR'RO\', So that ac- cent, with us, is not referred to tune, but to time ; to quantity, not quality ;. to. the mn-ore equable or precipitate motion of the voice, not to the variationr of notes or inflexions., 'T'hefe hav nothing to do wit v.ords i'epar:itly taken, and are only made use of, to.enforce, or. adorn.them, when they are rang- ed in sentences, It is by the accent chiefly that the quantity of our syllables is regulated ;. but not according to the mistaken rule laid down by all who have wiitten on the fubje&c,. that the accent always makes the syllable long ; than which there can not be any thing more false. For the two ways of distinguish- ing syllables by accent, as mentioned before, are di- realy opposite, and produce quite contrary effcfts; the one, by dwelling on the fllable, necessarily makes it long; the other by thle smart percuflion of thbe voice, as necessarily ,makes i flhert, T'us the firfA
i'-rft syllables in gl6ry, father, h1ly, arc long ; whilf ;those in battle, habit, b6rrow, arc short. The quantity depends upon the set of the accent, whe- ther it be on the vowel or confonant'; if on the vowel, the fyllble is necessarily 'long, as it makes the vowel long; if on the confonent, it may be ci- ther long, or short, according to the nature of the consonant, or the time t'kcn up in dwelling upon it. If the consonant be'in its nature a short one, the syllable is neccff:rily short. If it be a long one, 'that is, one whose found is capable of being length- ened, it may be long or short at the will of the fpcaker. By a short consonant I mean one whole found can not be continued after a vowel, such as c or k p t, as ac, ap, at-whilft that of long consonants can, as, el en or ev, &c. If we change the feat of the accent in the inflances before mentioned, we should change their qu .ntity; were we inftcad of 'stL-RY tofay cLOR -Y-iniLead of F -THE R FAT H- .,R-infl.ead of HO-LY HOL-Y-the first fvilables would become fhort-as on the other hand. were we to dwell on the vowels infread of the consonants in the last inQbnces they would change from short to long-fhould we for inflance infLead of bat'tle lay baitle-for ha-"bit halibit-and for bor'row b6r- row. This is one of the chief sources of the differ- ence between the Scotch and English gentlemen in the pronunciation-of Englifth; I mean, the laying the accent on the vowel, inrtead of the consonant, biy which means they make syllables long, that are Thort with us. And here I can not help taking notice of a cir- 'cumftance, which thews in the strongest light, the amazing deficiency of those, who have hitherto em- ployed their labours on that fubje6t, in point of knowledge
knowledge of the true genius and constitution of our tongue. Several of the compilers of dircion- aries, vocabularies, and spelling books, have un- dertaken to mark the accents of our words; but so little acquainted were they with the nature of o-ar accent, that they thought it necessary only to mark 'the syllable on which the frrefs is to be laid, with- out marking the particular letter of the syllable to which the accent belongs. They have therefore marked them by one uniform rule, that of placing the accent always over the vowel of the difinguifh- ed fyliable. By which means they have done worse than if they had not pointed out such lyllablcs at all ; for this rule, infecad of guiding firangers to a true pronunciation, infallibly leads them to a wrong one, whenever the accent ihould be placed on the consonant. Thus all foreig-ners and provin- cials, must for ever be mined, by coniulting such diaionaries. For instance, if they look for tht word endeavour, finding the accent upon the vowel c, they will of courit iound it end avour. In lhe fame manner dedicate will be called de-dicate, precip'itate piccipitate-hablit Jhubit-and lo on. Now had they only attendced to the plin rule, of placing the accent always over the consonant, whenever the stress is unpon thact, theic would have. afforded the belf and molr general ..ci. to jul; pronunciation, that could be iound wo-ith crg"ard to our tongue. For it is an unerring u le thro'ctut tahe whole, that whenever the accent is en the confo- nant, the preceding vov.'l hs a {horl found. As there is alfi another in fallble rule in our tongue, that no vowel crer hi:s "' long found in an unac- cented syllable, if this article cf accent were pro- perly adjufked, it would prove a inafier-key to the pronunciation of our whole tonigue. Wh en.
\Vhen we fee such a palpable and gross mistake as this, in our compilers of dirtionaries, we should be at a loss to account for it, if we did not reic&t, that they, as wvell as our grammarians, have never examined the state of the living tongue, but wholly confined their labcurs to the dead written language ; their-chief obiccr therefore has been to as{sist fl.ent readers, in comprehending the meaning of the words ; not tho1e who are to read aloud, in a pro- per delivery; to teach men how to write, not how to ipeak correEtly. In this view, tlhe marking the tyllable alone on which the accent is laid, without attending to the particular letter, would answer their purpose, as it would enable writers to arrange their \vor'ds properly in metre, according. to the riles of Englith vcrification. Every word in our languag~e cf more fvllables th:l' one has an accentc., syllable. The longer polvytylla.blcs have fcrquently t.wo accents, bJut one is so muc-h {i.ronger than tl.i othcer, as to chew that it is but one word ; and the inferior accent is always less forcible, than any ac- cent that is lthe ingic one in a word. Thus in the worud 'expos/"tulator/y--the lrongert accent is on the fecon. iylJabl, posl, but there is a fainter accent on the iaf ,ilable.:' but one, founded tur', expocstuIa- t vir-ry, ;s fucc.:iicon of four unaccented ifllables w',,uld :rto be agireeable to the ear. and might pre- vern din ct a -iculation. All monosyllables in our lanI u,,e :re also accented, the particles alone ex- cpt.c. which are aiuvays without accent, wh.enr rot ,.-n:';haic-.l (.nd they are long or shor-t,, in the fi~nme manner : beforec mentioned, according as the fe of th a-.c.t:- is on the vowel or cunfonant, Thus. a.,lai, bid', rod', cuV, are all short, the voice p:ie;g.-( ,u:ckly over the vowel to the confo- :..lct ; bu. i. t.hc contrary recafca, the words ilJ., F laid,
laid, bide, r6od, cube, are long, the accelnt being: on the vowels, on which the voice dwells iomc time bcfore it founds the con cfnants. As no utterance c?.n be agrce!:.e;le to the car, which is void of proportion ; and s ;-.ll quantity, or proportion of time in utterance, dcpeA.'si upon a due observation of the accent ; it is a n:'itt-r of ab- solute necelity to all, who would iarlivc at a gcoo and graceful delivery, to be maritcr of that poin t Nor is the ule of accent in our langu,: ' conFo.-d to quantity, alone ; but it is also t chief tn :'r by j w-~vich words are difidnguiflhcd from mre yvl blles2 . Or rather I may fay, it is the very cife-ncC of words, which without that, would be only io many col- !etions of syllables. The eTence of a i~liabrle con- :tils in articulation only, for every articulate' found of co'irfe forms a syllable. The effi':nce of a word c.,onjfbis in accent as well as articulation. This will be made clear by an infiance. If i pronounce the word ar-ti-cu-la-tion, in that imanner, without dif- tinguilhing any fvllable from the reol, it is no longer a word, but a fuccefion of syllables; but when I pronounce it articulation, laying an accent on the y;itable ia, that it is which coniittutes a vword, by .uniting the preceding syllables, and the fubl q' nt one to itfclf. And with rcfpe&t to mono!jlables, all which can properly be called words, are accent- ed ; for the particles, which are unaccented, can discharge their ofice perfetly in their mere iilabic state; they being in fa& nothing more than fimpl2: articulate founds to mark the relation and difference between words, and are therefore better fitted for that office, by being frnewhat different from words, than if they were of the fame class; and indeed in their very name of particles, this dirin&ion fecms to have been intended.. But when, by being cm- phatical,
Thatical, theyv obtain an accent, they then become words; no- in nanmeconly, buit in; si; as in that cafe they fIand in the room of words and ditchairge their ofic:2. It is true th1is m.,ne' r dfi-in'uif:incg wor.;: fr<m"n mere fvl'·1 ic. s is a::t f;: c.:'T,,-i. nor the only \v.:y by which it c.n . done. The C reks ' k'-owv had ainoth-r nt nne:. which w.vs th.'t of d:1- .tnguilhing thc~i ' i'. a ciert.-ii tone or note annl:;-:.cd io each word which iunder ther nice reg-itions, nmufc have contri. ted to m~ak<e theIir P echc mcore inuhical and plc..iin~; to the ear, thin that of ?any other nation in the world ; and this w...s acknowledg- cd by the natives oif ll other countries who viit:d t}hem, and even by the Romans thmnfelvcs, in the. height of their glory. -Nay it was1 k1nown th!:t so- reigners HR]lLuned to their Orators, th'i' the.y did rc~ underPiand their language, with as much pla'f .::e as we do to Italian lingers ; from the mere delight they took, in the harmony of their utterance. But. as this is a method not pursued by any of the mo- derns, excepting the Chinese, of whom we know but little, and a thing about which we can have but very obscure ideas, it would anfwver no end to be- flow any farther consideration upon it. The third way of distinguishing words from fyl- lables, is by making a perceptible pause at the end of each word. This last is the practice of many modern nations ; but in languages that abound ini long fyllablcs, and whose words are therefore often composed of syllables of an equal length, this me- thod of diflinguifhing them by perceptible pauses, muff add to the tediouhecfs, with which the ear is difguftcd by a f'icceliion of long founds. Some certain method of distinguishing words from mere syllables, must evidently be one of the F 3 firRi
firt f:eps take5, in reducing language to any degree of regularity; and this can be done only by one of the three ways before mentioned eiher by affixing an accent to each word; or a certain note or tone.; or a pause at the end. The fccond method ufed'by the Greeks has never been the pra&ice of any part of Europe, and therefore it would be but fruitlers Iabour to examine it. But it is well worth the pains to enquire, whether the firit ufcd by us, cr the latter by many other nations, is zu its own na- ture betll; as it may turn oui attentiont to a poi.:t iitherto little considered, and yet which is one ofthe chief sources of fuperioir.y that we have over our neighbours ; and one of the igreatcR per;!ctions of which our language has to !ioal But above al, bL-cau!c the knowledge of this will make every na- .tive of thcie kingdom.s better acquainrted with the peculiar genius of ou: tongue, and a10ord him ons. of the belt lights to guide him to a just and harmo.- nious delivery. Now to compare the{e two ways Cos diliinguilhir.g words, lby ccent, or by . pauic ; si: with regard to .tility, and next to ornament. VWith rcfpcfL to utility, it muR1 be a!lo wed, that thle method of diftingul ig words oi mi;re v:- ables, which is the .,o'L e"-vidcnt and recilc-,, acnd 'which- takes up the lean. time, is eft-. Nouv tilere can not be a more evident or prccile dL liCon, tlian that of accent ; nor one which ca:n be executed with more cafe and certainty: it requires no nicety of ear, as in the diitinguifning of tones, or ~eafur.- ing time ; it only dermands tht one vllable flhould have a greater stress laid on it than others : and the only difference is in laying the ftrcis on the vowel or consonant, which is of course acquired Lby natives, 2ncd by a :roper method, might soon be obtained by otihe.rs.
others. But the diftin&ion by pauses, having re- ference to the measurement of time, can have no certain rule in irregular discourse, and muff depend upon the ear of each individual. \Ve know how difficAlt it is to observe exa&nefs of time in the pauses of music, even with the alTiftance of rules and marks; how much more so must it be where there are noneci And with rcfpc& to brevity, it muff be evident, that the way of marking them, which adds not at all to their natural time, muff be preferable to that whose vcry cifence confiits in taking up more time. In point of use therefore accent has clearly the preference. Now let us confider them with rega-rd to ornament. The ornament of fceech, so far as relates to found, con:ifts in the pleasure which it gives the ear. This is the ref lt of harmony; and harmony, of proportion and variety, of tones and times. Now as tones are here out of the qucftion, let us fee which of these ways bids fairest for fixing a just measurement of proportion, and agreeable varitty of times. I have already mentioned that when the accent is on the vowel, it of course makes the rfllable long; and when the accent is on the consonant, the fyl- lable may be either long or f-ort according to the nature of the confmoant, or :will of the speakers. And as the accent alone is a -f'lcient difin&tion of words, without pausing nge' r at the end of them, than at the end of a fylii!e, excepting where the fcnfc requires it; and as ail n1Rccented fyllablcs are ihort, the quantity of our syllables is adjufled by the ceaicfet and fimlciv rvin it worl, and in the cxaceft proportion. When wve coniiler too, that this is cffected by the very power which constitutes wordr, and rendered mariff,:t by the fame mark, 3 which
which diftinguiflhes words from mere fyllabkls, i- ought to strike us with admiration.. It is a maxim in mechanicks, that the fewer and fimplcr the prin- ciples are by which any machine is constru&ed to answer its end, the better; and the fame will .hold. here. But in the manner of diRingulifhin words from syllables by longcr paules at their cnd, it will be extremely difficult,. as was bfore observed, to keep a due proportion in that way. Some vwill be apt to run their words too cldoi together, and so reduce them to the slate ofifvllables or they will make the paules too long, which may confound the fenic, take up much unneceflary time in diccourfe, and produce a tcdiouitefs very disgusting to the ear, JBut fuppolfing that a due medium could be obi'ervcd, which is scarce poitble at bcfl, and in gcnera1 is zOtterly impofible, this method of diftlnguifhing wvords, mulf, in its own nature, prevent any re- gular proportion of time being fettled, in the de- livery of such a language. For as the time of the paui.e rnmuf be equa;l at the end of each word, ;and as. words are constituted of different numbers of f!ylla- bles, the difance of those pauses from each other, nmull depend wholly upon the Jnequality of the worcis which compote the sentences, and therefore never can be reduced to any certain proportion. If for instance, a word of two syllables is followed by a monosyllable, and that by a word of five fyilblles, all of the fame length ; the ditiance of time between the first verbal.paule and the fccond, will be as two to one; and the diiLtnce of time between the ite- cond and third, will be as one to five; and out of l'uch unequal and uncertain proportions, nothing harmonious can be produced. Another reason, ginft V i" t:his mret hod of dif- linguihilhg
ti'nguifing words from fyllablcsby final pauses, is, that pauics or flops of the voice, are chiefly used to point out the conncecion and dcpend'nce which words have on each other, bv dividing sentences into different rnmembers, accorvd!; g to their connec- tion, and m.-rk;ng that connctiton by di ft.rnt lengths of pauL.-:s. Now if the {ime mtlii.od is taken to dicinguifh words from e ch ,other. as is used to difinguifh the diff'erent minieers of ien- tences, it will hardly be poi;ih!e to hinder their in- terefts from clashing, and producir.Cg confu.iln in the me-·ning. And a:s the rr: kiung olifelecs clearly underflood, is the chief e:cd of speech, the article of perceptible pVtu s, or the PLcops of the voice, so , eufntially neceiffry to that end, :hould be applied. to that i": only. As there are but the three ways b-fore mentioned' by which words can be dift ng',il'd, either one, or more of them muff be adopted, by all xwho aim at any regu!aritv of utter.:ance. If roi;e than one way be introduced, it will breced conIu ion, and it will be imponTible to fettle any due. proportion. In the French language, I mea'n in the puil'ic del!very of it, where tncy aim at regui.rity, all three are u-Id on diferent occasions. Sometcimes words are dif-. tinpguifed by prcrceptib-ic pari-fes ; fometimTes by ac- cents ; ftcmntimcs by tones. Thnis pronifcuous use of them is thbverfive of all harmony, and takes off from the fcvera! powers of each in their diflit.'- provinces. Where a lan-guage abounds in words: counpofd of fyllablecs ecqualy long, they muf ;:p-. pear to be equally acc::ntecd, and nothing can dii- tinguiih them in that cafe but verbal pauses, or tones; the inconvenience of the former has been already laid open, and if the latter are not fettled by a musical scale, so far as theiy prevail, they mruft rendcer,
render the found of the language difcord.'nt to the ear. Accent as a sure mark of difiinrion, can only take place in ifch words as are composed of short yvllables, or of one long and the r.:s flhort. This may be seen in every word of the English lan- guage compoeed of more fvla ibles tha.n one; as no vowel ever has its full long foirnd unless it be ac- cented. Thus in the word admire the i in the last fyilhble being acccnted has its fl long foind ; but when bv thie addition of a \itl.: the feat of the ?ccent is changed, as In ainir:ble, the i is changed to :, fliort one. The Pich way ors f-Sng' clearlyv the difrcence bet\wcena the geniu, of th t rc t e ng.ue and curs in this rf-pv wiHl be to iund . rnumber of words immediatel borroCwed ':from them, and fee in :whnt the -erinty of cronunciation condifts. Such as abancon ind, -cciit coit, col- 1ege col/1lge, c6ornin coii monC cornmpnicn comn- pan/ion, EUape Ecripc, obl;acl ob'"iici, ide folidJ DoI)euir Doc-'tr, fiveuir favour, hon(ur lion/- our, &c. in most o .hich words t he i;Hlablcs are all long in the French. a-nd hlol t in the English, as the accents are placed on the vowels in the French, arnd on the confon.'nts in the Eng.lh. T~his it is which makes moen of their words .p-Toir to an Eng- lifh ear to have as ma::' accentsas fvl'cbles, by orblig- ing them to give rn cqu:.l fi.rcs to th.m. And this would be our ccfe lfo, even with. ithe flnort found of the vowels, if we were to rc& an'n equal time up- on each f.llalble, as they do: for inRance, if in- flead of mban'don we Inoin d Iy i-banlo'dn. for com'bat comn/-b lt, for cor'nmon com'-m n. But this amrnon,-,'. us would be evidently not p.rorotnlc- ing words, but syllables only, as children do when learning to spell. The essence of Englih words confitlin in accent, as that of fylla:blcs in articula- lloi:1
tion. "VWe know that there are as many syllables as we hear articulate founds, and as many words as we hear accents. So that if any one places two equal accents, on the fame word, it founds to our car like two words. As if we should fay fortune nilfead of ftrtune; naiture for naittire ; hor'ro6rs for .hor''ro.s, bat'tlemr.nt for batt'lcmi nt, &c. Who- C ever will attend to this point, will find. that no- thing is more common in publi-c fpcakers, but par- ticularly those of the stage, than to commit this fault; and in this the peculiarity, of what is called theatrical pronunciation, chiefly confifs. Nor can there be a greater fault in prounciation than this, as it is an o eince againfl the constitution of our tongue ; aog:inft the fundamental rule upon wlhich the very ciicnce of our words depends ; and which is founiverfal, that( there is not a tingle exception to it, in our whole language, whein the words ar. properly pronounced. Since therefore it must be allowed, that in poin- of utility, that method of distinguishing words from syllables, which is shortest, clearefi, and most con- ftant (that is which admits of the fewcft exceptions) is the heft, I have alrcady fhcwn that all these qua- lities belong to accent. It is fhlortet, because it renders all other fvllablcs ihort, which need only b. articulated, and not dwelt upon; and becaule it puts an end to the ncceufity of verbal pauses, which need be no longer than the fvllabic, the accent alone fulficiently dii.i ngu iuhing words. It is clearect, becaule the difRinrion mufn be obvious to every one who knows what an accent is. rend he can never mistake or doubt. And it is molt confrant, for it. nevcr admnits of an exception, as every word has an accent. And as to harmony, or the fecttling the q.uantity, or
11~i (vlY>( tl- C1I1LL tfP.:,l` !CII 'C t ? c . C) (~ l:C1?4~·· C·!IIL I; 0Yu v ot'I f fa·cinI~:llO''''f lc 1'i kti ~vi i l·L'(, Nocr is tlirs aill 1o1. o, nc ;ns of 'accenr thre timezS o~f pauses alto 2i ai-e de ct quick~ci ai d thei~ir pro- portions more e {ily to be adjusted, ssd obfcrvc~d.. \,Ceibal oaufres beco niri 1lnncceila· the Iententia!. only take Iplarce it j~oi~owjs of cou'I>, thazt the ihmlef fctcnn pakL nifeet niol. k;-:neer tha:~n wvhat w·:ould b~ r'~cc ~'r~v to a verb 1a (c.n~ arid con- fC~q'~;cly tl one 1~~ Il than wbr~ t'-, ctb!ers are uf~d: fo" · \ic;· x lbal p:iufrs- '~', F'lace. tbl diifin~iccn of one P-cn~ tlice ot~er, mudt be the doub'"~ of ~e -' 'ib I onie ~lnd ti e i~eft foflow in th~at pve'roP'"t'~.;lljuvbcl' 1 hs~ ott~{iofl a dull a-nd (li{iuP'lpn T tc:1I 9 {' -c~e. s Imr Imufes V\lng~; iio real ~eauty l I;]e tonics arid beinlg tfed. ;.inro nr'ceii1 t' ,~i i r ovoder to 1~~ the hs mor ci~i- can nt c; too shor~t. j:!vovidcdl th~ey $~4lv ariLfVer that~ end ; tixecl-ore th~e in1Ca lur of
the fmalcfft pause, fLould be its marnife;l percep- tibility; :dl ad .lit.ionU time bionct this, being " unecei"-ry, And a.s the only beauty, which c-an ariie from paufcs, mruf depend upo'n a due iobir- vration of proportion in their duration, acc'rd'in as the ditferent members which compole a 'cntence require" the fewer in number the pauIcs are, the ealier \wi1 it be to obif rve that proporti on. NTow where f:ntential praufes Cnly t;:ake pice, th yev wVill be but soir in. numberb, as th:e cci'fiVi, fcmicoion., colon, and , .1 f:. p. B t if t.he verbal paul"e be'. adhmited, there -,9ill b:e nc, .rnd a much more di -icu.lt ratio introduced, as I ha-'ve alrcad' d thewn. Bedl.es: as was :before obo:rved, where verbal pa.es t:'k.e place:, it is imr.polible any rcguh'.r proportion of tii cn be cbiOrved, vords beinI formed Of fitch d .ierent and unequc numbers of ii: bles; and over thef the compoc'r has rn.o ,ower : But it is not 0 with rea .rd to il nt:ntil p1:ules; for as' the con.r.lon of 'periods, cr : ve.il, and their difj.erent mr -bers, depends ,holly upon the will of the compo'er, it is in his power to mk e flich a proportion;l r'atio of the t::ps, as alwys to pro- duce harm:., 'Thus r- then no lngun.-e can **ppear' to be built upon limpler, caiier, or more r.egul r principles. All our thoughts are coVmmunicated in Rnatences ; sentences ae c-ompoEd of words ;nd pau es ; words are rade un oif ivii bls, land Tylles of .lttcls, Sound is the effenco of Ic tters, - .ricula.tion of Lylla- bles, acccn: of ,vwords, and collc,, io"ns of words united by emph?.ais and divided. '!y pr opr pr;ufcs, of sentences. An accent at the ane "ime th..t it con- flitutes words, fettles th.eir quuttit, and: prepares the way for due and prcpor'tionid pa:i-s.- Thus words, confidercd as the marks of our ideas, in the nature
.nature of coin, come from the mint with tnhe clearest and plaineRi samp; a:nd are fitted in the bei man- ner, for a ready and brifi. circulatio:n in the com- merce of discourse. I h:- now conclude t'his head with a few pmr .ical rules for the ri'i obier- vation of the la,.vs of accent ; the neccfit:v of which, I hope, is b. this tihe a;,ppr-nt to a~l my heac;vers. All penrons who pronounce ,EnIlifh wor'ds pro- perly, of ccurlyf l:y the accent right, as that is part of prinunci; tion : and rncver s-.1i to do {o in con- vcrf'.T.ion. But m't'rL:v. i;e-,i i -ev Come to read or 1peak in public; ±-2.ni:rch? the rules of accent. This riEs Vrni a mi"'lCen not.on in forxe, that "ord's are rendere:'. more cd;.irt to a lrge .frm- bLiy, by dwelling >oger upon' the f/!.bies which comnpo.? t-hem; ?nd in o - thrs, th-. it accds to the .omf ?nd .i .nnt', of public dec maLtio,'r;. in w..ich they thi-k cve;y.. thing, ogt to be dilciuent from pr'ivae dicourfc. This s een chiy the vice of the f ge nd has princi;pally: g'iven rii to the dif- :tinlton of what is Ucommon1T v cUrClld "'hc.:t.ric':- De- clrnation, i oppo ition to tothait of the n tural kind; into an: imitation of whiich ie:n-, public fpe;-:lers Lhav- been betraved, and their manner c-P:lled on that ac- .oant Theatrical. U!on ex;:ination it would appear, :tht it aris chi-dy rom their dwelling upon {ylla- icls "h:t are un:acce:nted, thro' a notion that it 'I'kes the words move mor'e flow, RLatCly, ;ad uni- wil ow. Thi wac .' fault which Shtkei'p-ear . (,-' - tacVqT.i"cl· 4. r" !u-oi -rnc" o Abme late c-.orts 'towards it' and f.me -progreimade in it. The pu.e alluded to in Sh.aOkefpear is in t,- Sdvice t.ve o o tohe pbyr by Hmlet ;: where in .yin. downi rulcs. for a iuof delivcryv he su:s, 6 O~.· 1-
c Speak the speech I pray you as I pronounced ie ' to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you ' mouth it, as some of our aftors do, I had as lieve ' the town-crier spoke my lines.' By ' trippingly s on the tongue,' he means the bounding from ac- cent to accent; tripping along from word to word, without resting on fyliables by the way. And by mouthing, is meant, dwelling upon syllables that have no accent, and ought therefore to be uttered as quickly as is confiRfent with diftint articulation ; or prolonging the founds of the accented syllables, beyond their due proportion of time. The least de- gree of Taultinefs in this refpeft, gives an aritficial air to language; inafimuch as it differs from the usual, and what is commonly called, natural man- ner of utterance; and is on that account, of all others, to be avoided most by public ipcakers ; whose bufincfs it i3 induflrioufly to conceal art ; and chiefly by players, whoso office it is, in Shake- fpear's phr~fc, ' to hold, - as it were, a mi:rrour up ( to nature.' It is true this vice does not prevail fb much at prcfent, as it has' done in. the memory of rmany perfuns now living ; v.'lcn it was thought an im:propriclty, to !ave any thing resembling real life, i . the Fre ref!tation of Tragedy; when men were neither to wivk nor. Ipcak like human creatures ; and had ' neidh:r she accent of Chrifiians, nor th, ' gat of- C7ri(,,?as, Pacan:, or Lien.' Some indeed may-fay, like the pIlaer in Hamlet, ' we hope we ' have reformed tlhit indi-emrcnt'ly among us I:' to whom I should repyi in IIamict's .\ ords, ' (3 reformi it altogether; and give the fame carneft advicc to 11l public ipieakers wha'tfocr ; net only; on ac- count of the artiiccil :iir bc'or.e mncn!tioned which it gives to the utter:- u.e, but aibo as 1: cla.nges the very S( to'. nd d i.vs it o 'U: a carea (S.our'
source of difinEtnefs, and proportion, which I-havc ;before explained. If any one pronounces the words 'fdr-tine, in'-croac'h-men't, con'jd&iare, grati-tude, to-morr6w, 'hap'pinefs, patien'cc ; he does not ut- 'ter words, at Icaft not English words, but.fyllables; which with us are always tied together by an ac- cent ; as, for'tune, incroachmcnt, conjec'ture, grat'itude, tomor'rcw, hap'pinefs, patience. And yet, this is an errour, which almost ali persons who .speak with solemnity, run into, for want of know- ing in .what true solemnity of delivery confiflts. *Which, tho' it may demand a flower utterance than afuai, yet, requires that the fame proportion in point of quantit-y be 6bferved in the syllables, as there is in musical notes, when the fame tune is played in quicker or flower time. But of this I thall have occasion to speak more at large hereafter, The only rule, with regard to this head, necef- fary to be'obferved by all public fpcakcrs, who can .pronounce English properly, is to lay the accent always on the fame fyillable, and the fame letter of :the syllable, which they usually do in common dif- course, and to take care not to lay any accent or. stress, upon any other syllable. A rule iso plain and easy, that nothing but affetation, or bad habits, contracted from imitating others: can prevent its always taking place. And yet the v\ant ofknowing, or attending to this rule, is one oft ie chief sources, of the unnatural manner of declaiming, which is so generally complained of, tho' few can tell exa&ly where the fault lies. I fhalla only add upon this head, that there arc few * things in our language, to regular, and well fettled, as the article of accent. It is true there are some words that have occaficned many disputes about the feat of the accent, and have had their different par- ti fans ;
t·ifns ; such as con'cordance or concor'dance, refrac- tory or refrac'tory, cor'ruptible or corrup'tible, ac- cern'ted or ac'cented ; the accenting of th.ese being doubtful,, every man is at liberty to choose which he likes best; and in giving the preference, the car beyond all doubt ought to be consulted, as to that which forms the moil agreeable found, -rather than an abfiLrd, pedantic rule. attempted to be hlid down, that of throwing the accint as far back as poilible ; which has no foundation in the genius of our tongue, and must frequent!y produce the mofl discordant founds. And if any one who has the liberty of" choosing, flhould prefer the found of con'cordance to conc6rdance ; ref'ra&ory to refrac'tory, or corrup- tible to corrut'tible ; he cannot po{nibly make a;y one form a better opinion of his judgment, bu.it Ium sure he will give those whno ihve any i..ill in found.i a.very bad ene of his c,'r0 Ga LECTURE
LE CTURE IV. Of E -M P H A S I S. .H AVING treated of Accent, I now proceed to confider the next head, that of Emphasis. Emphasis, discharges in ientences, the fame kind .f office, that accent does in words. As accent, is the link which ties fylables together, and forms them into words; io emnphafis, unites words to- gether, and forms them into sentences, or members of fPntcnces. As accent, dignifies the syllable on which it is laid, and makes it mor.e d.istinguished by the ear than the reft; so emphasis, ennobles thl word to which it belongs, and presents it in a fironger light to the understanding. Accent, is the mark which distinguishes words from each other, as, simple types of our ideas, without reference to their. agreement or disagreement : Emphasis, is the mark twhich points out their several degrees of relation- ihip, and the rank which they hold in the mind, Accent, addresses itself to the ear only; emphasis, thro' the ear, to the understanding. Were there no accents. words would be resolved into their original syllables: were there no emphasis, fen- tences would be resolved into their original words ; and in this cafe, th, hearer must, be at the pains him- fl!f, firfr, of making out the words, and afterwards their meaning : and as this could not be done, with- out such length of pauses, at the end of iPntenccs, andi theirhveral mtiebers,- as would e;!lw him time
to revolve in his memory, the founds which had been uttered, it would make the aftion of lifening to discourse laborious and difguflingly tedious. Whereas by the use of accent and emphasis, Words, and their meaning, being Fointed out by certain marks, at the fame time that they are uttered, the hearer has all trouble saved, but -that of listening ; and can accompany the speaker at the fame pace that he goes, with as clear a comprchenfion of the matter offered to his consideration, as the speaker himfclf has, if the speaker delivers himself well. The necessity of observing propriety of emphasis is so great, that the true meaning of words can not be conveyed without it. For the fame individual words, ranged in the fame order, may have several different meanings, according to the placing of the emphasis. Thus, to use a trite instance, the fol- lowing sentence may have as many different mean- ings as there are woids in it, by varying the cm- phafis. ' Shall you ride to town to-morrow ?' If the emphasis is on fi{ll, as, shall you ride to town to-morrow ? it implies, that the person spoken t-o had expressed before such an intention, but tht- there is some doubt in the queffioner, v hether hie be determined on it or not, and the anfwcr may be, 'Certainly, or, I am not sure. If it be ct: you, as, thall yoi ride to town to-morrow ? the question implies that some one is to go, and do you mean to go yourself, or fend some one in your fread ? and the anfwcr may be, No, but my servant shall. If on ride, as, flhall you ride, &c. P the answer may be, No, 1 mfall walk, or go in a coach. If on town, as, shall you ride to tow\n to-morrow ? the answer may be, No, but I fnal ride to the forest. If on to-morrow, as: shall you ride to town to-mor-
row ? the answer may be, No, not to-morrow, but the next day. As there is no pointing out the very meaning of the words by reading, without a proper observation of emphasis, it surely has been a great defeft in the art of writing, that there have been no marks in- vented for so neccffary a purpose ; as it requires at all times, a painful attention in the reader to the context, in order to be able to do it at all ; and in many cafes, the most severe attention will not an- fwer the end; for the emphasis is often to be regu- lated, not by the preceding part of the sentence, but by the subsequent one; which frequently is so long, that the motion of the eye, can not precede the voice, with fufficient celerity, to take in the meaning in due time. The want of such marks is no where so ifrongly perceived as in the gene- ral manner of reading the Church Service; which is often so ill performed, that not only the beauty, and spirit of the service is loft, but the very meaning is obscured, concealed, or wholly perverted. I have heard many clergymen, who did not read one tingle sentence as it should be, from the beginning to the end; but I have known few who were not guilty of many faults in omitting, or misplacing the emphasis. And on this account it is, that there is no composition in the English tongue, which is at all attended to, so little understood, in general, as the Church Service. This would be obvious to any one, who would enter into a serious examination of the meaning of the service, and compare it with the manner in which it is usually delivered. Inftanc~ of impropriety might be furnifhcd in abundance thro'out the whole, but to give a few even at the first fetuing out, I meain in ofme of the verses from Scripture, that are read Lcfore the exhortation.
Upon examining their true meaning, my hearers will judge whether they have ever heard that mean- ing expressed in the delivery. The usual manner of reading the following text is this : Enter n6t in- judgment with thy fer'vant, O Lord, for in thy s'ight, shall no man living be jus'tified. Here the words not, fer'vant, s'ight, jus'tified, between which it is impossible to find out any con- ncEtion, or dependance of one on the other, are principally marked. By thel'e false emphases the mind is turned wholly from the .main purport, and drift of the verse. Upon hearing an emphasis on the particle n6t, it expects quite another conclusion to make the meaning consistent; and instead of the particle for, which begins the latter part of the sentence, it would expea a but; as, enter n6t into judgment with thy servant, 0 Lord, but.regard me. with an eye of mercy. When it hears the emphasis on fer'vant, it expedts another conclusion; as, en- ter not into judgment -with thy fer'vant, O Lord, but enter into judgment with those who are not thy servants. The fame also will be found in the em- phafei on the words Jfght, and juzifed. So that the fenter -e will seem to point at several different meanings nd to have no consistency. But if it be read in t : following manner, the meaning and conneEtio: will be obvious. Enter not into ju'dg- ment w":ii thy fervant" O Lord" for in thy' fight, shall man liv'ing be justified. Here we fee the wvhol.; rc-aning is obvious, and that there is a great 1' more implied, than the mere words could ex- press, without the aid of proper emphases. Enter not intojudgment with thy servant, O Lord-That is, enter not, 0 Lord, into the severity of judg- nment with thy creature,-for in thy' fight,---which
is all-picrcing and can spy the smallest blemish- shall no man liv'ing be juftified-No man on earth, no not the best shall be found perfec, or fufficient- iy pure, to stand the examination, of the eye of purity itfelf.-For in th"y fight shall no man liv- 'ing be juRified. Upon this sentence thus pro- nounced, the following beautiful passage in Job may be a comment. How then can man be justified with God ? or how can he be clean that is born of woman ? Be- hold even to the moon, and it fhineth not.; yea the Tlars are not pure in his fight.- How much less man, that is a worm; and the son of man, which i's a worm. The following verse is generally pronounced in a manner equally faulty. If we fay that we have no fi\n, we deceive our- felv'es, and the truth is not i'n us: but if we con- fess our fi'ns, He is faithful and just to forgive us our fi'as, and to cleanse us from all unrig'hteouf- ness. " If we fay that we have no fiu",'-Here by- laying the strong emphasis on the wcrdjmy we are led to a wrong meaning, as if we only sKid it with our lips, but did not think so. 1-ow then can the conclusion follow of deceiving ourfClves? '\e may deceive others by lfying what is flfe, but it is only by thinking falsely we can deceive ourf:Ives. \Vhich is the true meaning of he wvo,- s properly tDronounced. Ps we fay tl.bat we' have no f'n, we deceive ourfel'ves -That is. I'f there ;c axny amnongcf ius, so vainly blin'd to their own faluIis, to-i 0 ima- gine they are withoiut fin, they dc cCiv,' tihemfelvcs, This sentence is not an afb!rmir.ivc one, but con- ditional. It does not fay that there are a'ny such amongst us; but; If there be any such an : thre- fore.
fore the conditional particle If, is in this cafe em- phatical. I'f we fay that we have nob i'n, we de- ceive ourfe'lves-and the truth is not i'n us. Here is another fault committed in laying the emphasis on the words i'n. us only, whilst the word truth, which is the important one, is slightly passed over, And the truth is not i'n us. That is, the opinion entertained cf ourselves is falie. This strong em- phafis laid only on the words ibn us, is the more un- pardonable in thofo who lay fiuch an emphasis on the word fay, because it by no means follows that the truth is not in us because we sav otherwise ; a man may think the truth, and fay the contrary ; and this very phrase proves the meaning of the text as before explained, that it relates to thinking, not saying;- as :it cxprefsly says the truth is not in us, that is, we think f.-,. :!y. " But if we confcfs our fi'ns"-Here again the false emphasis is laid on the word fins, whilst the principal circumstance that of confe'ffing our fins is iightly paired over. But if we confe'fs our fins,-- that is, if upon a thorough felf-examination, after having -discovered our fins, we make an humble acknowledgement of them, with a contrite heart, filled with penitence;- and a thorough desire and- intention of reforming; .(for all this is implied in the word con.fe'f, as no other fort of confeffion can be of ainy avail t-owards obtaining the confe- quential grace promised from it.) How emrphtical. therefore ought this word to be which implies so much ! There is another word in this sentence which is hurried over as if it were a'mere particle, when in this place:it is a word:of f'rong import, I mean the word but. It is usually read, buit if we confeRs our fins, as if it were a mere difjunEtive particle, Where-- as.
as but in this fituati'on s:ands in the place of the words on the other hand, as may be seen by reading: the two members of the fentcnce and uniting them, by those words.. I'f we fay that we hf.ve no fi'n. we deceive our- fe'ives, and the truth' is not i'n us;' on the other hand, if we confcfs our ins--- But-therefore standing in the place of words,. ihould be made emphaticai. Bas all particles are when. they are substituted in the place of words. But, if w.e confess our fin's., he is faithful and: just to forgive us. our fi"ns-- Who is faithful andri just to forgive us our fins ? Could any one conceive that it is the great God of the Universe, who is: here spoken of in f f light a way ? Thro'out-the whole service indeed the awful name of God. is treated so. familiarly, and, so little dif,. :guihed. cven from: any particle of:th-ree letters, as muf give great of- fence to pious cars.. It is said of the great Robert Boyle,. that he never, mentioned the name of God,. even in- private discourse,. without making a per- ceptible pause after it.. How much more would this practice become those who are engaged in the solemn aEt of public worthip, and how much would it add to the- solemnity of that worihip ?- In this particular text, some peculiar manner of diftinguill- ing the relative,, which stands for the name of God, is more essentially ncceffary, because his name was not before mentioned, and the fente;ce can not even be made sense without it. The pronoun He, should therefore be made very emphatical, and both be preceded, and succeeded by a perceptible pause; at the fame time the eyes should be devoutly .raised towards heaven, to explain arid enforce by the look, what is deficient in the expreflian. But, if. we c.nfcfs our fins, "He"' is faithful and just to !orgive
?forgive us our si ns, &c. These last words are generally as improperly read as the reft.--The chief 'emphafis is here also often placed on the word fi'ns, which not only marrs the sense, but produces a "fad cacaphonia, very disagreeable to the ear, by the three fucceflive emphases on the word fins in the 'fame fcntence. As, " If we fay we have no fi'n, we deceive ourselves, and -the truth is not in us; but if we confefs'our fi'ns, He is faithful and just to forgive us our si ns, &c." The want of laying the proper cmphafis on the word confess, in the former part of the sentence, produces the fame miffake in not laying it right on the wordcforgive in the latter, :as the one is a conifequence of the other. If we *confe'fs our fins, He will forgi've our fins. The words, faithful and jzuc, by being hurried over lose their whole force and import. W'hen properly pronounced, there is implied in them by means of emphasis, that God has entered into a covenant with man that upon confeflion and re- pentance he will forgive him his fins; his faith and juifice therefore are both engaged in the perform- ance of this covenant. IHe is fa'ithful and ju'ft, to forgiv'e us our fins-and to cleanse us from all unrig'hteoufnefs. Here the emphasis on the word unrighteousness, is as unfortunately placed, as any of the others, For the emphasis ought to be stronger both on the words cicanfe, and all ; the meaning of the sentence being, .That God, upon our confeilion and peni- tence, will not only forgive our fins, but likewise cleane us, not from unrighteousness only, but from *a'il unrighteou!nefs. He will purify us entirely, Co that no taint of our former fins shall remain. I shall now read. the text in the two ways, first in tihe usual manner, ind afterwards in what I ap- prehend
prehcnd to be the right way, in order that the dif- fcrence may be made more apparent. If we fa'y that we 'have no fi'n, we deceive our- fe'ivcs, and the truth is not i'n us; but if we con- fers our fi'ns, he is faithful and just: to forgive us our fi'ns, and to cleanse us from all unrig'hteouf- nlefs. Now in the other way. I'f we fay that we have n6o i'n, we deceive ouv-it selves, and the tru'th is notin us : But", if we con- fc\fs our fins, "He"-I i:s fa'ithful, and ju'fi, to for-. gi've us our fins, and to dclesanfe us, from all un- righteousness. Had there -been proper marks invented for em- phafis, fulch gross errours could not have been committed. And nmany passages in authors, are on that account, unintelligible to mi:st readers. To give a remarkable infance of this, in the play of Macbeth. There is a passage which, as it lhas been generally spoken on the stage, and read by mofl people, is downright nonfcnfe ; which yet in it(clf is a very fine one, and conveys an idc truly tub- lime. I mean an exprefElon of Machcth':" aitc'r 1e has committed the murder, wher lie l ays, W ill all great Neptune's ocean was\ , tlii I'lonl! Clean from my hands ? No---thefre my aiinds wiil raticr, The multitudinous sea incarnardin.e, Making the gren one, red. Now the lafi line pronounccd in that m"anne. c"il- ing the fe, the gr'ccn one. imakcs ;fi;at non{enic of it. But if we read it with proper cpail's and flop, and fay, making the g:-en--o'ne red. Here is a most sublime idea conivc-cd. timal his h--nds dipped into the fe., woul d cha.nge t!-c .olo!r c,. the whole ocean from reen to rd;: irmaking thel grcen-o'ne redo Nor. if we confider the ditfrurbcd {In 1C
fhate of his imagination at that time, will this thought;, hyperbolical as it may seem at first view, appear at all unnatural. For it is highly probable that ' his- fancy at that instant presented all obje.ts about him-as of that sanguine hue; nay converted 'the very atmosphere that surrounded him, into a- tea of blood. Particles whenever they are emphatical change; the meaning of the words from that which belongs to them as pronounced in the common way. Thus if we read this line of Othello in the following mnanner, Put out the light, and then, put out the light; it is nonsense. But by marking the particle th'e in the repetition of the fame words, a new idea and. a new meaning is presented to the mind. Put out the light, and then put out the light. That is, the light of life, put in opposition by force of this emphasis, to the light of the candle. Or else the emphasis on particles introduces ac- ceffary ideas not expressed in the words; or marks the degrees of emotion better than it could be done otherwise. Of the sirs we have an instance in these lines of Tamerlane: Can'ft thou believe' thy prophet', or what's more That power supreme that made thee' an'd thy prophet ?t Under this emphasis on the particle, an'd, is couch. ed the following meaning; ' this prophet wl-hom thou worfhippeft, and to whom thou payeft the chief honours, was only a Creature like thyself, made by the fame Almighty Being, and subject to the fame laws.' Of the other we have an initance in this line of Othello: Petijidon catch my foul lut I do lobve thee, H This
This is the usual way of pronouncing that line, by which its peculiar beauty and force is loft. But when it is repeated thus, Excellent wench ! Perdition catch my foul but I do love thee--- :the emphasis on d, .marks the vehemence of his affetion, much better than any emphasis on the verb love .could. For when the emphasis is laid on the ver.b love, <do, becomes a mere expletive, being an unnecessary sign of the present tense, But when an emphasis is.placed on do, it becomes an auxiliary verb, signifying an a& of the firongeft affirmation. Emphasis is of two kinds; simple or complex. Simple, when it serves only to point out the plain meaning of any proposition: complex, when be- sides the meaning, it marks also some affeEtion or emotion of the .mind; or gives a meaning to words, which they would not have in their usual accep- tation, without such emphasis. In the former cafe, emphasis is little more than a stronger accent with but little change of tone; when it is complex, besides force, there is always fiperadded a manifest change of tone. Simple emphasis belongs to the calm and compiofed underfianding; complex, to the fancy and the pailions. By means of Emphasis what passes in the mind is often shewn in a few words, which otherwise vwould require great circumlocution. Of which take the following inRfance from. the play of All for Love. ... --the 'ault was mine To place thee there, where only, Thou, could'f fail. na, -this scene Anthony, having found out that his ifiiend Dolabella, whom he had employed on a
commiifon" to Cleopatra, inifead of discharging the trust reposed in him, had fuffered his own paflion for that dangerous beauty so far to prevail, as to give up his friend's cause,, and urge his own love-fuit to her; at firit, upbraids Dolabella in the bitterest terms for his treachery. But after- wards whenr he cools a little,, and his affeRion for his friend begins to revive,, he palliates the fault of Dolabella, and. takes the blame to himself, by re- fliEing on the bewitching power of Cleopatra's charms, and th at he should not have exposed his friend to a temptation so irresistible. Now let us fee how much more there is implied in those words, to be conveyed by the force of ernphafis, than could be if the words were uttered without it0. ---the fault was mine To place thee there---.. To place thee in so dangerous a situation.; to give you an opportunity of a private' interview with a woman of such fafeinating charms - o " ----where only---- The single situation in the world in which ----Thou - Thou who wert my bosom friend; thou who*p perfeA honour and fidelity I have approved thro'out our whole course of friendship on all other oc- ca ions- S---coul'dft fail. could'ft possibly have been found deficient in friend- ship or in duty. It is this latter use of emphasis chiefly that gives. life and spirit to discourse, and enables it to pro- diuce its noblcft effeas. By this it is that we have H 2 it
it in our power not only to make others conceive- our ideas as we conceive them, but to make them. also feel. them, as we feel them. By the use of simple emphasis, truths may be conveyed, and the understanding enlightened, if the hearer will be at the pains of commanding his own attention. But by the use of the complex kind, the affct&ions and passions are excited, the fancy agitated, and the attention of the hearer engaged by the delight which accompanies the very ait of attending. In the former, the mind is for the mo{i part paflive; a rfate in which it can not long remain, with fatif- faEtion to itself. In the other its a&.ivity is rouzed, and it is conscious of that aEtivity, without any labour of its own; which is one of the mofr agree- able slates, that can be conceived, to the human mind, made up as -it is of relleffneis and indolence,. The mind thus constituted, grows equally weary of .an ina&ive fAate, or of much labour of its own ; but delights in being exercised at the expence of the labour of others. And this is one of the chief reasons, that dramatic representations,. have ever held the first rank amongfl the diversions of man- kind, from the effe&s which those of the beaf kind. produce, as described by Horace; S...----perius inaniter anlgi. SIrritat, mulcet, falfis terroriuts implet Ut magus, &c. And en the fame account the powers of oratory arc reckoned amongst the noblest that belong to human. nature,, and produ&tive of the highest delight that - -the mind can receive. But as the powers of orato- ry can not be. at all exerted without the use of em-. phafis; nor the pafions of the hearers be rouzed, or their minds intercfted in what is offered to them, 'without thc .uL< of the complex kind, what a pity
it is that so little care is taken about so important an article in reading. For the right use of which there is neither any method known, nor rules laid down in our course of education ; which is the chief rea- son that public reading is in general so disgusting, and public speaking so unaffc-bng. Whereas no- thing would be more easy than to inftrua children in the moftperfe& use of emphasis, complex as well as simple, at the fame time that they learn to read, and to make the fame progress in the one, as in th;_, other. The yet uncorrupt ear, and the flexible or- gans of speech, would be capable of receiving, diit tinguifhing, and uttering all the variety of tones in their just proportions, in the fime manner as in singing ; were there but preceptors equally qualified to teach them by rules, examples, and p1raEce. With regard to simple emphasis, it is certain that every man, who clearly comprehends whe't he fayv: in private discourse, never fails to lay the emphafisi on the right word; when therefore he is about to read, or repeat the words of others, or his own, in public, let him only refledt on the place, where he would lay the emphasis, fuppolirg theie words had proceeded from the immediate sentiments of his own mind, in private difcourie ; and he will have an infallible rule of laying the simple emphasis right, in all sentences, whole meaning he clearly compre- hends. This rule is so obvious, and so ea to be observed, that it is astonishing to find every where, both in reading and reciting, such an abuse or neg- let of emphasis. But the cause of this is easily ex- plained. In teaching to read by the. eye, masters infiru&i pupils in the use of such marks as are pre- fcnted to the eye ; now as there are no visible signs but letters and flops, and as the words are diftin- g: 'fhed from each other, only by a greater di fance H 3 between
between them than between the letters which corn- pose them ; and the different members of sentences, by little crooked figures; the eye has no assistance in the two most important parts of reading,' accent and emphasis; and therefore in those it is, that the chief blunders are committed. It is true, whoever is told that he is always to pronounce his words exa&ly with the fame accent that he speaks them, provided he be master of the right pronun- ciation, need not have any visible mark to point out the accent: but even this easy rule is so seldom inculcated, that there are few free from errours in this refpe&; especially when they attempt to read or recite any thing with more than usual solemnity and pomp. But with refpe&t to emphasis, it is im- poflible to lay it right, unless a man first has clearly comprehended the meaning of what he is about to read ; and as this is difficult to be done at fight, after long practice and experience, even by the best read- ers; nay as it is impoflible for them to do it without some errours, and never with the fame degree of accuracy, as after a perut{l of what they are to read aloud, how much less are we to expe&t it from such as are learners, even under the best inftrution ; but least of all from those, who are taught in fuich a method, as does not make this a necessary part of reading. I appeal to the experience of mankind, whether in general, any thing else be taught, but the pronunciation of words and observation of the f~ops; and whether any one, who can readily give utterance to all words offered to the eye, and put them together, or separate them, accordingly as the flops dired, does not think himself qualified to read any thing aloud at fight, so as readily to under- take it in the hearing of any persons when called upon ? All this arises from a mistake, which m-en naturally
naturally enough fall into, who judge of language only· in its written state; that sentences are wholly composed of words and flops,. because there are no other visible marks offered to the eye ;: but the man who considers language in its-primary and noblest slate, as offered to the ear,. will find that the very life and foul of speech, consists in what is utterly unnoticed in writing,, in accent and emphasis: And as the man who attempts to pronounce words, with- out observation of accent, really does not utter words,. but syllables; so the man w-ho attempts to pronounce- sentences,. without emphasis, really does not utter sentences, but words. So that in speech, words are the body; pauses and flops give it ihape and form, and diftinguilh the several parts of the body; but accent and emphasis, are the life, blood, and foul, which put it in motion, and give it power to at. And as nothing can be more te- dious to the ear, or irksome to the mind, than a long fuccelfion of mere lifeless words; we need not wonder that our public readers and reciters, so in- firu&ed, are either so little attended to, or heard with disgust. I would therefore recommend it to every one, whohas any thing to read or recite in public,, to re- fle& in what manner and with what kind of empha- sis, he would point out the meaning, if he were. to deliver those words,.as proceeding from the imme- diate sentiments of his own mind. With this point in view he can not fail of finding out the words, on which,. in that czfe, he would lay the emphasis. Let him therefore give a particular mark to those words, such as one of the accents used in Greek; that whenever he reads, he may be put in mind of laying a due stress on them, by those visible marks; otherwise he will be apt, from habit,
iabit, to fall into his usual manner of reading. And' in every recital, when the words are well fixed in the memory, let the chief article of attention be, to lay the stress upon those words only, which he hd before so marked. And this I take to be the fureftand best way, of countera£aing bad habits, arising from the very defective method, in which we are taught and pra&ised in the manner of reading aloud and re- citing. * If it be said,. that tho' in reading or reciting the works of others, men may be apt to make mistakes in the article of emphasis, yet when they deliver compositions of their own, or speak their extempo-- raneous sentiments in public, it is impo{fible they can be guilty of any such errour, I believe upon examination the matter of faa would be found; tfrongly against this opinion. For I have known few authors, and many inflances have fa!len in my way, who did not read their own compotitions ex- aEtly in the fame way as they would those of any other writer ; excepting perhaps their doing it with more emotion, and thereby rendering any absurdity in their manner the more glaring.. And with re- spect to extemporaneous speaking in public, I have not known many instances in my life in which the artificial manner,, got from a bad habit of read- ing, or imitations of others,. has not fupplantcd the natural manner of speaking ; and even in the bcft, their delivery has in many parts been much afl'e&ed by it.. The man is apt to harangue his fellow citi- zens, much in the fame way, as the boy was accuf- tomed to recite before his fch~ool-fellows ; unless where nature breaks thro' the force of habit, when the heart of the speaker is much engaged, in his fubje&, and when he delivers himself wholly from feeling.. I have-known fime inrftces of this kind.
ri reciting also on:the stage, where the fame per- formers, who in the unimpassioned and declama- tory passages of their charaaers, were generally wrong in laying the emphasis; whenever they en- tered into the more animated parts, and the pafiton which they represented took full poffeffion of them, were always right in that article. If th,e use of the simple emphasis, which has to plain, general, and certain a rule to point it out, be yet so mistaken, what shall we fay to that of the complex kind; which is infinitely more compre- henfive, intricate, and difficult ; and yet is utterly without either rules, or examples to point out its. true use ? Tho' this is one of the most important branches of delivery, since the power of animating and affieting the hearers depends much upon it.. As words are marks of ideas, to are tones-of ener- gies and affections of the mind; and as we can not make .known our ideas to others, without a fuffi- cient number of words, to mark, not only their difference in gross from each other, but also the nicer diftin&ions of degrees in the fame idea, to- gether with their various relations; so can not we manifest, or communicate to others the several feelings of the mind. in conceiving and uttering its ideas, and the various proportions of those feelings, without a suitable number, and equally regular and. nice diftin&ion of tones. But here art has entirely deserted us, and left us to guide ourselves as well as we can. And indeed all her exertions seem to have been confined within the bounds of written language, where fhie has the faithful eye to guide her by sure and fixed marks ; nor has she, hitherto amongst us, dared to make any excursions, into the more extensive, and nobler provinces, of spoken language, the ways thro' which are to be found only
enly by the information of.the uncertain ear; which if not well inftru&ed, and early cultivated, must ever prove a false guide.. Hence it comes to pass, that words, as marks of our ideas, are tolerably well regulated, and reduced to order; whilRt tones, the marks of our feelings, are left wholly to chance. The natural confcquencc of which has been that many difcourfcs, good in themselves, are pronoun- ced without affecting the hearers ; and that in: a nation abounding in good writers, a good fpeaker-is a prodigy. But of this I faill have occasion to ipe:k more at large under, the head of Tones. A't'prefelrt I (hall content myself with closing this head, by laying down the only rule, which appears to me to be of any confiderablec benefit in pr-aiELce, towards making the befl use that can be, as things are now circuirftanced, of the complex emphasis. And that is dire&tly the fame rule before laid down with regard to the simple emphasis.; that every one should centent himfclf.with the use of: thofce tore.. only that he is habituated to in speech, and to give none, other to emphasis, buat what he would do to the fame words in discourse. Thus whatever he utters will be done with ease, and appear natural; whereas if he endeavours at any tones,, to which he is not accustomed, either from fancy, or imitation of others, it will be done with difficulty, and carry with it. evident marks of affectation and art, which are ever disgusting to the hearer, and never fail to defeat the. end of the speaker,. LECTURE
LECTURE V. Of PAUSES or STOPS,. T H E next head of which I am to treat, is that of Pauses, or Stops. Stops or pauses, are a total cessation of found during a perceptible, and'in numerous compositions, a measurable space of time. The use of thee- is equally necessary to the speaker, and to the hearer, To the speaker, that he may take breath, without: which he can not proceed far in delivery; and that he may relieve the organs of speech, by these tem- porary rests, which otherwise would be soon tired by continued and uninterrupted action: To the hearer, that the ear also may be relieved from the fatigue, which it would otherwise endure from a continuity of found; and that the underflanding may have fufficient time to mark the diflindion of sentences, and their several members. Thefi pauses being thus necessary and useful, become ornamental also in verse, when reduced to exa&t proportions of time, in the fame way as in music. But as in common discourse, and in most compo- fitions in prose, there is no neceflity to observe such nice proportion of pauses, they have besides their duration, marks of a surer kind annexed to them, to point out their nature; and these are, certain notes of the voice, which declare of what kind the pauses are, at the inflant they are made; and inform the -mind what it is to expe& from them ;
"them; whether the sense is still to be continued in the fame sentence; whether the succeeding one is to be the last member of the sentence ; whether more are to cinfue; or whether the sentence be closed, and a new one is to begin. The great utility of this pra&ice will appear, when we confider how necessary it is that the hearer ihould be able to accompany the speaker in all that he utters, so as fully to comprehend his meaning; and therefore he should be spared the trouble of attending to any thing else, but his meaning. Now if pauses had no other mark of diftin&ion, but the time of their duration, it is evident that not only the speaker, must always be exceedingly nice, in observing the exa&eft propor- tion of time, with regard to the different pauses, (a thing scarce pra&ticable in. irregular discourse) but the hearer also, must employ his whole atten- tion, during those pauses, in measuring their exa&t duration, without which he muff mistake their nature; a thing equally impra&ticable, or which if attcmpted, must by this diftraation of the attention, do great injury to the principal point in view, a full conception of the meaning. Whereas, when the nature, or kind of pause, is declared at its be- ginning, by the sure mark of a note or tone of the voice, it matters not afterwards to the hearer, whe- ther the speaker observes any due proportion of time or not ; for he is at that instant prepared to accornm- pany him, whenever he pleases to set out; whether it be suddenly, or whether he chufes to delay long-. er than is neceiTary. For he knows by the tone what the pause should be, whether the speaker ob- serves the due proportion of time or not. It is trIue in poetical compositions, the skilful ear wiH not be satisfied. without a due obfcrvation of
the proportion of pauses, as well as founds; but it is because in that cafe, it has a right to be pleased itself, at the fame time that it is the inRtrument of conveying the meaning to the understanding, and its diifguft ariics from the disappointment. But the interests of the understanding receive no farther prejudice, the notes or tones {till proving sure guides to the ifenfe, than vwhat may arise from want of attention, occasioned by iuch difgutf of the ear. But in all fpccchcs and harangues that are more loose, and fiec from the fetters of meafiure, tiis circumfiance has given the fpeoIkcr such a power over the pauses, as; judiciously uird, may contri- bute mouch to the main point in vicw. that of firongly inculcating his meaning. For by this means, he ma .y '.'.vavs. proorpLoron his pau'{-s to the importance of the icfee, :nd not mer:y. t to the pram- matical fiuP,'re of :wor;s i:"n fentenccs, making like paules *to al of like ilrudi:e, withoi't dif- tinj'on. F-r infrnce, if tce be anv propo'tion or !entinent which he woul d cnforce r.ore {wongly than the reft, he may cither prcc:ed i;t bv a longer pause than 'iuai, which 'il rouz attentio, give it the more weight when it is delivered " oC'. lc: may make a longer paui.e af~er it is closed. ,.-iLich w\ill -iYe tine for tihe mind to ruminate ".U - i, and let it :ink deeper 'n- 'i b e fnc rcEt:e ; 0 according to the i>viT.0'nce o- the point, he m y do both. He m-v g it f rthcr, r'i .nkc a pin. beLfore .'hnme very eiph ia:Cl r< ,o:., viec ih the icnfe nor co;. n'on usage would idinit .o- " a:\" but this liberty is to be u~ld with , r', t c:a:utio For as such pauics excite uncommon a' Ltent ", a',-, of courfz raii e:xpectation, if the i:mp: t::ncc o :..: matte' be not fl an'fwlveabl" to uch- exn-.tt''- it -ill o c'io . d ilk .p o ,n ,m en t ',r'n-dt c u. T h.
liberty therefore is to be seldom taken, and never but where something extraordinary and new is of- fered to the mind, which is likely to be attended with an agreeable surprise. For paules of this fort put the mind into a state of fulfenfe, whhch is ever attended with an uneafv f nfation, and for which -t will always expe to have compensation made, by a greater degree of pieaflre, than it otherwise could have had. But in the use of the tones which mark the pauses, great care must be taken to avoid those two artificial tones, with which every one. is taught to read ; the bad effcts of which I need not now ex- ptia:te on, having {h:wn them ;et l-rge in my sir&s Jetkure. And as this is one of the chief sources of the difgutling .mc-notcny, and unnatural manner of ;elivery. which is so generally complain- d of in ,ur public rc.aders ard fpeakcrer;, too mnich pains -:.n not be taken to get the better of it. The truth is that the tones which mar-k the pauses in speak- "'nfT, have an infinite variety, according t to the mat- ter of the dificourfe, end difpcfition es mnind in the eak.er ; whe rea thof' in reading, as I fbewed be- fore. are reduced to two. I would therefore re- -.nmaimend it to every perton who has any thing' to deliver in public, to make use of the fame rule for his guide with regard to the tones belorging-to the #top s, as was before laid 'own with rcgrd, to those appertaining to the complex jempha',s. and for the fame rafons : becauc e is marr er of these, he will t'lo it with ease; his delivery will appear natural, and free from all marks of a~ec ation. By means of thefi tones that mr'ik the pauses, readers may at an'y t ne, when they find it neceffa- ry, take breath even at the fminllefT pause, without c:ejudice to the:I ffe ; as the tone, fufEciently . . ..r,2.
marks the nature of the pause, without reference to time: but in this care is to be taken by the spea;:ker that the true tone be given to -the paue at. the til_-i: it is made, for thus the hearer will have notice tha:. the sentence is not closed, and his attention is onily fufpendecd, without perplexing his underand.ing. And he may have a sure: rule for.ufin g the triec-ton-c, by giving exacly the f me one th't he would, w'c, he to proceed more qu!ckly to the next member ro the sentence, and were not to make a longer i! : than ordinary.. The want of knowing this circ..'.ri fiance, or rather the false rule by which peop1i': ;K inflruEted, that the breth is riever to be drawn, - .* t when there is a full flop or cl.Oce of uhe {n:- ., made it exceedingly diHcult to maniv to utii r. sentences and impossible to tiicfe who re ih ;i- winded. They are therefore either apt to run themselves entirely out of breath, (which is always disagreeable, destroying all force and grace) and net to flop 'till necessity obliges them to it from failure of breath; which is therefore likely to happen in improper places: or ele they subdivide the long sentence, into as many diftlinc sentences, as they make times of breathing, to the utier confa'fion ci the sense. For as they have been taught, not to take breath, but when they make a full flop, th,-cy habitually use the to:ne of a full Poop, whcneve they take breath. It is of as much importance to .. speaker, that he should have at all times a fu .-ci;.' command of breath, as that an organ should be Lu- plied with a proper quantity of air ; nothing there- fore can be of more moment to him than the prac- tice of the rule which I have laid down, as it will enable all who do not labour under some great infir- mity in point of breathing, to go thro' the lonigefi peric.ds, without any perceptible defeci. of that kind... I 3 There
IThere is no article in reading more difficult than that of observing a due proportion of fltops, occa- fioned by the very erroneous and inaccurate manner, in which they are marked by printers and writers, Stopping, like spelling, has at different periods of. time, and by differcnt persons, been considered in a great measure as arbitrary, and has had its differ- ent fashions ; and these falhions have been spread, aad become general, by being adopted by the print- ers most in vogue. The art of puntuation is of modern invention, and probably was not known, previous to the discovery of printing, at least we are sure that the Ancients made not any use of flops in their writing. A plain proof of what I asserted in my firfl leaure, that the art of writing amongfl the Ancients, was not c;lcul~te'd for the use we. put it to. of reading works aloud to auditors, but only to enable the fpcaker to get the words by rote, in order that he might recite them from memory. And happy had it been for the frate of modern elo- cution, that the art had still remained unknown ; for then every one who had any thing to deliver in public, must, like the Ancients, have been obliged either to recite it without book. or apply himself clofcly to fRudy the meaning of what he had to read, fa as to be able to deliver it.propetly. Nor ihould we then have had those reading tones, before men- tioned, which have been annexed to the flops; nor those false pauses and rests of the voice, which have been introduced by false puntuation : but every one, having no rules to misguide him, would of course follow the obvious one, that of reading words as he would speak them. It is evident that to mark the flops properly in writing, every perceptible cessation of found in the vice ought to have a mark ; but this is far from lbeing
being the cafe in the present pra&ice of pun&ua- tion, continual inflances occurring, where the voice ought to be suspended, without any comma ap- pearing; and instances as frequent, where commas are put down in places, where there ought to be no suspension of the voice. The truth is, the modern art of punduation was not taken from the art of: speaking, which was never fludied by the moderns, but was in a great measure regulated by the rules of grammar; that is, certain parts of fpecch ar< kept together, and others divided by flops, accor.i- ing to their grammatical confiruaioin, often without reference to the pauses used in discourse. And the only general rule by which pauses can be regulated has been either unknown, or unattended to : which is, 'that pauses in general depend upon eimphafi;. I have already fhcwn that words are fi±'ircicntlh- distinguished from each other by accent; but ".- point out their meaning when .rangce in finrencc:, emphasis and paufcs are neccqiry. Accent is the link which conne&s fylplables together, and forms them into words Emphasis is the link which con- nets words together, and forms '!hem into membec.- of fcntences; but that there rrny be no if,, to which emphatis the words belong, at the s., of every such member of a fentcnce there c,:u,.t to be a perceptible pause. If it be aiked why a pause should be any more nccciTarv to emp:afis than to accent, or wvh'y eu:ph;afis alone will not fufficiently diftinguiil the mrnenbers of -etrcnccs without pauses, as accent does words frOe.n :,t '-. other; the answer is obvious, that we are -i.p- acquainted with the founds of the xvwrds. -n can not miflake them when- dit.in&ly pron<rncedl, 1-ow- ever rapidly ; but we are not pre-acquainted weith the meaning of fentcnces, which must be point'd- 1 3 out
out to us by the speaker; and as this can only b done by evidently fhewing what words belong to the emphatic one, unless we make a pause at the end of the lakf word belonging to the former em- phatic one, we fh:ll not be able to know at all times whether the intermediate words betwecn two emphatic ones, appertain to the former or the lat- ter; which must breed a perpetual confusion in the sense. This will be fuailiciently illuRLrated by two of the examples given in my lciure upon Em- phafis : for in the line quoted from Macbeth, had they placed a comma at the end of the word greeri Es thus-- Par';i,'g the grce?, one rc ----- the sense cou!d not have been mifhLken. And lh:d they plreed three commas in the line quoted from All for Love, as thus-- 5t place thee cthere, , t C ,I-:, .corllJf f.il---- the full import of the paffege would have been at once perceived. VWhocver therefore has. a mind to read any piece correctly must fop according to this rule. Let him irft find out and mark each emphatic word ; then let him examine what nurnm- ber of words belong to that emphatic one, and at the laP of those let him place a comma, or such other iCop as the fene, requires. The tones apper- taining to these pauses, and the time taken up in them must be left to his own judgement : and his beir rule will be to reflteI what tones he would uPc, and what time he would suspend his voice, were he to speak them as his own immediate sentiments. And whoever reads any th!ng at fight, would do well to py as little regard to the flops as pofi;'b, ;.n:i be chiclvy at.P'i-. e to the mcaning cf othf .ardds, ;.Y.':C! S
Of the PITCH and M A NAG EM-E N T of the VOICE. The next points I 'am to treat of are the pitch and management of the voice; articles of the utmort importance to give doe force and proportion to alt the others. To the bei.ng heard with fatisf.t&ior, it is nfcect~lry that the speaker should deliver hi!:- self with cafe. But if he does not know how to pitch his voice properly, he can never have the d,.:c managemennt of-t ; and his utterance will be painfuil to himi{clf, and irksome to his hearers. Every i.eakr who is rin.t corrupted by b ad. 1a- bit, has Llire pich.rs in his vo ce, the high, Ia~v, and midd!e pi.ch. T'ihe middl. pitch is thatu.-whcii is ulid in ordinr.ry difc.o:ir"i, from 1,hich he eltc:cr rises or falls according as tl." matter of his difcour i, or emotions of his mind require. This midd" pitch therefore is wvhat ought to be gner.lly n{id, for two rc'-)ns; fii- , beca--'.::f the org"-:s of the voice are stronger, and more pi,1 le in tiis pitch, from conr;ifnt u ': Arid 'cc.div. ~ cc;auif it is more eafvr to rife or f 1i From th<-t clch, to higli or low. with rx i gIr;r I r.cpor r ' in. Mf.c peC fins, thro' va'?nt iof F'Ill nd pnraiice, wh.en tlhey read or i..)e:'k in p;b'.!lc, fji into one of they ut Li the !ov pitch, in wLi;ch tlicv r- not heard at all, or with so much tro.i;ble ro the lii:ncr, as soon to weary alte rntion or i tey anim at avoiding t-his fal, they run into the hi:h' pitchi; which is productive of concfeql'ences cq'.'lly )c. The or- ga~-ns of- the voice, in thius ui.ufjl pitch, are soon wa:.rifed, end clanguor mnd bioarlcnefs enifue. Andr as the reln for continuing- it, twill be cqually * iton g
strong during the whole discourse, as for the first setting out in it, the speaker muff lose all the bene- fits which arise from. variety, and fall into a dif- gufiing monotony. The prevalence of this praEtice arises from a common mifltake in those who speak for the first time in a large room, and before a numerous audi- tory. They conclude it impossible that they ihould be heard in their common pitch of voice, and there- fore change it to a higher. Thus they confound ·'two very diftin& things, making high and low, the fame with loud and soft. Loud and foftf in speak- ing, are like the forte and piano in rr.u!ic, they only refer to the different degrees of force used in the fame key : whereas high an.d low idnply a change of key.- A man may fpe:ik louder or softer in the fame key; when he speaks higher or lower, Ihe changes his key. So that the bufincL of every one. is to proportion the foice or ltoudnefs of voice, to the roem, and number of his auditory, in its usual pitch. If it be larger than ordinary, he is to fpeJk louder, not higher ; in his uful! key, not in a new one. And whoever neglets this. will never be able to manage his voice with cafe to himself, or pleasure to his hearers. It is evident that he who begins in the high pitch on a supposition th:rt he could not otherwise be heard, must for the f;me realon continue in that pitch throughout. And they who fct out under this de- lusion "re apt to continue in it all their lives, having biut little chance of being informed of their errour. So that whe:never they deliver any thing in public. they of co-irfe fall into this unnatural key, This errour is no where more obicrvable than iln-. the usual manner of rec'dGing Divine Service. The unnatural pitch of voiee is the first thing that
i-rikes every judicious ear, in the sirs sentence the clergyman utters, which is continued throughout ; nor have I heard many in my life who read the Ser- vice in their own proper pitch. The quantity of found, necessary to fill even a large space, is muc;h smaller than is generally imagined; and to the being well heard, and clearly underflood, a good and dilf tin& artic ulation, contributes more, .than power of voice. Poffeffed of that, a man with a weak voice, has infinite advantages over the strongest without it.. If the voice be weak, and the articulation good, the attention and {ilence of the auditory will be propor- tionally greater,, that they may net miss any thing that is said ; whereas they are.under no fuich appre- heniions from a loud fjoeaker. He who delivers himself in a moderate pitch, whenever his fubjea demands that he should rife to a higher, or fink to a lowe', does it with ease and due proportion ; and produces the effeas which are to be expeced from such change, and agreeable variety. Whilst he who takes a high pitch, can not rife upon occasion with- out running into discord, nor fink with any rule of proportion to guide him.. They who to avoid this. fault run into the opposite extreme, and begin in a lower pitch than is natural to them, err indeed on the safer fide, but areequally distant from the point of truth. It is true, it is more easy to rife gradually and proportionally than to descend ; but whilst they remain in that key, it will appear equally unnatural, and rimore languid than the other. And they will be very apt thro' the body of their discourse, to ruin chiefly into that key, in which they had set out. The true, t{ife, and sure rule (unless upon extraor- dinary occaiions indeed) is always to begin in your usual pitch of speaking; if that should not prove firong enough, strengthen it by praEtice ; if there be such.
fich a natural wc·kncfs in the orgrns as that you can not be heard in publich: ..Tcmb'is in that pitch, you had better give over rlI thougehts of appearing in them ; or if vou:: proohmon obii;'.es yo'u- to it, vo'i ruiuit give up all hopes o1f -eakin rce .... , a di agreeably, or even intelligbly. ' Ior ie who is ob- liged to frain his voice, in order to be heard, wi fccarce articu1lte wveI. The OcIce of articulation is of a very delicate nature, :,nd requires that the or- gins which perfor'n it, ihodi not be disturbed, or fiiffer.anv violence ; :'hich .. . al' v ys be the cac'" *when the voice is pulhd ouit o ."pon t~hern wih un- common fbrce. I have known iniitaices of perfoiin with very {i-rong voices, of wl:n in their utmno;t exertions of them, it has bec'n vcvy jPdy cbierved, that there was no hearing -,v'hl;. they iaid, they spoke fto loud ; for the torrent of the voice, left neither sime nor power in the organs, to flape the words properly, but bore away with it clutered and un- couth rnaales ofbolrtive fillables.. The best rule for a fpe .ker to ob-.rve is, never to utter a greater quantity of voice, than he can 'fford without pain to himelf, or ainy extraordinary effori. XVhilPc he does this the other organs of speech will be at libcri:y to diicharge tilcir i\veral offices with ease ; and he will always have his voice under com- mand. But whenever he tran[Frcffes therfe bounds, he gives up the reins, and has no longer any manage- ment of it. And it will ever be the fafeft way too, to keep within his compass, rather than go at any time to the utmof extent of it; which is a danger- ous experiment, and never juVifi.,ble but upon soma extraordinary emotion. For even in that cafe, the' tranfgrefiing the limits in the least,. (difficult as the task is for a speake.r to keep within bounds, when ander the influence of fach creiution) will scarce be p;ardonird :
ipardoncd : for, as the judicious Shakefpcar has well observed in his inibuftions to the player, ' In the ' very torrent, tempjef, and as I may fay whirlwind of v your pa/ion, you mnifj acquire and beget a temperance Sth.zt may give it fmoothnef=.' For the fame reaibn also, every speaker should take care in the manage- ment of the breath, always to get a fresh supply be- fore he feels any want of it; for whilst he has fomo tofparc, he recruits it with such cafe, that his hear- ers are not at all sensible of his doing it. Whereas if he waits 'till he is put in mind of it by any degree of unealinefs, he not only does it with more dirfi- culty to himself, but he may depend upon it that his hearers also have felt his uncafincis, and been fcnfible of his difficulty. For so filreg is the lym- r; thy between ths organs of pcccch and those of ]hcainsg, that the leaf unedfinefs in the one; is mme- diately perceived by the other. I fhlli clof m l obfer~'vations en this head with t\w-o rules; one. for giving fnrength and power to the voice in its natural pitch. The other foradjuft- ing the proper quantity or degree of ]oudnefs in the voice, proportioned to the size of the room and the number of the auditory. The first rule for {irength- cniing the voice, is this. Any one, who thro' habit, lhas fallen into a weak utterance, can not hope fuId- denly to change it; he mufti do it by degrees aind confant pra'tice. I would therefore recommcnd it to him, that he fhouid daily exercise hi~mnlf in read- ing, or repeating in the hcaring of a friend; and. that too in a large room. At nrit his friend should flind at such a distance only, as the speaker can eafi- ly reach, in his usual manner of delivering hinmflf. Afterwards le-t him graduiily increase his distance. ?nd the: speaker will in the fame gradual proportion increate the force of the voice for the method of ICr:e3th~ ofi
increasing by degrees is easy in this as in every thing else, when 'Ldden transitions are impra&icable; and every new acquisition of power, enables you the bet- ter to go on to the next degree. When he shall have thus got to that distance, beyond .which the speaker cannot be heard without straining, and forc- ing his voice, there let him flop ; and let that be the usual place of his {landing to hear the moit part of what is declaimed; because when the speaker, is able by pra&tice to manage his voice in that extent, he will certainly be able to command it in all the inferiour degrees. Tho' for the more gradual un- folding of the organs, and regular increase of the quantity of the voice, it will be always right for the hearer to begin at each day's exercise with the fhoi t- eft diflance, and increase it by degrees 'till he arrives at the utmof; in which situation, for the- reaion before assigned, the chief part of the exercifc ought to be perfermcd. The second rule for giving a proper degree of loudness, or issuing a i`ificient quantity of voice proportioned to the room <,ld thm e auadience, which is commonly called pitching the voice, is this. Let the speaker afccr having !oo(ked round the affmbly, fix his eyes on that part of his auditory vw-ich is farthefc from him, and he wiil me 'chatisllv endca- viour to pitch his voice 10 s thT it n-ay reach them. This is what we coniantly ~.-r.?itce in conmmaon dii- course, for we alwavs .ropi. ion the loudicfs or foftnefs of voicr-, to e dli ctic;cc of the perion to whom we are Up-;l-.ir.. 'ieen . the speaker there- fore shall have fixed his eve upon the mo,' dift nt part of his au:diences his tbuiineis is to conlidcer hn- ielf as addressing his di flo:'!vic to some o(ne ainong'iit them, in iuch a manner as that he may be loar-.'.' by him, and if the pcb:n be no beyond0 t.he reach 'fhis
voice, he will not fail to cffe& it. But still he is to take care not to change his usual pitch in order to do this, but only to add force or degrees of loudness in proportion to the diY{ance. This is what we do in life when we call after any person to come back; we add loudncfs to our voice according to the dif- tance he has got from us, but we never change the key, or bawl, till we find that he has got so far, as that his ear can not be reached by the natural pitch of our voice. He therefore who sets out in a higher "key than is natural to him, in order that he may be -heard by the mofP distant, may bejuftly said to bawl out his discourse, but not to dcliver *t. There is another material circum f.ance to be at- tended to in pitching the voice, which- ari-fs from the.conPrrucion of the room in which you are to speak ; some being admirably contrived for the pur- pole of fpcaking, and others quite the contrary. Of: course in the former, a much f:r?.llr oqu:ntitv of voice will do, th-a in ithe :ttcr. The fnirlf o(e1 t of every -,: kRer, ought to be to find out whether his voice c.n fil the room or not; and afterw 'rds to Cntii cecor1-..n! filling proportion 1 he q;anti"y ox i" " 0ccorily. ,y ,ig a room with the voice is me:-nt. when there is such. a qrantity of it uttered, as not only wil reach the extremities, b1ut return !aso to the i'cakcr. And a room may be f.id to be wel'l confrru:&ed for 'p'caking when tlhis is -cfe.d bv a moderate exertion of a common voice. The two0 e-trcns r-c when either a room thro' its fizc, or ill con -lruio. ill w .admit of no revc"beration, or vhen the rev'er'i-eraion is made by an echo. I {hali en+:avo-:r to hnd out what is hbef to be donc in t;he three c3es. In the firit cafe when the speaker can .11 the roo.n with hi voice, his bufincfs is to find ,.eut wha.t Cquantity wi!l be luricient to do it ; that he may neiticr ulnncf . !. LX
farily waste his voice by throwing out too much, nor diminish his power by using too little ; but that he may have a Fcrfea command and management of it, -according to the different degrees of exertion, which may be required in the different parts of his dif- course. The best way of finding this out, will be, to begin with a moderate quantity of voice, and to increase it gradually, till the speaker finds out the degree of loudness, that is necessary to fill the room ; which will be difcovcred to him bv the return of the found to his own ear, as soon as he has arrived at the proper pitch. With this degree or quantity of voice he is to deliver all the more forcible, spirited, and impaiiioned parts of his discourse. For tho' he n-ay be difcinaly heard with a smaller exertion, yet - it will not be in a manner fb fatisfaaory to the hear- er. Every speaker therefore in a well conftruaced room, which is not too large for his powe rs. may have an infallible criterion'by which t.' ;,a.dg:. o{ t!at point, as he may be sure that hw h. s oll.:1 he ears cf his auditory, when he has filledJ ti rooo ; and he may certainly know when he h.s hs ted the room, by the return of his voice to his own ear. Th'i i: one of the most valuable pieces of manag:ement thrat a public speaker can possess, and of which, with due ;;tten- tion, and a little practice, he may ed{ily become marter. This rule is on a supposition that the room is so constru&ed as to return the found gently and equably, without any perceptible echo. But in the second cafe where the found is sudden- iv reverberated by an echo, the difficulty to the speaker is much encrea!ed. Nothing is more apt to mislead the unwary and unskilful speaker, than this circumstance in a room; for as his voice founds much louder to himself on that account, he is apt t:; oenclude th,. h3 is te bettc.r heard ; whereas the ',v r?"
very thing which adds to the loudness, destroys ar- ticulation anrd cdifinir~ion of utterance. which are. eifentially necc{iary to the being underflood. For" the quick and sudden reverberation bs the founds which havebeen uttered, makes such a jumble with those which are uttering, that the whole appears a con- fused babble of something like words indeed, but ut- trly unintelligible. In the former cafe, when the room is well conftlu&ed for speaking, the return of the voice is made in a moderate and equable marnner ; in the latter, it rebounds like a tennis-ball. In the first cafe, the undulation of found rcfembles the cir- 'eles made in a frnooth water by the gentle droppinr in of a pebble, where all gradually increa[e in their circumference, and are regular in their fg.urs : t-,e other resembles the motion of the water when a ftoae is dashed violently into it, where all is irregular az-d confused. Nothing can rhew the ignorance whici prevails in the art of speaking in this age in a £Lror:g- er light than this very circumstance ; for there have been few rooms built for the purpose of speaking, in which the contrivers have not endeavoured bL 'artificial means to procure as fkrong an echo as po:- ftble, in order toaPfift the speaker, when it is of ?Il others the greatea hindrance to him. WVhoever therefore has the misfortune to be under a neceffitv of speaking in a room of that fort, has no remedy but this. He mufi lessen the quantity of his voice 'till he finds no perceptible echo. It is true this will put it out of his power to exert himfc!f, but all he can hope for in such circumstances is to be heard and underfl ood ; energy he must wholly give up, at least it must be confined to very small degrees. There is another kind of echo in some rooims, which does not- suddenly reverberate the founds, but takes up some interval of timc. H-Iere the K 2 fpeakcr
speaker mult take care to be much flcwer, and ifn- tin&t in his utterance than ulfu.t, and to make his pauses longer._ He is to attend to the returning found, and not to hegin after a pause till the found is: ceased. The third cafe is, when a room is si large or so ill conrtruaed, that the voice of the speaker is lo0i, before it reaches the extremities, cr so ifr spent, that it has not force enough to icturn to him. There are many enormous buildinigs of this kind; such as the old abbeys, cathdrccals, ad halls, in twhich the fueaker has no more advantage from being. covered, than if he were in the open air. The only rule the speaker has here, is what was first mention- ed, that of fiying his h 'eyes on the most ditant part of his auditory., and endeavouring to make himself- heard by them in his natural compass; but if that- cannot be, he is to ::liver himself to the reft with- as much force of voice as he can use without strain- ing. Beside those which have been already men- tioned, there are some rooms too spacious to make any return of the voice from the extremities, which. yet have, from the hollowners of the ground under- neath, a irong echo. This is the cafe in many oF o:-r cathedrals. \Vhatever speaker has the misfor- tune to be obliged to deliver himself in one of these, has nothing for it, but to furbmit to necefity, and; eo g thro' his work as wdll as he c~,n. .L - &, URE- ~
LECTURE VI. T0 N E S. ""I.US far. I have cornidcred the several points, . that are fun damentail. Iv, and c iffnt;? 1ly ne cc.l- fry. to every public ":pe!aker; w'itiout v'ich h: will be so far from man.:ing avy inmpre;orn on his hearers. that he .'il not be ab!e to comnnaind their attention, nor, in ii:anyv car fr, even ir:-lIe hImifelf underfLood. Y.L so lo',, is the site oCf -l(.ociuton amongfl us, that a man who is imafLcr "even of thCe rudiments of rhetoric, is comparatively confidcred, c:s one of 2an cxcClict delivry. 'This very circumP-arac- therefore, is a fui..ci.t irdcerent, to apiv clocily, at lctfI t~ the 'aftery of t hife points. But when a mna-n hIs got ib f) r, as I can ife no reason tha'- he fiould flop l there or thit he flo-uld not fartle cn e odevou.ln to make himnflIf matfer of cvery thing, which can add grace or force to his d.elivcy; I fha!i nfow attempt to lay open the Frin, ciplcs, that ¾ 'y serve as .:guides to hi.mu, in the use of the two re-aining :irticies. tones, and g.flure: upon vwhic'h, all that is Fleafurabie, or affecling in c!ocution, c'hiely depend. Before I enter upon "thle ,fujet of. tones, it ,will be nace5ary to :ii:, the prcci:e i eaning of the term I--n r:-' , to kno a" w iat it com'.:. hcn s. arid \v'n are itt bound::. K. 3 - d.e'.
were ;:fk;d, ' what they mean by the term language ?' as bei!ng a thing, which every rational creature, is supposed ne, ei';rily to know. And I fancy, upon fich a qicflion's being proposed, the first thought that would occur to every one, who had not pro-. pcrly considered the point, is, that language is conm- posed of words. And yet this is so far from being an adequate idea of language, that. the point in which most men think its very eiTence to consist, is not even a necessary property of language. For lan- guage, in its full extent, means, any way or method whatfoevcr, by which aHl that passes in the mind of one man, may be manifePced to another. And as., this is chiefly done by an agreement in the use of. certain signs, it is no matter what those signs are ;. there being little or no natural conneaion, between any verbal i-gns and our ideas, which is fufliciently evinced, by the variety of languages that are fpokeni. in the different countries of the world. It is true, the facility with which the communi.- cation is carried on, by means of the organs of speech, preferably to any other method-; together. with some other reasons, which need not here be enumerated,, have made mankind in general agree,. in making articulate founs or words, the fyimbols- of their ideas; but we have ample proof, that this. did not arise from a principle of neceATity, but con- v.eniency. For they who are born deaf, can make themselves underflood by visible signs; and we have it on the best authority, that the Mimes of the Ancients, were perfealy intelligible, without the aie of words. But why need I mention these, twhe% eveCry one lQi.o can read knows, that our doughts.
theughts may be communicated by visible marks,, as well as by articulate founds ? I am aware it will' be said, that written language is only a copy of that which is spoken, and has a onflant reference to articulation; the charaters upon paper, being only symbols of articulate founds, But tho' all who are blest with the gift.of speech, by constantly associating the ideas of articulate founds, to those chara&ers which they'fee on paper, come to imagine that there is a necessa-ry conne&tion between them, and that the one is merely a symbol of the other; yet, that it is in .itself, a manner of' communication entirely different, and utterly inde- pendent of the other, we have ample demonstration from this ; that it can be perfealy understood by those, who never had, nor ever could have, the leaC idea of an articulate found. This has been fully proved, in the cafe of many persons born deaf, who. vet could read, and understand written language perfecdly well, and write their thoughts with accu- rac vy. It may at sirs view be thought, that I am la- bouring a point, of little or no consequence, farther than speculation ; but as I think I thall be able to lhew, that this fundamental errour with regard to our general idea of language, in confining it to such narrow bounds, has had a remarkable effea upon our pratlicc; and that some of its noblest uses have been lo!t to us, thro' the want of a jufft notion of its comprehrnfion ; it must, be granted, that before I proceed, it will be necessary, in the fullest manner, to clear up that point. The allowed utility of any meaniure must be the first inducement, to enter on the pursuit of it ; and the reasonableness of it must e nfwn, before its utility will be allowed. ? ..- : <
In civilized countries, pofferi d of the rolikcaed wisdom of ages in books, the learned think they know, or have it in their power to know every thing that it is poflible for the human mind to be acquainted with. In vain have several new and important difciovcries, made in latter ages, as well as in our own times, fhewv.n how ill founded this opinion is. Learned vanity, which exceeds that of evcry other kind, till takes up arms againif any thing that is offered as new. And even amongaf the molt candid, on account of the many prcten- fi.ns thlat have been mr.de to new difcovcries, which have ended in smoke, the undcerfinding is exceed- ingly on its guard, en such occa;cuns ; doubts of every thing that is offered to it, which does not carry conviaion ; and will scarcely admit of any conclusion, that does not a:mount to demonstration. This is the cafe even in fubjeas that are in them- selves new, and which therefore have no prejudices to encounter: but vwhe the fubje&t happens to be of that kind which is ocpn to all the world ; which has noct only been an object of enquiry and examin- arton, in theory, but is aifo to be viewed in univer- fil praa;ice; and therefcre is of that fort, about which all mankind have formed certain opinions, or judgements ; it is evident, that the prepoff'efio=s to be encountered in that c;:-f. mull be much stronger; and that nothing is likely to remove them, but necessary conclutions, drawn from ielf-cvident premies. Of this nature, is the fTujrct of language ; which being used by ;ll m:'nkind, is of all others the fubje&t which nmnkiud in general, thnlk themselves bcil' acquainted with, and that of which they have the clea;rcl and f'.:llell co:nmprehenfion. And .yet It is.of all others, that cf wvhich the anoRe erroneous opinion'
spinions are entertained, and with whose true nature, mankind in general are least acquainted. The reason of this might be clearly shewn, were there time now for such an enquiry; but it ought to make the most knowing and learned of men, doubtful of their judgements in this article, when it it considered with what candour, the clear-fighted and judicious Locke, has acknowledged his errour in that point: and his ignorance of the true frate of language, 'till the precision, necessary to his.fubjeE&, compelled him to a itri& scrutiny into its nature : in consequence of which, he was divested of the prejudices, that he had imbibed from cufiom and education. With what ingenuous modesty has he confeffed, that confcioufnelfs of errour, firfl gave rife to those new and important discoveries, laid open in the third book of his E{ay, in which he treats of words! Where he says, ' I must confess ' that when I firt began this discourse of the under- ' standing, and a good while after, I had not the le aft. thought, that any consideration of words, was * at all necessary to it.' And yet this great man found, that he could not proceed himself with any certainty, or manifeu' his thoughts to others with any clearness, 'till he had first written an entire book upon that point, which he acknowledges he had before thought, utterly unnecessary; and 'till he had set himihlf right, as well as the reft of the world, in the miiftaken notions entertained of lan- gu-ge. What a pity is it, that this penetrating writer, did not carrv his enquiries farther into this im- portant fubjes&d as he feemrs in one place to pro- mise. WVe might then have had, as accurate a knowledge of the whole of language, as we now have, of tiat part of it which he ha;s laid open- to, .$S,.
us. But he confined himself entirely to that branch- of language, which related to his fubjec&, an en- quiry into the human underRianding; I>is only ob- ie& was, to examine the nature of words, as sym- bols of our ideas: whilf the nobler branch of" language, which conifits of the signs of internal emotions, was untouched by him as foreign to his purpose. And however we. may be indebted to him, for the new lights which he has given us into the fubje&, so far as he has g.on.: , vet it is to be feared, that by flopping there, he has not a little contributed, to th'j confined vi.w which we have of language, in considering it, as made up wholly of words. Our pains with refpe&L to language, are at pre- sent limited, to the narrow conceptcon which we have of'it ; and therefore arc whovly c.,fined to the knowledge and use of words : and I think I may venture to appeal to my beaiers, whether this is not the generally received.opinion ? and whether he, who perfccly, underfbA.nds the meaning of the words, and has the right use of them at command, is not thought to be a matter of language ? Yet, if it can be shewn that this is only a part of language ; if it can be fthewn that it has. other parts, absolutely necessary to the communication. of what patfes in our minds, which can not possibly be done by mere rwords; and that too in order to answer som.e of the noblest, and most important ends, of such social communication ; it must be allowed, that our pains ought not to be confined, to that part only ; but inould proportionally be extended to those other parts, which are equally necefrary, and in their cLonfequences of more importance. I have already shewn, that words are, in their *.wn nature, no c~fntial part of language, and are only.
only considered so thro' custom. I shall now pro- ceed to shew, that .when by cuflom they are made a necessary part, they are still only a part ; that they cannot possibly effe& all the purposes of social communication ; and that there are otherparts, essen- tially neceflary to answer its noblerf-and best ends. Words are, by compat, the marks or symbols of our ideas; and this is the utmost extent of their power. Did nothing pass in the mind of man, but ideas; were he a different kind of being from what he is; were he like the Houynhms of Swift, always direced by a cool, invariable, and as I may fay infinlive reason ; to make known the ideas of such ai mind, and its internal operations, would not be beyond the power of words : and a language corn- posed of words only, provided there were a fuffi- cient number of them, so that each idea, and each operation, might have its diftin& mark, would sus- ficiently ant,er the end. For this we find effe&ed amongst us, in all matters where simple reason, and mere speculation is concerned, as in the inveftiga- tions of mathematical truths. But as there are other things which pass in the mind of man, beside ideas ; as he is not wholly made up of intellec;, but on the contrary, the pas- fions, and the fancy, compofc great part of his complicated frame; as the operations of there are attended with an infinite variety of emotions in the mind, both in kind and degree; it is clear, that unless there be ofme means found, of rmanifciting thlofe emotions, all that passes in the mind of one man can not be communicated to another. Now, as in ordcer to know what another knows, and iin the fame manner that he knows it, an exa& tran- script of the ideas which pars in the mind of one m.an rmuf: be mad: by fcnfible marnaks, in the mind of
®f another ; so in order to feel what another fee., the emotions which are in the mind of one man, must also be communicated to that of another, by sensible marks. That the sensible marks necessary to answer this purpose, can not poflibly be mere words, might fully be proved by a philosophical disquisition into their nature, were it proper at pr'cfent to enter into such an enquiry: but this point may be made sus- ficierntly clear to answer my present design, in a shorter way. It .is certain that we have given names to many of these emotions, at leai to such as are of the strongest, and meof remarkable kind, tho' much the greater part of them, and the diilerent degrees of all, remain without narmes. But the use of these names, is not to Rfand as types of the emotions them- selves, but only as signs, of th(e nimplc or complex ideas, which are formecd of those emotions ; that we may be enabled, by the help of those rin;s, to difringuifh them in the under j-ndiPn, and tra.t of their several natures, in the Iriuc cool mani:-cr as we do with regard to otherc ideas, that lIavc' t' cco:- ncftion with any emotion of the min;!. Every one veill at once ackno.vled"Ce th':.t the terms anger, fear, love, hatre'di, itv, g",ri. w...il -not excite in .him the fcniations of those "re-.'.. r-s., and make him n sgry (,r afraid, compa'n ;V-c':m c on " erievcd ; nor; should a mn decl0rc 0rCicif to be under the influe.'nce of any of thl'cfc p;:.io., i t. e imofL explicit and Vr ong words t!' at thei l-- i',gi'a;: c.an arFord, iwould he in the k 1. :{ u, ov g' Yiny credit, if he u{cd no ot1iher nis brt .-c-i . If" one should fay in tlhe i:m tone cf o .c:- ti he uses in deli ring i" ia 0 nt "" *''.ions fim a cool underitanding, ' Sure n;v:r .:,' i. ortal e ,,'. si ' ovcrwhenl:.d w , -,ith .-ii s at i ,; u ti ti;s r.) -;-i:o i.2 -.,~
Or, M Iy rage is rouzed to a pitch of frenzy, I can : not command it : avoid me, be gone this moment, ' or I shall tear you to pieces :' sure no one would feel any pity for the distress of the former, or any fear from the threats of the latter. 'We should either believe that he jerfed. or if he would be thought serious, we should be moved to laughter at his ab- fiurdity. And \iwhy is this ? but because he makes uTe of words only. as the signs of emotions, which it i iimrpof'mble they can repreCent ; and omits the" u!e of the true fiigns of the passions, which are, tones, looks, aind geftuics. This will ecrve to (hew us that the language, or fcLubic nlmalk-i, by which the emotions of the rind. are di'covcrc,, atd c()irn'uVicateCd( so rC man to mn, arce entirely di.crcent from w- Isw 'nd iidCp-ndrn of them. Nori was this kin, ot lang'u:te left ".' the invention of man, or t'. th,- chantce of fch -Go. bitrarly mark, .s he holti thinkl proper to affix to the paf'ions, in order to char'L.-r-dre them : n., it was k.ec'.T.:y to foc -t;, -nd to thc tute of hu'marn at^ure in g.:·ner;:: t.!h t th. kt ;7'.i ce of the r::i-m; l p.i oi s ofi man i t Iea':, hculd: be fxed, ,li-cvid: , and univ ri ..ly inccll i : ; fnd i. has accordingly l.-en impreffcd, by th'." uncrrir' l nd of 1nature, ,: of the intellc,.ial ficu" lis t.. an' em ncl t (dc r.., could fall to the lot of ibut a I ' fa r,:'rtion of II::.;n- crn not be ncqiired by much t c, g-etr i.r, bt by fa.ch co :-; it ...bo.r ... d ind; - ry a" :il ,Ford no timre , O- coni;: .n: tiVe .lud s. B. to', it be no' it is. ncce.f ry" that tl-hcy itould fel m- .c-, acnd hav c a mutual sympathy, in whiatfoiver a:ff:c ih.eir fecL ... cr.at'r3E . Al, our aec-tions thcrefore and emrn-
tions, belonging to man in his animal afte, are so diftinAly charaterized, by certain marks, that they can not be miflaken; and this language of the pas- fions, carries with it the samp of its Almighty Ar- tificer; utterly unlike the poor workmanship of imperfce man, as it is not only understood by all the different nations of the world, without pains or study ; but excites also similar emotions, or corref- ponding eff.&ts in all minds alike. Thus, the tones expreflive of sorrow, lamentation, mirth, joy, hatred, anger, love, pity, &c. are the fame in all nations, and consequently can excite emotions in us analogous to those paflions, when accompanying words which we do not undei sand : nay the very tones themselves, independent of words, will produce the fame effeats. as has been amply proved by the power of musical imitations. And tho' these tones are uf{ally accompanied with words, in order that the und.errlandi ng may at the fame time perceive the cause of there.ee.otions, by a communication of the particular idt'as which ex- cite them; yet that the whole energy, or power of exciting analogous emotions in others, lies in the tones themfdlves, may be known from this; that whenever the force of these paflions is extreme, words give place to inarticulate founds : sighs, mur- nmurings, in love ; sobs, groans, and cries in grief; half-choaked founds in rage; and shrieks in terrour, are then the only language heard., And the cxpe- rience of mankind may be appealed to, whether these have not more power in exciting sympathy, than any thing that can be done by mere words. Nor has this language of the paftions been con- fined to man only ; for in that refpea, he seems to be included in the general law, given to all animals that are not mrate, or w-holly incapable of uttering anV
any found; as they also express their pamfYons bv certain tones, which striking the auditory nerves of those of the fame species, always produce corref- pondent effeEs : inasmuch as their kindred organs, are invariably tuned by the hand of nature, in uni- son to those founds. But it is to be observed, that each fpecieos c animals, seem to have a language of their own, rn:. at all understood, or felt by the reft. The lowirg f the cow asse£&s net the lamb ; nor does the czif regard the bleating of the fnheep. The neighing of the steed, calls up all the attention of the horeI-kinrd ; they gaze towards the place from whence the found cmes, and answer it, or run that way, if the fLc.-d be not in view : whilif the cows and sheep raise rc::. their heads from the ground, but cbntinue to f..>', utterly unmoved. The organs of hearing in ctc:. species, are tuned only to the founds of their own : and whilst the roaring of the lioness, makes the forest tremble, it is the sweetest music to the car.; of hers young. This shews us, that the auditory nerves of animals, are conftruled in such a way, as to be affet&ed only with fucli founds, as irme- diately regard the two chief ends of their being ; the propagation, and preservation of their fpecic : all other founds therefore, excepting such as excite sympathy or antipathy, are indifferent to them.- Sympathy, with those of their own kind ; antipa- thy, against such as are their natural enemies, or deflruitive of their species. Those which excite sympathy, may be supposed to be all in concord; those which rouze antipathy, to be discords ; which by creating an uneasy sensation, immediately difpofc them to flight, to avoid the enemy. Thus the cry of dogs, warns the hare of his danger: and the howlings of the wolf, alarm the flock. The dif- L 2 fercnt
ferent species of animals, may therefore be con- fidered, as so many different nations speaking differ- ent languages, that have no commerce with each other; each of which consequently understands none but their own; excepting only those who are in a state of warfare ; by whom the language of the enemy is fuHiciently understood, for the purpose of felf--prefervation As the paflions and emotions of the-feveral kinds of animals, are very different, according to their different natures, so is there an equal diversity of tones, by which these several paflions and emotions are expressed: from the horrible roarings of the lion, to the gentle bleatinge of the lamb: from the loud bellowings of the wild bull, to the low purring of the domelic czt. But as there is no paflion or emotion whatsoever. in the whole animal world, which is not to be found in man, so equally compre- henfive is the lngu.rgeu of his ptffions, which arc ill manifested by suitable tones. The roaring of the lion, is not more terrible than the voice of his anger; nor the cooings of the pigeon, more soft than the murmurs of his love. The crowing of the morning cock, is not f6 clear and sprightly as the notes of" his joy ; nor the melancholy mournings of the turtle, to plaintive as those of his woe. The organs of hearing therefore in man, are so conftruced, as not to be indifferent to any kind of tone, either in his own species, or in the animal world, that is ex- preflive of emotion or pavlon : from all they re- ceive either pleasure or pain, as they are affe&ted with fynipathy or antipathy. It is true that like the several tribes of animals, man is most affeced, or has the strongest sympathy excited, by such tones as are uttered by those of his own species ; and in proportion also by thafs which meQt nearly re- femble
ftmble them in others. We are moved mort by the diRrefsful cries of those animals, that have any fim- ilitude to the human voice, such as the fawn, and. thehare, when seized in pursuit by dogs. But Rfill we both- feel and understand the nature of all others.. Nor can any animal utter any found which we canr not explain, or tell from what emotion, or pafinon it proceeds. This di{tinguifhing faculty was ne- ceffary to man as master of the animal race, that by understanding their fevera; languages, he might relieve their distresses, and supply their wants.- And indeed we find, that the tones of all domeltic animals, expressive of their wants or difreffTes, have a wonderful power over the hum m heart, and me- chanically rouze us to their relief. Thus exrcnfive as are the poxwers of the Iuman ear,. those of the human voic: do not fall fh~CIart ( them ; but are ex'acly suited t m t..cn in, d-ngr;e :,a. comorehenfion-; there is no ton.. .vi:ch the ear canr diflinguifh, that the voice, by pains and praE&ice, is not capable of uttering. Hence it comes to pals, that as man underlfnds the languarge o.f the different tribes of animals, fh he can mike himiel' undei-rfocd by them. The horse rejoices in the applauding tones of his rider's voice, and trembehs :,lhen he changes them to those of anger. \Vhat bLandi{h- ments do we fee in the dog when his .maticr foioth:s him in kind notes; what fear, and even fl.me, when he changes them to those of chidinsg ? By those the waggoner direJs his team, and the hlerdf- man his flock. Even animals of the most faCvage nature, are not proof agrinlt the collelive powers f the human voice; and ifauts of multitudes .vili u(.. wild beasts to flight, who can hear witheut err.otica the roarings of the thunder. But that man should be furnrirfed with such an *extensive power in there points, even in his anima I L 3 ftat% ,
that in his tribe are to be found, all the emotions and passions, that belong to all the several tribes: consequently all the marks expressive of those emo- tions, or such as are similar to them, should belong- to that tribe. If man is capable of being the most social, the most tender and affetionate to those of his own species, of any animal; he is at the fame time, capable of-becoming a greater enemy, and of having a ifronger hatred and detestation of them, than is to be found,, even among{R the different tribes of animals, that are born in a natural state of: enmity. All the natural language therefore of sym- pathy, and antipathy, should be given to him in a higher degree, for the fame reason that it is in a more limited slate assigned to the several tribes of animals. Thus far we find, that man, in his animal ca-. pacity, is furnished, like all other animals, by na-. ture herself, with a language which requires nei- ther ifudy, art, nor imitation ; which spontaneous- ly breaks out in the exa&eflR exprelions, nicely pro" portioned to the degrees of his inward emotions; and which is not only univerflily understood, but felt by those of the fame species, as also in certain. degrees by the reft of the animal world. That ani- mals ihould come pcrf.& from the hand of/nature, in this refpet, as well as in every thing clfe, feemrs reasonable from this consideration ; that they are ut- terly incapable of improving themselves, or of mak- ing any alteration in their frames by their own care or pzins; their several faculties by an invariable law, growing to perfe&ion, and decaying with their bodies, with as little afifbance from them- selves, as vegetation in heibs or trees is performed 4i tihe infcn~ tiye woredd. As the sirs of animalh, nat~r~rf'
a ture has not been less provident with regard to man ; on the contrary this, as well as all his other animal faculties, is bestowed on him in a degree suitable to the superiority of his rank. But as man is something greater than the first of animals ; as he" is the link between animal and spiritual beings, and. partakes of both their natures; other faculties, and other principles, belonging to his nobler, spiritual part, disclose themselves; of which there are no traces in the animal world.. The first great diftind-ion between the human and animal species,. and which seems to mark their boun- daries, is this: that it is in the power of man, by his own pains and industry, to forward the perfec- tion of his nature,. And what the nobler part of his nature is, is clearly pointed out by that dif- tindion ; because it is that nobler part only, or such of his animal faculties, as are nec.effry to forward: the perfecion of that nobler part, which are capa- ble of improvement by such pains. All the organs and faculties of his body necessary to his animal life, are so fashioned by the hand of nature, that they grow of course to perfe&ion ; but the organs, (if I may be allowed the exprefiion) and faculties of his mind, necessary to his rational life, are only in embryo ; and it depends wholly upon .the afTiftance- of others, together with his own care, to give them birth, and bring them to maturity. Hence arises the necefflity of a social ifate to man. both for'the unfolding, and exerting.of his nobler: faculties. For this purpose, a power of opening a; commulnication between mind and mind, was fur- nifhed in the most easy way, by beflowing on him the'organs of speech. But flill we are to observe, that nature did no more than furnish the power and mean.s; Tfie did not give the language, as in the cafl of the paflions,.. but. left it: to the industry of mncn3
Smen, to find out, and agree upon such articulate. founds, as they should chufe to make the fynmbols of their ideas. And the seems to have laid down the fame general law, with retpet to every thing which. regarded the nobler part of man ; to furnish nothing but what was abfolutcly necessary, and leave the reft. to his own indufry : from the exertion of which, his merit was to arise, and his pretensions to land. a candidate for his admission, into an higher, and happier order of bcings. Accordingly as she did. not furni{h the words, wh;ch were to be the sym- bols of his ideas; neither did she furnish the tones,. which were to mranifeit, and comrmuniccte by their own virtue, the inte-n:! exertions ?and emotions, of such of his nobler f .clties, s chiefly. dift'in,'ifh him from the brite species; but left lh-nim Ilfo, like words, to the c.a're and indvention of m:.-n i; content- ing herself with fipil:i'n, him w'th ,n irftrument,. of such a compass as .would furnif ll si :ficcnt vacri- ety of tones, to an!wv,-r ll the v.iric-ty of emotions, exertions, ond cn-rgies o fall his facl.ties, if fought for, and tiitled by a:g. cement, to b': their marks. Nor has rt rfor.-! those which are of her invention to be of leis ckic:cv, or less cp? ibc of exciting cor- ref;ond-nt emot ions, t.hn th:re even of nature, when cfftbliied cby cIom ; in tl i's ca;fe justly call- ed second nature. '"he only difference between. themn Iving in thIs, t:i-ii the tones of the animal pas- fions, of themr{elves excite analo ',ous emotions, with- out the intervention of anyr thing elfc; they are un- derftood, by being felt. But the tones resulting from the emotions and c xiertions of our nobler facul- ties, tho' they excite fgeling. as it is in the nature of all tones to do Lo, yet it is only of a vague and indeterminate nature; not correiponding to the energies in the mind of the speaker, unless they are associated with words, or the symbols of the ideas, wh:c i.
which give rife to those energies and emotions ; theii nature and degree then become fixed, and the hear- er both feels and underltands them. W'hen any tones therefore are affixed to certain modes of ex- pression, and adopted into general use; those tones, tho' they have no natural conne&ion with the fenri- ment, no more than words have with ideas; yet by such association, beceme equally intelligible, and equally affeding with those that have, and are made part of the language; insomuch, that were tho1l expreiflons to be uttered, without those tones, they would not convey their full meaning. r Thus far I have eonfidered tones, chiefly in con-. tradiftin&ion to words, as the types and language of b-he passions, and all internal emotions, in the fame way as articulate founds, are the types and language of ideas,, independent of any such emotions. BuC. when we come to examine the powers of each in- their full extent, we shall find, that tho' words ar= limited to their peculiar office, and never can fuppyV the place of tones; yet tones, on the other ha:-i,- are not confinedto their province, but often supply the place of words, as marks of ideas. And thoe the ease and diifin&nefs. with which our ideas are marked by articulate founds, has made all mankind agree to use them in discourse, yet that tones are- capable in a great measure of supplying their place,~ is clear from this; that the Chinese language is chiefly made up of tones., and the famn individual word {hall have sixty different meanings, according to the different tones in which it is pronounced. Here then it is clear, that fifty-nine of the sixty ideas, are marked by tones ; for the fame individual word, pronounced exa&ly in the fame manner, can not pof- iibly by itself, be a clear and diftin& mark for more than ene idea. This indeed has prodigiously increased the iffcul ty of their language, so that it is fcarccly possible
for strangers to acquire it ; and it is the labour of a man's life, even among the natives, to make him- -'felf fully master of it. Such a use of the tones therefore, in equal extent, has not been adoptedc by any other nation. But there are none which have it not in some degree. It is true there tones amongst us, are not annexed to words in their fe- parate tatc, but only when they are ranged in fen- cences; and he mufi be very ignorant of speech who does not know, that the fame individual words in a sentence, shall have fevera, very different mean- ings according to the tones which accompany the emphasis. To the use of these tones is owing in a great measure conciseness of discourse; and the ne- cefity of multiplying words in a language, to a. degree that might make them burthenfome to the memory, is removed. Nor are there the only ad- vantage:s arising to language from tones ; for by thus letting off words by tones, and making them deter- mine their meaning, an agreeable variety may b«. introduced, into the most abftra&ed and philo. fophical discourses, in which there is no room ser the language of the passions aad emotions; and which consequently must occasion disgust, and soon weary attention, if delivered by the use of mere words, in one dull uniform to.ne. On the fame ac- count it is fortunate also that tones have been made the marks of the several pauses; and the links which unite together the several members of fen- tences and periods. But beside the use of tones, in the exertion of his animal, and intelletual faculties; there is ano- ther part of man's nature which seems to be the link that joins the other two, a great part of whos® exertions, have their very essence, so far as they are communicated by the voice, in tones; I mean the fancy.- -To onc branch of this part of his frame, Nature
Nature herself has furniflhed matter for a language, different in its kind from all other, and peculiar to man; I mean, risibility; and this matter, accord- ing to the exertions of fancy, is to be modified inte an infinity offhapes. There is a laugh of joy, and a laugh of ridicule ; there is a laugh of anger, and a laugh of contempt. Nay there are few of. our pas- fions, to which fancy can not adapt, and associate this lnguage. And should we trace it thro' all its several modifications and degrees, from the loud burst of joy, to the tones belonging to the dry sneer of contempt; we should find, that an extensive, and cxpreffive language, independent of woifids, belongs to this faculty alone. Let any one who has been present at a well-aded comedy, only refle&t, how very different the sentiments, charaders, and humour have appeared, in the reprefcntation, from what was conveyed to him by the mere perusal of the words in his closet, and he will need no other proof to shew him how necessary, and how extensive a part, the tones make, of the language of fancy. From what has been said, it will iufliciently ap- pear, how grossly they are miflaken, who think that nothing is effentialy neceiTary to langurge, but words: and that it is no matter, in what tones their fntiments are uttered, or whether there be any used, so that the words are but diftinaly pro- ea®unced, and with such force of voice as to be clearly heard. Since it mulf be allowed, trht the use of language is not merely to communicate ideas, but also all the internal, operations, emotions, and exertions, of the intellectual, sensitive, and imagi- native facuitics of man: since it must be allowed, that from the frame of our language, our very ideas cn not be communicated, nor con:rqucntil our meaning underifood, without the right ufc- of tones ; as many of our ideas are marked and ditfinguifiled from each other by tones, and not words: and since it
it must be allowed, that the connexion or repugo nance of our ideas, their relationship or disagree- ment, and various dependence on each other in fen- tences, are chiefly pointed out by tones belonging to the several pauses. When therefore we refle~ , that not only every thing which is pleasurable, every thing which is forcible and affcfting in utterance, but also the moil material points necessary to a full and diftin& comprehension, even of the sense of wvhat is uttered, depends upon tones; it may well afronifh us to think, that to essential a part of language, should in a civilized countly be wholly negickted. Nay worse. that our youth should niot only be unin- ftrufed in the true ufc of thei;. but in the little art that is used, they fiould be early pervertc: d by false rules, utterly repugnant to those wich nature has clearly pointed out t, us. In conkcqLicince of which, ;ll the nobl '-ndis which migit he aniverd "in a free fate., b:y a cle.r, lively, and af-cir,.g n)':b.lic elocution, are in a 1;ni-t rne: LurCe 1I to us. -nd how can t b. o"' heif; hn ,, have givn ,p? the vivifying energ ti:c ianguag, LnpI d by God hifelf ipon( our natures, for 1tat wi-ch is the cci, iifel.ls work of art, and inve,-tion of man ? and brtercd that which ca;n penetrate the inmoi: recc!ik: ofi.' 0 i" heart, for one which dies in the c£2r, cr f'des cn the fight. I should now p1rcced to :ly down frmc pr'"-icai rules and obierv tio:Cs, with S' ra< id to inSs material article, bu:t tihat ther. is AniClh.er branch cf Iran- , ,agee so nearly conn.. d .: ith t-is, thl t a rulesC in regarcd to tlhe onc hve a neceiiary rrlatic;n to the other:' and therci1 c it will be b<;ti the 'i.ort- eft, and clcarc nrcnthod., to -.lce . L.c:n_ t "ogether in view. The branch w Ich n-e.n is th;:t .-.; .f 1anGuacC whicl i3 . :_.ifLetcd to fiht, by1, the : -;. prRinon'ofthe .co....cc and g.ur. : of whc
LECTURE VII. GESTURE. I ITHE RT 0, language has been confiderecd, as addressed to the mind, thro' the ear, by means of words, and tones. But Nature did not trust an article, so essential to the well-being of man, to a communication by one sense only; she has also made it virable to the eye, as well as audible to the ear. So that the deprivation of either sense, should not wholly prevent the exercise of man's nobler fa- culties. As she has. annexed tones to the paflions, to make their exertions known thro' the ear i-b has she associated to them looks and gefnures, to manife1 them to the eye. The one, may be jiftly called thb speech ; the other, the hand-writing of Nature. And her hand-writing, like her spee-ch, carries evident marks with it, of its divine original ; as it Gorrcf- ponds exaatly to its archetype, and is therefore uni- verfal1v legible, without pains or Pfudy; and as if contains in itself a powcer, of exciting fimnilar, or analogous emotions. Not like the writing of man, which having no affinity with its archetype, can be understood only by pains and labour; and con- taining no virtue of its own, can of itself, commu- nicate no emotion. Nor is the writteni language of Nature l-fs exprcf- five, or lets copious, than her speech. They seem nicely suited to each ether, in degree and power; in their effets exuctlv fii'ilar, havi:-g o other dif"- ferrce,c-, but wh..,t arifts from thc diiFernce of the ?M. crga s.b
organs, thro' which they are conveyed. .As every palion has its peculiar tone, to has it, its peculiar 'took or geflure. And in each, the several degrees are marked, with the nicest exatnefs. Both indeed proceeding from the touching of one mafter-firing, internal feeling, muff always answer to each other, if I may if n;eak, in perfect unison. Thus far they are equal in point of expriion ; and with refpc& to copiousness as it has been before observed, that the human voice is furnished with an infinite variety of tones, suitable to the infinite variety of emotions in the mind ; so are the human countenance and limbs, capable of an infinite variety of clanges, suit- able to the tones; or r-ther to the emc tions, whence thev both take their rife. To this purpose every nobler organ in man's cor;plicated framc, and the vwhole animal ccononmy contribute. The nmuiclcs, jr~'ves, the blood and animaln spirits, all are rt work -to shew\ internal comrrmction. Tie contirlion or remniiion of.the solids, thewn by cour-: c·-ls exe:r- tion of aCion, or pulillanimous ticmtling ; the r'irhing or withdrawinp of the fluids. fe,-n in bluflh- ing or paleness ; are frr:ong and ieif-cvidcnt charac- ters. But of all tie ori;a.ns, the eye. rightly called the ' indow to the t bro.o't, coi;t:lirns the greatest va- riety, as well as d':tin.tion and force, of characters. In rage it is ini-lamcd, in ar it {ickens: it fparklci "n joy, in dirirefs it is clouded. Ncature has indeed a .n-cxcd to the parlion of grief, a more forcible cha- ratter than an, othlcr, that of tears; of all part-s of ]angugce, the mno!l expreilvc. And justly was this cxltrr,-iia)\' si-gn of that pmlion. annexed to the niatur of t.?;n ; the child of sorrow, and inhabitant of the val of twoe : rnot only to ease the burthJcncd i':eart, blut more lrDowerfully to excite his fellow cGrcatuies to .piyv. and to relieve hIs di.ffrcfs. Thus
at once affording balni to the aftliced, and inciting mankind to the exercise of their ncbleft quality,. benevolence. On which account, this single ch;a- raEter, fuins up in it the whole power of language ; and in certain circumflances, has more force alone, than all the united endeavours, of words, tones, ana gcffures, can come up to. Such were the precious drops that fell from Milton's Eve, which Adam kissed away ; as ,-P---- gr-.;ciius fgns oJfwfhe:t remorse, Anid is i, far t, sari o a.ve aodFtaordd. Such were the tears of Sigimnutnd , in Dryden's:. baeautiful description, fied over G uifcardo'i eeart. She faid---Her brim-fall eyes that ready fiod, And only wanted'will, to "vesp a flood, Relcas'd their ',atry fJore, and pour'd amabi?, Like clouds lowu-hung, a sober sow .','r Cfrain; .lMute, flemn forrov, free from fimale noif, Such, as the majeJly of grirf dciroys ; For bending o'er the cup, the tears JJe Jid, Secn'd, by the pofJ.ire, to dis/charge Ler head O'erfill'd efore ; and oft her mouth applied 'To the cdd heart, Le kifs'd at once, and cry'd. Nor is the virtue of. this expreflion confined to our own species only, but it is of all others that which most moves us, in such animals as are capable of it. On which account, the ireong painter of nia- ture, Shakefpear, in his description of the wounded stag, standing over the stream, took care not to omit it ; where he says .--*---*- the big round drops Ccurfed one another dewn his .'jccent nof, In piteous chaft. M 2 'Which
Which is by much the moiR affe&ing part of the. pi&ure. But tho' in this written language of nature, she. has given such forcible, and diftina charaters, to all the animal:paffions of man, and proportionally to such as have a near affinity to them, or are blended with them; yet she has laid down the fame law, with regard to the visible signs, of the exertions and emotions of all his nobler faculties, as the has done with regard to the tones. .In both lhe has furnished. the means with equal liberality; but has left it to the invention and care of man, to make a right use of them, and apply them in suitable degrees. By the exertion of such skill and pains, it would be found that the viible language alone, which can bh fnhewn in the features and limbs of man, is of itself fufficient, without other aid, to every purpofce of. social communication, To inrance only in two articles, the eyes, and hands: what inward emo- tion is there, which can not be manifested by these P Do not the eyes discover humility, pride; cruelty, compaflion ; refletion, diflipation; kindness, re- fentment ? Is there any emotion of fancy, is there a shade of ridicule, which they can not.reprefent ? Let any one who has seen Mr. Garrick perform, confider how much he was indebted to the language of his eves, and there will be no occasion to fay more, to give him an idea of the extent and power of ex- pression, to which that language may be brought. With refpec to the pewer of the hands, every one knows that with them, we can demand, or promise ; call, difnifs ; threaten, supplicate ; ask, deny ; shew joy, sorrow, detestation, fear, confefflion, penitence, admiration, refpecc; and many other .things now in common use. But how much farther their powers light be carriCd, thro' our negklA of using them,
we little know. And indeed, the extenfivenfs, of this visible language, would scarce gain credit with us, notwithstanding all the accounts of it handed down from antiquity, particularly with refpe& tp the Mimes, had we not inftanccs of natural Mimes, now living, who have been compelled to th study and praaice of this language, thro' the misfortune of having been born without the sense of hearing. Having fufficiently hevwn the force and extent of this language of nature, and the absolute necefhty o> it to man, in order to the exertion, exercise, and manifestation of all his nobler faculties, it may juily excite wonder to reflec, that it has been in general so little cultivated; and that history furni.hcs us with an account, but of two nations, out of the great variety that have inhabited this peopled globe since the cr-ation, that ever ap.plied themselves to the regular fludy and practice of it, to as to bring it to perfection. And these were the Greeks ai.d Ro- mans ; who ra.ised, themselves to such an height above the rcf of mankind, that. when we cxamine their hiltory, survey their mighty works, and compare them with those of other natioxns, their proportion to the reft of the world, seems to be that of the- Brobdignags to the Lilliputians. It. is true that in fonue other countries, this lan- guage of signs has in fibm degree prevailed ; Iut the- difference between the Ancients and Moderns, lies in this ; that the Ancients, founded all their infti- tuted signs, on.Nature; from hei" they drew all their flores ; fitted them in the nice; l and exaReflt manner to the emotions which they were to express ; and adapted them so to their artificial language, that their whole delivery form'd the complecaten liairmo-' my : the words, tones, looks, and geflures, corref- ponding to each other, in such a way, as that each M corntributed .
contributed to enforce, and adorn the other; and their united efforts, produced the sentiments of the mind, in their full propoition and beauty. So that all mankind who saw, and heard them, were charmed with the manner of their delivery, tho' they underflood not their speech ; and partook of their emotions, even without any communication of their ideas. But amongst the Moderns, the infti- tuted lhgns of tones, gesture, &c. were not founded on nature, but caprice and fancy ; and obtained their whole force, from fashion and custom. Confe:- quently they had neither meaning, nor beauty, to any but the natives of each country,, and were totally different from each other in the several countries ; which is fufficiently known by all, who are con- versant with the natives of France, Spain, and Italy, But of all nations in the world, the English seem to have the least use of this language of- signs ; there being few inflituted signs of emotions, either of - tones, looks, or gestures, that are adopted inmo ge- neral use. On the contrary, each individual either follows his own fancy in this refped, and has what is called a way of his own; or clfe adopts the man- ner of some other, who pleafcs his fancy, and of whom he is altogether a mimic.. From what has been said, it is apparent that no. general pra&tical rules, I mean such as would be of any efficacy, can be laid dawn in this refpc-t. For general pratical rules muRft be founded on general pratice ; and as there is no such fLandard, in these eountries, to refer to, it would be in vain to lay dlown such rules, as can not be explained and en- forced by examples. In bfme points,. that demand pra&tice, as well as ipeculation, the pra&ical part must be obtained by the imiirtion of patterns, and centinual cx-crcife in that w:v--. t~11 the imitation bc.- cGO1$ e ,.
cmnes perfeet, and passes into a habit. But where there are no general models to be copied from, theie can be no general praEtice, founded on imitation. In Greece and Rome, all the pub-lie speakers, agree- ing as much in the use of the fame signs, or language ®f nature, as they did in the use of the fame words, or language of art ; afforded general, constant, and sure patterns of imitation to others. In France, Ita- vl, and Spain, as in each country, there is an uni- form, steady use of the fame signs, tho' in a more confined way, yet to far they also afford sure pat- terns of imitation. But in England, where there are scarce any. traces of a general agreement in the use of fuchfigns, there can be no observations drawn from general praerice, no rule's laid down that re.- quire explanation by examples, nor no manner rc- -commended,' which demands the aid of patterns. In this cafe, all th.at can be done is, to lay down ifch rules to individuals; as sh.ill enable them to avoid faults, not acquire beauties. It' is in the power of rules to cormpafs the former, the latter can not be obtained without models and- pracice. I fay can not be obtained ; for to rbme, nature has been un- commonly bountifi' ; and in thcfe who have had the good fortune to escape ill habits, a native grace will appear, beyond whrt could be acquired by art alone; but of this the infltances are rare. If instances of fich extraordina.rv gifts are few-, much fewer are the examples of fhch, as have not been corrupted by custom. And indeed when tliefe'gifts are be- stowed in the moft-eminent degree, they are capable ofgreat improvement by art; so that industry i; equally u{eful, if not equally neccl.'iry to al!. It has been already observed, that as there is na common standard to be referred to, no general modehl for imitation, in the us¢ of tones and geflure ; each individual
individual, either forms a manner peculiar to himself, or adopts that of some other, that strikes his fancy, Of there two ways, there can be no doubt, which a man should follow. He that forms to himself a man- ner of his own, will probably acquire such a one, as will be most consonant to his own powers and his own feelings. The very ease with which he falls into this, and the difficulty, as well as absurdity, of putting any constraint upon his nature, and forcing his organs, where he has no objet of inmitation in ,yiew, will of course accomplish this point. But he who endeavours to adopt the manner of ranoth.er, Iofes fight of his own nature, and puts a constraint upon his organs. For men do not differ more from each other in their faces, than they do in their pow- ers of delivery. And the ifame manner which is easy and agreeable in one man, becomes conf'crai;cd and disgusting, when i-T:mued by a.nother. ~ The reason is, that all contraint u-pon nature is infL?.ntly per- ceived, as it prod.luccsha'e&action. and of course de- firoys true fccling ; for it is as irnpoflmblc, where affrecation takes piaca, in the manner of delivery, or in the Gfi:s o~ inward e-rrm, i.ons, that the feelings of the heart should be exc ted, .as that two musical firings, not in uniion, ihould vibrate to each other, w-hen eon oniv is struck., Fantailical emotions will produ.ce fant.fi;c.; fig.s, and fantatQical signs, by re6tlion, will produce fant:'iiical cmoeions. Both, having their rife in the imagination, may operate upon the fancy, and produce e.ff Cs there, but ne- ver can reach the heart ; as all cornmm..ic.-tion be- tween them, is nece-ii-rily cut eT- by affaIzation. Thus the fancied operations of the spirit, in the people called Ouakers, manif-Pced by the irol- un- natural signs; arad in some ocher religious se&ts by a certain cant, and extravagant gestures, produce K3C~~~v r.u. V2 :, - II -
pwerful effects, on the imaginations of such hear- ers, as are bred up in the persuasion, that such signs are the language of the spirit : but it muff be evi- dent, upon observing both the preachers and their auditory, that it is only the imagination, which is so wrought upen; asthere is no discovering in their countenances, any signs which are the natural con-.. comitants of the feelings of the heart. This fort of language of emotions therefore, is well calculated to. make enthufiaffs, but not believers. In such a situation of things, te rule by which all public speakers are to guide themselves is obvious and easy. Let each, in the firt place, avoid all imitation of others;. let him give up all pretensions to art, for it is certain that it is better to have none, than not enough ;. and no man has enough, who has not arrived at such a perfe&ion of art, as wholly to conceal his art ;.. a thing not to be compassed but by the united endeavours, of the bed inftruQion, per- fe& patterns, and constant pra&ice. Let him forget that he ever learned to read ; at least, let him wholly forget his reading tones. Let him speak entirely from his feelings; and they will find much truer signs to manifeff themselves by, than he could find for them. Let him always have in view,, what the chief end of speaking is; and he will fee the necelf fity of the means proposed to answer the end. The chief end of all public speakers is to persuade; and in order to psrfuade, it is above all things necessary, that the speaker, should at least appear himself to be- lieve, what he utters; but this can never be the cafe, where there are any evident mnarks of affeta-. tion or art. On the contrary, when a man delivers himself in his usual manner, and with the fame tones_ and gesture, that he is accustomed to use, when lie fpsaks from his heart; however.aukward that man- Ke:"
ner may be, however ill-regulated the tones, lie will fbill have the .idvanrtagre of bein.g thoigiht iincere; which of all others, is the tnoft nacefiary ,irticl., towards eculrinig attention and belief; as .i:fccqtation of any kind, is the iuiret way to dceiroy both. In elocution, the two gr.-t nrticlcs ar, force,'and grace ; the one .has it.; found,:t on clicfly in niaturei- the other in art. \V'he niiinted,_ they mutuallv support each other; when ;'ep ,--td, their pc;wci s are very different. Natr re can do much without art; art but liittle wv- .hoit i:aturi . o:ttLure, ;ic [a ulhs the heart; art, plays upni t.!e i:ancv. F~,'ce of speaking, will produce "n:ioti'c-i ,an. ccn ..' bion .; grace, only ex-cites ple 'fi..:- e aid aici:;"ration. As the one is the primary, anid the other but a {ccond- ary end of speech, it is.evident, thi;t where cr:e or the other, is wholly to t<dke pla'ce, the oimer hnould have the pieference. (G. ce in elocut'on, it is hardly poffibie to obtain, in the prl{ent fl.te <of things; force of delivery, is the nec:-iTry rcf!it of a clear head, and warm hert : provided no bad habits interfere, and the fpciaker fiffers his manner to be regulated wholly by his feelings and concep- tions. Perhaps it may be thought, that in reducing all wvhich might be offered on this head, to one fim- pie rule, there has been little done, and that no great improvement is likely to ensue; or at best, tnat by recommending it to each, to follow his own manner, whatcver it be. he will be left in the poifeTcon of all li.e faults and defeas, belonging to that manner. It will be urged, that a system of Iiles pointing out whati particular tones and gef- tures, are in their own nature, best adapted to ex- press the fcvcral emotic:is of the n;hd, would be the
the true means, to fhcw how people may arrive at propriety and grace, in those ornamental parts of delivery. But they who judge in this manner, have not fufficiently considered the nature of the fubjc&; and therefore attribute more power to precept alone, than it is poffeffed of. Prat&ical rules differ much from those which are merely fpccula- tive; nor will informing the underitanding in some cafes, by any means produce right execution, with- out other afliftance. Can any one be taught to sing, or to dance, without the aid of maftcrs, and patterns, for imitation? Why ihould we suppose then, that the use of regular tones and gesture, which are of the fame nature, and founded upon the fame prin- ciples, can be acquired any other way ? Should we not laugh at the absurdity, of any singing or danc- ing-mafter, that thould propote.to infirua his pupils only by laying down each, the -rules of his art ; and fhewing the pra&ical p;rt by tinging, or dancing himself, without making his pupils also prt&ice, and correcting every deviation from rule, and every fault in their execution, till it become exact ? Should we not fhppofe, in fiich a cafe, that h pu- ;p.ils, at bct, muff become but very :auk~ rd, - nd inaccurate mimics of their manner ? The f:me fate muPi r1lto attend any attempt, to teach the u': of re- .gular tones and gesture, without puduilung the fame metho!d as is used l:v the maflcrs in their kindred arts. Notiing would be more er y than to produce a more comprehensive fvifem of rules, on that -herd, th' *nv extant; but this would be a work ., more oReneation than ufc. \Vere there ma ters to teach this. in thee fame manner as other arts are taught, irch v 'ritem of rliErs, would not onl> be ulfefu! but neccft-rv. And indeed, without unch a fytecm of r.!.-v,. to qualify per:lns for the office of inllruaing pupils
pupils methodically in the art, we can never h-ope to fee proper masters arise among us. 'Till that comes to pass, the best service I can do, is to inform individuals how they may by their own endeavours arrive at such a degree of excellence, as they can attain without the aid of masters; and I am much deceived if the observation of this rule will net be found the only means of accomplishing the point. To those who imagine, that this would make but little improvement, in the article of delivery, I muIf beg leave to observe, that they have not fuftciently :considered, the chief cause of its low state among.st us. Which is, that an artificial manner, either from early injfitution, or subsequent imitation, has in general supplanted that which is natural in molf public speakers, and readers; or in some degree as- feced the best. And this artificial manner, not being founded on true principles, and always dif- fering from'that which is natural, of course carries with it evident marks of art and efTcdation. So that the restoring a naturail manner of delivery, would be bringing about an entire revolution, in its most es- fential ptrts. And if I can flew, that after a person has made himself master of the flinda'mcntal points, which have been coniidered at large in the former 'ic&ures, nothing else would be wanting, 'to answer 'the great purposes of delivery, and to obtain him the 'char ctoer of an excellent ipeaker, in proportion to his natural talents ; if I can {Tew too, th:.t it is in 'the power of ev.rv one to ccmpafs this point, if he feriouflv applies to it ; I can not but think, that every cnd, which could reasonably be expcaed r om a course of this nriature, wvill be fully answered. I know the objieion ready to be farted againt "this method is, wi.ht has been lrcady imentioned, that if every one follows his own mainecr, the faults blor;ling
belonging to that manner, muff of.courfe accompany his delivery. '.Tis granted; and it were to be with- ed, that a way were opened, by which speakers might be cured of all faults, in all the parts of deli- very ; but as this is impoifible, wvithout the aid of maiters; and since thro' want of mafiers, faults there must be; the queflion is, whether a person should take up 'with his own, or those of another.? A man's own faults, fit easy on him ; habit has given them the air of being natural ; those of another, are not assumed without aukwardnefs, they are evident- ly;artificial. Where truth is concerned, the very faults of a speaker which seem natural, are more agreeable to the hearer, than such beauties as are apparently borrowed ; in the fame manner as the most indifferent natural complexion, is preferred by those whose tafle is not corrupted, to the finest painted skin. It- is often seen, that the -nmotions and address of a man, aukwardly formed, appear more graceful, on account of their ease, than those of the bect- shaped, who ape the manner of others ; and who hnew an evident attention to their deportment for that, must always be the cafe of copyifts. But betides, in the present state of elocution, no one-need be appfehenfivc- of fuffcring, by faults of this kind ; for they will either not be perceived by the g:eneral eve, or be overlooked by the mos criti- cal. It has been already observed, that he who is m:-iafcr ev.cn of the rudiments, passes amongst us for a good speaker; and if to these, force be fuiperadded in his manner, we have every thing that we require in a good delivery. Grace and harmony, as they are scarce- known amongst us, so are they in general out of the quef.ion. Nothing can shock us, in the manner of delivery, but some manifest absurdity, or impropriety. He who speaks from his heart, can N nev cY
*never fall into any absurdity in his manner ; this is what they'only are liable to, who adopt the manner ss another,:or are gdverned by imperfect, or ill- founded ru.elcs of art. And '-.ith refpe& to impro- priety, as t!hat:cori-fts in offenfdirng againff some ge- neral know;n rule, where no such rules exiut; there cn be no perceptible impropriety. SSingularity of manner, is far fro'm giving us any idea of impropri- ety', because it is-fo cuilom'ary, as to seem conform- able to the very genius of the nation. Nor is fin- gilarity of manner, in the'prefcnt state of elocution, prejudicialt othe main ot bje of deliveryv the rea.- ifn of this wii! be irnmediatclv perceived, when we confider the difFerence,' between irrmproprietv in the uie of words, as {igns of our-ideas, and that of tones and gru-re, as-signs of our emotion-s. Words being made by compca. signs of our ideas, have a geneaI .meea ring annexed to them, in which all are girc~ .d ; and he whois iingular in his Use of them, <r.d r.n- nexes any other- fignication to thenm, than wh:at is ef;hblifhl:-d by f(ich general agrcenm unt, rendei': q'm- fiLs urnintelligble,. and is gulilty of a mrnifeUi imp:o- ipriety. LBu the 1'o of- trest zi(! gr Rlur, a-s minrks c, our emot,-'ions nolt havinXg ,cen eiizabli :-d uaopgff us, by any fueh gen:eti ri £comn a ; at le' -i the'e be- ing but' very few that have -nyv ffttld fignificmnce ; ei'ch indiv.idulu has a propo- tic'a]l latitude, to adopt liuch as he thinks proper, for his ov-n ,e. Amongfl the Greeks atnd Romans ind"ed, by whom the lan- guage of emotions waas s well regulated, and uni- verfaiil understood, as the l:ngu-ge of ideas ; azny change in th" ue iof efbablifuhed tones and gesture, was looked .pon to be as great an impropriety," as tlhe uc-fe of words in a different sense from what cuf- torm had annCexed to them. i And the fame holds godd a;!so ii F:irance, Spain, and Italy, tio far as such iigns are
are adopted into general uife. But for the reasons before afligned,- it is not so with us. Each man, has in a great nmeiure, a lnguage.ofhis own, by which . he expre(lls his emotions. If it- be said, tha't sack a divcrfity in the ule of this language, must be at- tended with as bad corniequences, as the confufican of the tongues at Babel; and rtnder i't impoTihble fct men to underland the meaning of each otler's sign? ; in anfiwer to this, it 'is to'lhe obfervcd, that there is an essential diflerence betvc-:n the two language., as to their intelligibili y,, or mcde of underf:ndi g t-hem. The language of ideas, can not poilibiv be underflood, without an agreement in the use of the fame -signs or words; but the lahguage of emotions, when associated to words, requires no such agrec-- ment in the use of the fame signs, to point out the;ir significancy. For, as words shew the ideas which pass in the mind of the speaker, and which are the- causes of his emotions, the natlure of the signs by which the fpeakcr manifests those emotions, is <.t the fame time fully difplaved. On tie otlier handuc it is not in the power of the l-ngu:ge of emotions, to give us the least infight into the language of ideas ; for if. a person, speaking an unknown tongue, ihoul. accompany his words, with the moit aiimated gei- ture, expreflive looks, and figni.cant ton es; tho' we may perfetly findlartand the nature of his emo- tions, and parntke of hia fcelings, vet it is impofihble, without an interprieter, to know the cause of them, or the particular ideas in the mind of the speak.er, that gave them birth. But should three ntives of France, Spain, -and Italy, relate the f:,mn thi.g fuic- ceflively to one, who underfood their t'evern, tongues, vwith tones, looks, and gefLures,: crtirel-. different from each othec he would not only under_. fland the meaning of their words, but of thir con: N z cornitant
comitant signs also. In this cafe the language of ideas, illuflrates all the different languages of emos tion, in the fame manrer as the fun illuminates the fcveral planets; which dark in themselves, thine only by reflc&ed light.. This. being the cafe, persons who are advanced in life, need not have any solicitude, about the delica- cies and graces of delivery; force and expression will answer all their ends; and these, it is in their own power to give, to their external marks, in pro- portion to what passes within their minds, only by indulging their feelings, and avoiding all affe&ation and art. Of this we have as many inflances in pri- vate life, as we me.t with persons who speak from their hearts, upon any topic, or incident which nearly concerns them. And if we seldom meet with it in public lifcourfes, it is either, because the speak- ers, have not their hearts affe&ed by the fubjeas, upon which they harangue ; or becaafe, an artificial manner, for the reasons before mentioned, has sup- planted that of the natural kind. This it was which Betterton meant by his reply to the Biflhop of Lon- don ; who asking him on a certain occalion, ' What * could be the reason that whole audiences should be C moved to tears, and have all forts of passions ex- ' cited, at the representation of ofme flory on the ' flage, which they knew to be feigned, and in the ' event of which, they were not at all concerned ; ' yet that the fame persons, fhl Id fit to utterly un- ' .moved, at discourses from th i>ulpit, upon sub- ' jeEs of the utmofi importance to icm. relative not only to their temporal, but also, their eternal inter- ' efts ?' He teceived from Betterton this memorable reply: ' My Lord, it is because we are in carnef.' And indeed whoever is in earnest when he speaks in public, provided he be free from any defe&s, in the fundamenta!
fundamental parts of delivery, will answer every end of elocution in these times, and pass for an ex- cellent speaker; and I am much deceived, if it is not to this point chiefly, that tliofe who are reckon- ed the best fpeakcrs at this day, arc indebted for their reputation. Sure I am, that the advantages which the Methodist teachers, have obtained over the regular clergy, in seducing tb many of their flocks from them, have been wholly owing to this, For were they to read their nonsense from notes, in the fame cold, artificial manner, that so many of the clergy deliver rational discourses, it .is to be pre- finmed, that there are few of mankind such ideots,. as to become their followers; or who would not' prefer sense to nonsense, if they were. cloathed in. the fame garb. Excepting these wild orators, we have few in1 stances, of any public speakers, who even seem to be in earnet; and on that account, thofc few whxo are really so, raifq to themielves a proportionate de- gree ofadmiration. Upon a late public occcr;ion ;at Ox- ford, there was a remarkable proof givcn of this. A person of the filft RPation * in the Univeriity, was to address, by virtue of. his office, the new-eledted Chancellour, in the public theatre, and in the pre- fence of many thousands. I:ec was no way remark- able for elocution, ,.and this was perhaps the si.rs. time, he found himself engaged, in a scene of this kind. As he was a man of a peculative turn; lie had an uncommon l'hare, even in private company, of that aukward barnfulnefs, which is ufuelly the attendant of thole, who have much commerce with hooks, and little with the world. Those of his ac- quaintance thecrefore were in pain for him ; and * N 3 they ? * The Vice Chancellcur.
they who knew him only by character, did not ex- peEc that he would acquit himself well. But all were pleasingly disappointed. As he had no art, he dlid not attempt to ufc any. -le was reilly, and at heart pleased, with the elcrion of the Chancellour, and expressed himfeclf accordingly. I-e received him, with the air of the fame cordial joy, that a man would thew, on the arrival of a long wifhlcd for, noble guetf, under his roof, whole presence would make a fort of little jubilee in the family. His tones were such, as rcfult from a glad heart ; his eyes fparklcd with plefure, and his whole countenance and -- ture were in exa& unison. No one was at leiifure to examine whether any part of his elccution might have been more graceful ; it was just, it was forcible, it moved every one. His eal\, natural, and unaffected manner, which perhaps was learcely ever seen before bv any of his auditors, in a public speaker, excited burf;s of universal applause ; not from proftituted hands, in flpport of pal ty opinions ; but from hearts, that felt therfcllves agitated, by a participation of kindred feelings, reulting from his manner, independent of his matter. But that the natural manner of delivery, should have such force, and pass for the most excellent kind amongst us, 'who have never made any attempt to fiudy elocution as an art-; is no.matter of surprise, when we confider, that even amongst the Romans, after the art had been introduced, and numbers, ap- plied themselves clofclv to the friudy and pracice of it, there was jfill great ,arteent],,,)!. ivcn, and high honour paid to fch speakers., rs r''lied en.tirely on nature, and had th-ir cit? .verv v.-holly governed by their'cmotionis. Cicero in his book d O:ratore, mern- t;ions an inftaince of th!is kind in Q. Varius, whlom he reprefeats, as utterly rude, and ungraceful in his
his manner, to the last degree ; yet as one who had obtained a great weight at Rome, by his power of speaking, such as it was. This point being allowed, it is evidently in the power of every one, to deliver himself with such force, and acquire such a reputation for speaking, as he is. entitled to by his natural talents. There are few public fpeakers.who have not two kinds of delivery . one for public, the other for private use. The one, artificial and confiraincd; the other, na- tural and easy. There is therefore nothing more required, than to change one manner for another; to unlearn the former. and substitute the latter in its room; of which each individual is already master. Had he indeed a new manner to acquire, as well as ?o get rid of the old, the dificulty would be great ; but when he has only to unclarn a bad .habit, and has another ready to fabPcitute in its-robin, it re- quires nothing but attention, and regular informa- tion of his errours, when he f-;l!s into them. Bcfide the iources of artificial delivery before mentionei,. there is another, with which rnoof public ipeakers arc urknovvwingly infested. I mean certain peculiarities- which prevail, in each of the three different ipecies of delivery, in the pulpit, the fen- ate-houfe, and the bar, both in phraseology and manner; and thc{e, can not be too fi-diouiyv avoid- ed. They have each their par-icular idioms, and abound with expletives and repietives. accomoanied with motions, equo-llv unimnortant, and inF.gniicant. There problibly, owed heiri- orii.n. to imication of the faults (for faults are easily iritated) of some of the admired speakers, in the f:evral br.-nchcs. They have been adopted into such general use by each so- ciety, that it is hard for any member of those bodies, to avoid catching. them, unless he be upon his-guarcd against
against them. But as it is easy to know those fingu- larities, so the being guarded againRf them, will pre- vent new members from falling into them ; and at- tention and resolution, will soon get the better of them, in those, who are always infedted. It may be said, that custom has so far fanCtifiad these fingu- larities, that the avoiding them is not an objcat of any moment ; and that it is at. least a matter of in- difference, whether they are used or not. It is true. indeed, that general use has rendered them so fa- miliar, that their deformity is not perceived ;-and the pra&ice of them is attended with no blame, But on the other hand, he who avoids them is fiure to be commended for it, and makes himself dif- tinguifhed on that very account Hie that is con- tented, if he escapes without cenfire, may freely indulge himself in the use of them; but he that would obtain praise, .will not surely lose so cheap an opportinity of purchasing it, -as that of avoiding_ general and apparent faults, which wil col him no more pains than a resolution to do so. But a cafe may be put,. that supposing a man ha;s,. by indulging early bad habits, or from any other cause, acquired a manner of delivery in private life, and in his usual discourse, very dif.grecable and dif- gufling ; fuppoiiig he should have a habit of diftcrt- ing his features, o using aukward and cxtravagant gestures, a!nd uttering strange and discordant tones; is he not in such a cafe, to endeavour to get the bet- ter of these, whenever he speaks in public, and confequentlv to avoid th;at manner, which from habit, may be calild his natural one ? My anfw'er is, that if he thinks of reformiing this only in public, he begins, at the wrong ncd, and will never be able to-effec what he desires. His buiinefs is, to set about a. reformation of all such faults, silt, in pri- vate.
v.ate life ; if by his own attention to it, and the con- fiant information of his friends, he should get the better of them there, of course he will be without them also in public. But if he should continue re- gardlefs of his private manner, arid be only studious of correaing what is. amiss in public, he will find habit too powerful for him ; and the very attention which he pays to that point, will prevent his en- tering with earnestness into his fubjed, and give a contrained air to all that he delivers. So that tho' a man can not give too much attention in private, to the corre&tion of faulty habits, yet he should utterly forget that he has any such .when he speaks in pub- lic; fobr by such recolle&ion and attention, he will lose force, without acquiring grace; which is in- ctompatible with any apparent solicitude about it. Nor need a person, even tho' he fhiould not be able wholly to subdue habits of that fort, be in any pain about it; as the frequency of faults, and fingulari- ties in this way, pleads their excuse.. Defendit nu- mnerus. Veniam p.ietirmujn e darmufq'ue vicifim. He is kept in countenance by numbers, who partaking of similar faults, mutually give and receive indulgence froim each other. Singularity of manner in any speaker only flrikes at first. After.a few times,,. it is no longer taken notice of by the hearers ; and if a stranger observes upon it to such as are his usual au- ditors, the common answer is, ' Oh, that's his way;' and this puts an end to all farther remarks. Faults which from constant habit appear natural to a man, have an cafe with them which takes away their difa- greeablcnefs, when one is a little used to them ; but faults from aiTfeation, or imitating the manner of others, are for ever disgusting, becaufe-they are ap- parently artificial. To contraEt bad habits of one's --ywa is rather the fault of the times, than the mran. Xc.;
He is unconscious of them ; he continues in them, thro' want of inftruCion, and. information : few, or none are without them ; they r::cce readily therefore with indulgence. But to imr;ate and adopt the faulty manner of others, is a voluntary a~E, it is done. with the eves open; and as it betrays a21 errour in judgement., will not admit of the ifme excute, nor be allowed the finme indulger:ce, biv people of any discernment, Upon the whole, there are two kinds of language, neceifry to all who would with to aif\vcr the cnd of public speaking. The one is, the .. ugSage of ideas; by which the tho .ghts which prafs in a man's mind, are maniferced to others; and this language is comp8fed chiefly of words properly ranged, and divided into sentences. The ether, is the language of emotions ; by which the effits that those thoughts have upon the mind of the fpeakel, in exciting the paflions, affeions, and all manner of feelings, are not only made known, but communicated., to others ; and this language is compcfed of tones, looks, and gesture. The office of a public speaker is, to in- ftru&, to please, and to move. If he does not in- itru&, his discourse is impertinent; and if he does not please, he will not have it in his power to in- fIruEt, for lie will not gain attention; and if he does not move, he will not please, for where there is no emotion, there can be no plealfre. To move therefore, should be the firfI great objea of every public speaker ; and for this purpose, lie nifti ui.ie the language of emotions, not that of idea2s alone, which of itfolf has no power of moving. It is cvi- . dent, in the use of the language of emotions, that hlie who is properly moved, and at the fame time de- livers himself, in such tones, as delight the ear with their harmony ; accompanied by' such looks and gestures,
gestures, as please the eye with their grace; whilst the underflanding also perceives their propriety; is in the first class, and must be accounted a mailer. In this cafe, the united endeavours of art and na- ture, produce that degree --of perfc&ion,' which is no other way to be obtained, in any thing that is the workim.anfhip of man. Next to him, is the fpcaker, who gives way to his emotions without thinking of regulating their signs; and trusts to the force of nature, unfolicitous about the graces of art. And the worst is he,- who uses tones and gestures, which he has borrowed from others, and which, not being the refuilt of his feelings, are likely to be mif- app'ied, and to be'void of propriety, force, and grace. But he who is utterly without all language of emotions, who confines himself to the mere ut- -terance of words, without any concomitant signs, is not to be classed at all amongst public speakers. The very worst abuse of fuich fiigns, is preferable to a total want of them; as it has at least a fironger refemhlance to nature. There is no emotion of the mib.d which nature does not make an effort to mani- feJr, by omrne of those signs; and therefore a total fulbpre-f'ion of those signs, is of all other fbltes, ap- parcnt lv the most unnatura!. And this, it is be f.'ared is too much the stat-e of the pulpit elocution in general, in the Church of Enigland. On which account, there never was perhaps a religious fe& upon earth, whole hearts were so little engaged in the aR of public wor{hip as the members of that Church. To be pieaied, we must fel ; and we are pleased with feeling. The Prcebyterians arc movedj the Methodists are moved; they go to their meet- ings, and tabernacles, with delight. The very Quakers are moved. Fantastical, and extravagant *as the language oftheir emotions is, yet lill they are moved
movedby it, and they love their form of worship for that reason. Whilfl much'the greater part of the members of the Engiifh Church, are either ban- ifhed fiom it through disgust, or relu&tantly attend the fcrvice as a disagreeable duty. F I NI^ Sp . a r -
wI +~ ¾ . 4..·i~i 1"~ *1'~s~a