t
I ]
rnp H I N G S fingularly novel, or of
-»-- the moft remote antiqaity, feldotn
lail, in feme degree, according to tbcir
^htrinfic merit or collater:il ciicuTiflances, of att; adding the attention of
mankind. Of this obfervati jd. the poems afcribed to Offian is a rare demonftration. Antiquity being the taiie of the period wherein thefe prorlucflions
appeared in public, they were every- where, and by every body, read, and
'by many with adu.iration. The fragments the tranjlator at firfl: fhewed to the v/orld, raifed the public expeiflations, infomuch that net only his ex-
' pences were borne in a journey through
the Highland?, by the literati in and
about Edinburgh, to collecft more, but
B the
[ 2 ] the book was afterwards taken into every hand.
A variety of reafons occafioned with
fome, doubts of the authenticity of the fragments ; and many were thorough
fceptics as to the poems of Fingal and
Temora. — Hence the controverfy between fome of the Scotch and Englifh
literati, who affirmed, that they never
exifted in any other form than that in which we have feen them.
The ingenious and learned Dr. Johnfon fn-ft ftarted objedlions ; and thofe
arofc from the internal evidence of the poems againft their authenticity, and
other facts, which fervcd to confirm the Do6lor in his infidelity.
To the internal evidence much hath
been elegantly faid by Dr. Blair of
Edinburgh ; and many fceming fadts were produced to corroborate the whole. Dr. Johnfon was too finccre a friend to truth, to accept of an elegant criticifm by a profeflbr of rhetoric as internal evidence, and letters, and ipfe dixits from
[ 3 ] from the Highlands for a demonftration
of authenticity. He knew the poems
were every where read, and thit Cal ^donians, naturally partial to their countiy
and its antiquities, weie nut '* flu.dy
enoug 1 moraiifts" to di own an honour
politically done them by a politically
cunning tranjlator.
To induce tlie public to buy his book, it was necellury to f it their prefent tafle, which was antiquity, and
to fix the date of his p em at a re- mote period : therefore he adlu Uy
made a journey into the Higl^.l.incis j and in his Intrc dudion to his Fingal
he fa3's, that by paj/mg fix months in the
ijlands and weftern coafis of Scotlandy to- gether with the help offome manufcripts, he has been e?iabled to give the world thefe poems in their prefent jorm. This w^s
all the evidence he had to produce for
their authenticity ; which was enough,
were it true, and had he immediately
produced the originals, which any genB 2 tleman
[ 4 ] tleman of letters might expedl to feci and the public had a right to be put in
pofreffion of. Thefe, however, although
promifed by the 'Editor, have not yet
emerged from Mr. Macpherfon's flrong box.The rapid fale of the poems naturally
enough flattered the editor, and the Scotch nation in general ; and the Highlanders, whom they more imme-
, diately concerned, were Angularly elated with this acceffion of hojioiir and feeming proof of their antiquity and learning. Whilfl editions were felling off, and fome of the Scotch and Englifli
doubting their authenticity ; and the Highlanders and their partizans, from
the love -of their country and their own ho720iir, which they imagined concerned, were flrenuoufly fupportingj
either with the pen or converfition,
in every circle, the genuinencfs of
Offian ; Mr. Macphcrfon had time to recoiled himfclf, and to choofe the
I part
[ 5 ] part that was , moll; agre.eable to his opening views and interefl. Being certain that the fuccefs of the book depended on impofing the authenticity on the pubUf (which, as it af- forded fame entertainment, was not thought vcvy difhpneft) he confirmed
the blind zeal of his countrymen, whofe
curiofity to invefligate never carried them further than converfation, by exhibiting an old Iriih manufcript, which
neither himfelf nor they could de- cypher —or, if any vv'ilhed to hear fome
lines recited, the fpecimen which he
tranflated from Engliih into Galic rea-. dily fupplied him. Thus the Scotch^ were led to defend his caufe, and Dr.
Blair v/as impofed on by others, to publifh a dillertation on the fubje(ft
;
whilft Mr. Macpherfon, ready to fi,atch thofe laurels that might bed adorn his brow, fometimes inlinuated he was the
author, at other times conhrmed his countrymen in what, fo: the honour o£ B 3 their
[ 6 ]
their nation, they wifhed to prove true, but were at all tunes ready to belitVJ. In the year 1774, Dr John Ton publiflied an account of his journey to the Highlands and Ifiands, in VN^hxh he
gives the pu': lie his opinion of the gcnuinenefs of the poems afcribed to Offiin, and the conduft of the fuppofed
tranllator towards the public. " I fuppr.fe, ' fays the Do6lor, ** my
*' opinion of the Poems of OlTian are
'* already difcovered. — I believe, they
** never exilled in any other form than
** that in which we have feen them. " The editor, or author, never could " fhew the original nor can it be fhevv'n
*' by any oth'. r. To reven;.:,e rational
** incredulity by refufing evidence, is a
** degree oiSS^nfolence with which the " world is not yet acquainted ; and
'* ftubborn audacity is the laft refuge
** of guilt. It would be eafy to fhew
'*it.
[ 7 ]
<* it, if he had it -, but whence could it
** be had? It is too long to be remem-
" bered, and the language formerly had " nothing written. He has, doubtlefs,
*' inferted names that circulated in po- " puiar {lories, and may have tranilated
*' fome wandering ballads, if any can
*' be found ; and the names, and fbme
'' of the images, being recolledied, make
** an inaccurate auditor imagine, with
** the help of fome Caledonian bigotry,
^' that he has formerly heard tlie whole.
*' I afked a very learned minifler in
'' Sky, who had ufed all arts to make
" me believe the genuinenefs of the
*' book, v/hether at lad he believed it
** himfelf ? but he would not anfwer.
*' He wilhed me to be deceived, for the
** honour of his country ; but would
** not diredly nor formally deceive me. " Yet has this man's teftimony been " publicly produced, as of one that held
** Fingal to be the work of Offian. B 4
*' It
[ « ]
**, It is faid, that fome men of intC". grity have heard parts of it; but they
** ail heard them when they were boys;
** and it was never faid that any ot them
*V could recite fix lines. They remem-
** ber n.^.mes, and perhaps fome prover- " bial fentiments, and, having no dif-
** tindt ideas, coin a relcmbLmce \a ith-
** out an original. The perfuafion of " the Scot^, however, is far from uni-
** verfd ; and in a queft.on fo capable of
*' proof, why fliould doubt be lufi'ered
** to continue ? 1 he editor has been " heard to fay, that part of the poem
** has been received by him in the " Saxon charader. He has then found, " by fome peculiar fortune, an un\^rit-
** ten language, written in a charader
** which the natives probably never bc-
*' held.
** I have yet fuppofcd no impofture
*' but in the publiflier ; yet I am far
•* from ceitainty, that fome tranflations " have
[ 9 ]
*' have not been lately made, that may
<* now be obtruded as parts of the ori- ' ginal work. Credulity on one part,
<* is a ftrong temptation to deceit on
** the other, efpecially to deceit of which
** no perfunal injury is the confequence,
^' and which flatters the author w^ith his
** own ingenuity. " The Scots have f miething to plead
^' for their fo eafy reception of an im-
** probable fiction. They are feduced
** by their fondnefs for their fuppoled
^* anceflors — A Scotchman muft be a
** very flurdy moraliil, who does not " love Scotland better than truth : he
'' will always love it better tlian en-
** quiry ; and, if falfliood flatters his
** vanity, will not be very diligent to
*' detetl it. Neither ought DOthe Ens-lifh
^* to be much influenced by Scotch
** authority i for of the pafl: and prefent
** flate of the v/hole Earfe nation, the
^* Lowlanders are at Icaft as i;^norant as o
*^ ourfelves. To be ignorant is painful;
'" but
[ 10 ]
*' but it Is dangerous to
** eaiinefs by the delufive opiate of hafty " pcrfuafion.
** But this is the age in which thofe
'* who could not read, have been lup-
*' pofed to write ; in which the giants
*' of antiquated romance have been ex-
** hibited as reahties. If we know lit-
*' tie of the ancient Highlanders, let us
** not fill the vacuity with OJjian. If
** we have not fearched Magella?iic re-
** gions, let us, however, forbear to " people them with Patagons."
From this circumftance, one would
readily think that a youthful and ambitious mind would rejoice at fuch notice taken of him in a publication by
the fir ft writer of the age, and grafp at an opportunity of deriving confequcnce
from difputing with fo fuperior an antagonift. But, firange to tell! when the public might have looked for a depofit
of the manufcript, or a publication of
the original, according to promife, on
this
[ ! ] this open and public declaration of
a forgery, Mr. Macpherfon's irafcibility flamed forth, and he only had re- courfe to the fingle a'-gument that al- ways remains for the defence of impofture, the argumentum ad hominem^ or baculinum. He wrote accordingly a letter, the particulars of which I have not been able to learn ; but they were fuch
as ex i. railed from the Dodlor the fol- lowing anfwcr :
** Mr. James Macpherfon,
** I received your fooliO:! and impu-i-
** dent letter. —Any violence that ihall
** be attempted upon m.e, I will do my
" beft to repel J and what I cannot do
*' for myfelf, the law Hiall do for me
:
*' for I will not be hindered from ex-
** pofmg what I think a cheat, by the
** menaces of a ruffian. What would
** you have me retrad: ? I thought your
*' work an impofture ; I think fo lliil
;
** and for my opmion, I have given
** reafoqs
[ '2 1
** reafons Vvhich I here dare you to
** refute. —Your abilities, fmce your
«' Homer, are not lb foriTnidable j and
**'what I hear of your morality, in-i
** clines me to credit rather what you
** fhall prove, than what you iliall
<* fay.
*' S. Johnson."
At this kind of argument, youth
might prevail over age -, but the origi- nal caufe is generally weakened, if it does not ihew that no better can be
produced, by fuch an appeal. — For the honour of my country, and for the fake of a language on which I have beflowed
fo much pains, I am forry the editor of
OfTian has had no better method of defence. Had the heroes, however, met, it
is likely pofterity, with greater certainty,
might look for and examine at home
the fields where Fingal and Swaran,
Robin Hood and Little John, fought
their fmgle combat, without giving the curious
[i 13 ] curious the trouble of exploring the Ultonian Plains or Marifchal Wood.
For bulk and ftature, I would think it would be no bad reprefentation of thofe ancient heroes ; and in this I am fure they would excel them, as far as real Jheroes do thofe of the imagination.
ic. When the ebullitions of irafcibilitjr had fubfided, reafon had realTumed her
feat, and the incompetency of the argilmentum baciiliniim to prove a literary truth was manifeft, the next refource was to caufe Mr. Becket fubfcribe an
. advertifement in a public news-paper,
^ to this purpofe :
\'' "That, during iix weeks after the
** firft publication of the Poems, the
'''^* original manufcript lay at his fhop,
' ** for the infpe(5tion of the curious.
; (Sigi.ed) " T. Becket,"
This MS. was never iQ^n by any per-
' fon. Why v/as it not left there at the time the advertifement was publiflied ? The
[ H ] The reafon is plain—as he had no MS.
of the poems, he was afraid that feme
IriOi gentleman might infped: it, and
find, in place of Olhan's poetry, the genealogy of his own fimily, and his relation with fome one of the monarchs
of Ireland. For it is very well known,
that the Earfe dialed: of the Galic was
never wTitten nor printed, until Mr.
Macfarlane, late minifler of Killinvir,
Argyleihire, publiflied, in 1754, a
tranflation of Baxter's Call to the uncon-
'verted. Since his time there have been
fome fongs and books of piety printed.
This I can eafily prove, becaufe no
Earfc MS. ever was or can be produced:
and although the Pfalms of David, and
ConfefTion of Faith, have been tranllated into Galic, it is well known that it is neither the Earfe fpeiling nor diale6t,
but written in the Irifh Galic ; and
therefore not every where in the Highlands well enough underllood, although
fung in churches. It was iirft publilhed
in
[ '5 ] in 1694, and was verfified by the fyndd
of Argyle : but the beft-executed pfalms
are allowed to be done by the Romiih
clergy of the north of Ireland. Indeed I am apt to think the whole have -, for the monkifh clergy of Ireland had a variety
of verfions compofed very early ^ befides, the Preibyterian clergy, in thefe early
periods of the Reformation, were far from being learned ; for, on account of
the troubles of the times, the unfettled
ftate of the church, and parting with
all ecclefiaflicai revenues, and from
the fcarcity of paftors, hands were fud- denly laid on thofe who could affume
an afperity of manners, or pretend to
fpiritual influences. Lieut. Col. Vallancey, in his Grammar of the Irilh, fays, " Mr. Macpherion, in his poem of Temora, p. 184, has given us a few lines of the ori- ginal in Earfe ; the words^ he tells us, are
noty after the Irijh ma?mer, brijiled over with unnecejfary quiefcent cojifonants, fo
difagreeable
[ i6 ] difagreeable to the eye, and which rath^f embarrajs than ajjiji the reader. It is difficult to undei Hand Mr. Macpherfon's
meaning in this pafTage, unlefs he in7 tends it as an apology for the < nnffion of fome radical Celtic confonants, which
have ever been a Humbling- block to the modern Scots. However, in con tra- dition to this flourifh, Mr Macpherfon
has introduced no lefs than twenty afpi- rated confonants, with the hiatus he
annexed to them, in the iirft twelve lines he has favoured us with of the original
poem. The reader will judge whether
choille Earfc, c'oille Irifiy thairis Earfe^
or t'airis IriJJjy iulluir-huil Earje, or
fiolair-s'uil IriJI:), do moil embarrafs the
Celtic reader; and to all others, it is of no confequence how thefe words are written. The corruption of the Celtic
in this example is worthy of notice,
and in my opinion is a ftrong proof of
the novelty of this poem ; or, if it be
ancient, it is a proof of the unlettered
i;2:norance
[ -7 ] ignorance of the ancient Gallic Scots. In line 4, illuir-huil, i. e. eagle-eyed, Should have been fiokir-s'uil, or, in the
jEarfe manner, fhiallair-diuil, &c. The
word has been corrupted into jolar both
in Earfe and Irifli, but never v^^as written
julluir: and Mr. Macpherfon is referred
to the tranflation of the Galic pfalms,
by the Synod of Argyle, begun in 1659,
and publiflied at Glafgow 1765; in pfalm 103, V. 5, he will find this line
;
Mar iolar hiath nan fpeur ; which corred:s the fault in the 4th line of the poem of Temora.
Mar illuir-ftniil greine Jian fpeur.
Again, pfalm xi. 4.
Is leir da Jhuilibb, &c.
If we v/ere to criticife on every corrupt
word in the twelve lines before us, it would require many pages ; we fliall therefore defer that until we are fa- voured with a fight of the original."
C Thefe
t 'S i Theie obicrvations, from a man of
£o much knowledge in Celtic learning
as Col. Vallancey poffefTeth, is another argument to confirm me in what I al- ways believed, that the fpecimen given
by Mr. Macpherfon is his own tranflation from the original Englilh. And I can
ealily prove that thefe lines have never been known to any Highlander in Scotland, before he publifhed them ; but
to my certain knowledge, within thefe few years, an illiterate Highland porter, or cady of Edinburgh, has got them
by heart, being frequently read to him
by a gentleman zealous to fupport the impoilure. This gentleman is himfelf
an ingcfiioiis tranllator, of whom I fliall have occafion to make mention hereafter. If Mr. Macpherfon ever intends
to publifli a Galic veriion, he would do
well to attend to the true orthography
of the old Galic, efpccially if he wifhes
to continue the impollure. Many of
the Scots agree with the Colonel's obfervation. ProfelTor Macleod, of Glafgovv.
[ 19 ] gow, In a letter to me, begged '' that
in my Grammar of that language, I ihould not throw away the radical confonants, nor apply the powers of the
letters in Englifh to Galic writing, as Mr. Macpherfon did in the fpecimens
he gave us of Temora."
In this fituation the matter has been
left by the Editor, to be controverted between the Scotch and Englifh. Unfortunately, however, for the caufe of
the advocates for the authenticity, the moft fenfible, difinterefted, and conli- derable part of the Scotch, have declared their doubts. The filence of the
tranllator, if he had any thing to fay, was abfurd and ungrateful, both to his country and thofe gentlemen who fupported and fuggefted to him the original
plan. Dr. Blair, of all men, has the
greateft reafon to be difpleafed, who
has been impofed on, and led to v/rite in defence of a forgery.
But although the author would pro- duce no fort of evidence, individuals C 2 made
[ 20 ] made it a national caufe ; and feveral books have been publillied, to eilablifli as genuine, what they themfelves fe- cretly difbelieved, never faw, and of
which they know nothing, excepting
fome of the names which are current
in the fables of the country.
I could wifli to be able to reduce this
little treatife to method, and to advert
to all the authors who have attempted
to fupport the authenticity feverally -, but as they ufe the fame arguments,
only differing in degree, thefe I will difprove in order as they occur. As Dr. Blair's Diifertation was the
firft publication on the fubjedl, and the only one that has offered fads, I fliall begin with it. I have nothing to fay
of the merit or demerit of the criticifm, becaufe that will be the fame, whether
genuine or falfe^ but I will briefly advert to whatever he has faid, to prove
the poems the compoiltion of Oflian,
To prove them by internal evidence, the Dodor fays, ** In their battles, it « is
f 2« ] " is evident that drums, trumpets, and
** bagpipes were not known nor ufed."
I believe, as well as the Doctor, that drums are modern, and that bagpipes are not very ancient ; and Mr. Macphsrfon
would take care to introduce none of
thefe. But trumpets were both known
and ufed ; and the author, knowing a trumpet to be the moft ancient, makes
ufe of it, and commonly calls it the War-horn of Fingal. In this parti- cular the Doctor's argument either falls, or militates againft itfelf. —*' Even a mountain, the fea, or a lake, when
Offian has occafion to mention them,"
fays the Dodtor, " though only in a
fimile, are for the moil part particula- rized 5 it is the hill of Cromla, the florm of the fea of Malmor, or the
reeds of the lake of Lego." The author furely would not be fo uncir- cumfped: as to ufe the name of Parnaffus, Scylla, and Charybdis, or the
reeds of the Red Sea. This is no more
than what every poet, and in every C 3 country.
[ " ] country, has done; and this internal evidence proves nothing.
** To fuppofe that two or three hundred years ago, when we well know
the Highlands to have been in a Jiafe of grofs ignorance and barbarity, there fhould have arifen in that country a poet
of fuch exquifite genius, and of fuch
deep knowledge of mankind, and of
hillory, as to diveil himfelf of the ideas and manners of his own age, and to give us a juft and natural pidure of a
flate of fociety ancienter by a thoufand
years ; one who could fupport this counterfeited antiquity through fuch a large
colledion of poems, without the leaft inconfiftency ; and who, pofTefTed of all this genius and art, had at the fame
time the felf-denial of concealing himfelf, and of afcribing his own works to an antiquated bard, without the impofture being deteded, is a fuppofition
that tranfcends all bounds of credibility." In this fentence I think the Dodor has
juft
[ n ] juft reafon to apprehend the virulent refentment of Mr. Macnicol, and his embellifher, for a compliment more
grofs than any that came from Dr.
Johnfon. " Highlands well known to have been in a ftate of grofs ignorance
and barbarity !" Mr. Macnicol vv^ill not allow that the Highlands was ever in a ilate either of ** ignorance or barbarity j" nor indeed do I fee any reafon the Dodtor has favoured us with, why
we fliould conclude the Highlands was
in greater barbarity in the 15th than
in the 2d century, or why there fhould
not be as good an Offian in one age as in another. As for the felf-denial of
the author, it was only for a year or two, in order to fell as many editions
as poflible ; for he well knew that they
would lofe a great part of their merit,
fo foon as it was known they were modern.—But now that the palate of the public is fated, that he has got the copy
fold, and the money in his pocket, he
allows the zeal of his country to at- C 4
tempt
[ 24 ] tempt eftablifhing what he neither wilhes, nor can himfelf prove. " Another circumftance," fays the Dodlor, *' is the abfence of religious ideas"—OlTian has a mythology. The
author knew that was rieceflary to conllitute an epic poem ; and genuine hif- tory inftrudting him when the Chriftian
religion was introduced into Ireland and
Scotland, it was natural to fuppofe he
would, as much as pofTible, avoid any
allufions to it. In this, however, he
has oftener than once failed ; for in Temora we find the Chriflian expreffions, " peace to thy foul," ** bleft be " thy foul." But the religion of that
£era was not what Mr. Macpherfou
tells us. —'His mythology he has raifed entirely on the fuperftition of the fecond
fight, heightened by poetry, and the
ftories of ghoils, apparitions, &c. fo common in the fifteenth century, which
he affedts fo much to defpife ; but to which, however, he is indebted for all the materials he has had. The
[ ^5 ] The other great fpirits to which al- lufions fometimes are made, is nothing
lefs nor more than the common Highland idea of the Devil, who is believed
to raife every ftorm, and go abroad
with it. All thefe notions are ftill prevalent in the mountains, and a proper
part of a mythology. In lliort, the whole machinery is nothing but the
fuperftition of the Highlands, poetically embellifhed. The fpirit of Loda is ingenioufly
tranflated from Ireland into a Scandinavian god, taken from a tale called Muirarlach mor o Laidhan. Mr. Macpherfon, not perhaps knowing that haidhan was the Irifli name of Leinfler, turns it to Loda, and calls it a part of
Scandinavia. The tale rnakes Muirarlach
a fort of monfler, and fometimes a knight-errant engaging a windmill, and
then a giant, ftriding from hill to hill acrofs Erin. It afforded, however, to an author, a good hint; and Mr. Macpherfon a(:cordingly conjured it to the
fpirit
[ 26 ] Iplrit of Loda. This tale is common
in the Highlands to this day. —Allufions
to clans, for the fame reafons, common
underftanding would teach to avoid. An objed:ion, which has been flarted by Dr. Percy, Dean of Carlifle, is, " that although the wolf and the bear were natives of this ifland, in thofe early
days, yet neither is ever mentioned by
this fictitious Offian. The moft modern
epic fongs, and thofe Irip OJjians of
the 15th century, as the modern OJjian
calls them, abound with limiles of this
fort : and a hero is frequently compared
to a wolf or bear." This is a reafonable and juft objedlion, of which the author was not aware.—We can fuppofe no
period of fociety, when cows, fheep,
and goats were not known ; for by all travellers, and from every hiflory, it appears that brutes did propagate much
falter than mankind ; and wherever the human fpecies have been found, there
alfo quadrupeds cxifted. Yet Mr. Mac^
•pherfon, in order to fupport the great
jintiquity
[ 27 ] antiquity of his poems, in a note,
p. 350, vol. i. introduces a (hort poem,
with modern and unpoetical allufions to goats and herds^ cows Jeeking fielter^ and
jhepherds wandering after their flocks. Dr. Blair very ingenioufly takes ad- vantage of this circumftance, in his
DiiTertation, p. 31; and, contrary to other criticks, thinks it very unpoetical to introduce fheep, cows, and goats, whilft he delights in the defcription of
Cuchullin's chariot, ** the children of
the Rein!" Why might not cows, goats,
and flieep live on the mountains of Scotland, and the plains of Erin, as well as the ** children of the Rein," or the deer ? Was there any thing in the foil or climate to refufe fuftenance to thofe animals, any more than to horfes ? Do
not all thefe live together at this day ? The bifon, a fpecies of wild cow,
the peculiar native of the forefls and
mountains of Scotland, although now
extind, was certainly common in thofe days 3 yet no mention is made of it. Huntin 2:
[ 2S J Hunting the wild boar is often mentioned in the few fcraps of ancient poetry that flill remain; which Mr.
Macpherfon makes little of, becaufe,
according to his account, they " want " age," being the compofition of the 15th century; although the genuine
Offian knew nothing of it : unlefs in- deed we fuppofe that brutes did not
multiply fo faft in the firft ages as man. The contrary is true. — It were too much to fuppofe that the author could
be fo happy as to fucceed in every thing,
and make the deception compleat. In
an impofture, a man cannot fhut every avenue to detection. However, it has
fucceeded far enough ; a variety of editions have been fold; and the author
]ias acquired credit by his ingenuity. —•
That was the great defideratum. I, however, envy it not. O / grdnt me honejl fame, or grant me none. By many it hath been faid, that the
fimiles-
[ 29 ] fimiles of Offian are taken from fo re-
' mote a period of fociety, as to be a flrong proof of the antiquity of the poem. I grant the fimiles in general
are from nature. And why ? Becaufe
the country defcribed as the fcene of
adiion at this day, and its inhabitants,
are in fome degree but emerging from a
ftate of nature. Thither the author
went to fee the face of the country, and
the appearances of nature ; befides that he was born and hved long in the mountains and vallies. Hence that fe- rioufnefs which pervades the whole,
and which is familiar to every Highlander; and is one great reafon why
every one of them is fo ready to believe the poems authentic. Any Englifh- man may go down, and fee thefe ph£» nomena in the elements and face of the country; of which he may lay up a number, and write, when he comes home, poetry of the fame nature. This
indeed has already been done at home,
without the trouble of travelling.
9 I remember.
[ 3° ] I remember, when I travelled that country three years ago, to have fat down on a hill ; and, the fcene being
favourable, in a poetic mood, I jingled
together upon paper, with fuitable in- vented Galic names, the epithets of
blue-eyed, meek-eyed, mildly-looking,
white-bofomed, dark-brown locks, noble, generous, valiant, tears, fpears,
darts, hearts, harts, quivers, bows, ar- rows, helmets, fteel, ftreams, torrents, noble deeds, other times, bards, chiefs,
ftorm^, fongs, &c. and produced a
little poem, which reads pretty fmoothly; and, if I had a mind to publifli it, it would be no difficult matter to per- fuade fom.e people I had tranllated it from the Galic : for I might tranflate a ftanza of it into Earfe, fhew it to the
inquifitive, and fay I had the reft by me i after which they would never enquire. In this manner a colledion hath been
made up and publifhed at Edinburgh,
three years ago, by an ingenious franf- htor.
[ 3' ] tatOTy Mr. Clarke, entitled T^he Cakdo^
nian Bards. It has been reviewed at London, and adduced as an argument
for the genuinenefs of Fingal. Mr.
Clarke, when I charged him with it, confefTed that it was entirely made up.
'— One of the poems of that collection
is happily fet off with the title of Tihe Words of Woe. The author told me,
all he had for the ground -work of it was, a fong called Jurram 7ia truaidhe,
compofed on a late emigration of the Highlanders to America. In the fame manner the reft of the collediion was made up. It, however, does Mr.
Clarke's ingenuity credit ; although, in general, for the honour of his country,
he alfo wifhes to carry on the fraud of
Offian. If the public Would continue
to purchafe liberally, there is no knowing what number of poems we might
be favoured vv'ith from the Earfe ! But,
unfortun:^.tely, the public tafte in this way fee Ills now to be fated.
*' The time of my departure is nighi"
is
[ 32 ] is a fentence of OfTian. — Did not
the author of it read the Scriptures ? And it is well known the Bible has not been fo long as two centuries
tranflated into Irifli ; for in Earfe, it has not yet appeared : and the genuine
Offian, Mr. Macpheifon himfelf ac- knowledgeth to have been totally ignorant of Rofnan and Greek learjiing. Another powerful objed:ion to the genuinenefs of Offian is, that, excepting a few names, all the characters in
that poem are the creation of the
tranflator, and are not at all known in the popular tales of the Highlands.
Swaran is never once mentioned ; but
A^agnus, a more modern name, is re- prefented as engaging Fingal, who is a
real but antient captain. — No fuch
kingdom as Morven was ever known in the weft of Scotland. The name Morven, although at home it is called Moramidy founds well, and, for no other
Teafon, fuited the author's plan, though
it is never once mentioned in any of
their
t 33 1 their tales or fongs. The dlftridl known
at this day by that name, is only a part
of the parifh of that name. ^
Selma is not at all known in Scotland. When
I afked, and particularly thofe who were
poflefTed of any poetry, fongs, or tales, who Fionn was ? —for he is not known
by the name of Fingal by any—I was
anfweredi that he was an Irifhman, if a man j for they fometimes thought him
a giant, and that he lived in Ireland,
and fometimes came over to hunt in the Highlands. This is the univerfal voice of all the Highlanders, excepting
thofe who are pofTefTed of abilities and
knowledge to perufe the work of Mr.
Macpherfon, and are taught by nationality to fupport an idle controverfy.
The truth is, this Fingal is no more
than, as hath often already been obferved, an Irifli chief of the third century, who fignalized himfelf againfl the northern invaders of thofe days, and,
being made captain, or chief commander, of an army or miUtia, neceflary to D 'be
[ 34 ] be kept under arn .^ for fome years ; and
the Irifh and Scotch Celts being one and the fame people ; had occafion, at
different times, to pafs over to Scotland, where he was joined by the natives, for the mutual defence of both
countries. Like a true Scotchman, in order to make his compofition more
acceptable to his countrymen, Mr.
Macpherfon changes the name of Fionn
Mac Cumhal, the Irifhman, into Fingal ; which indeed founds much better^ and fets him up a Scotch king over the
ideal kingdom of Morven, in the weft of Scotland.^ It had been a better ar- gument for the authenticity, if he had
allowed him to be an Irifliman, and
made Morven an ln{h kingdom, as well
as make Ireland the feene -of his battles : but, as he muft need make the hero of an epic poem a great character, it was too great honour for any
other country but Scotland to have
given birth to fo confiderable a perfott- age. —All the authentic hiftories of Ire- 3
^-i"tl
[ 35 ] land give a full account of Fingal, or Fionn Mac Cumhal's anions ; and any one who will take the trouble to look
at Dr. Keating, or any other hiftory of
that country, will find the matter re- lated as above : whereas in the Chronicon Scotorum, from which the lift of the Scotch kings is taken, and the pre- tended manufcripts they fo much boaft of to be feen in the Hebrides, there is hot one fyllable faid of fuch a name as Fingal. A man fo thirfty after fame,
would furely court an opportunity of
meeting the cotemporary Romans, who
certainly would not fail to make mention of fo great a hero. We will rea- dily grant, that part of the contefts in Ireland, and the war with Lochlin, is founded in hiftory, becaufe all the annals of Ireland have handed it down to us 3 but the author, in order to ferve his purpofe, wrefts fads as they may
beft ferve his end, and, apprehenfive of
a future detedion, labours with great
zeal to deflroy the credit of all Irlfh D 2 hiftory.
[ 36 1 li'idory, and, with a few bold ftrokes of his pen, obliterate all the Celtic learning ever known any where, in or- der to make way for a ftew fyflem of
Celtic emigration and Hebridian and
Fingalian hiftory, in the Introdudtion to the Hiftory of Great Britain and Ire- land, of which nothing was ever heard
before. This book was publifhed on
purpofe to fupport the impofture of
Fingal.
Whilft I thus freely fpeak my fenti- ments (for I have had accefs to know
and underftand the language as well as any man living j having beftowed more
labour and expence upon it than all that went before me) I am not ignorant
of doing w^hat may, though innocently,
incur not only the difpleafure, but the refentment, of fomc of my compatriots,
as derogating much from their fuppofed national honour. I profefs myfelf to be an enquirer after truth ; and,
as the fubjcct in hand is a literary topic, in itfeif of little importance, it may
[ 37 ] iiiay bp difcufled yvithout giving reafonabie offence to the fenlible, liberal, and
difcerning part of my countrymen ; and,
if I have their approbation, I {hall feel
little anxiety from the apprehenfion of
the malignant virulence and perfonalities that may iiTue from the illiberal few. I never yet could diffemble, nor
perfonate a hypocrite ; truth has al- ways been dearer to me than my country \ nor (liall I ever fupport an ideal national honour founded on an impofture, though it were to my hindrance. — I can fliew Dr. Johnfon that there is
Qtie Scotchman who loves truth better than his country, and that I am 2ijlurdy
enough moraliji to declare it, though it fhould mortify my Caledonian vanity.
I would therefore v/illi to be conlidered
as a perfon who, though I have as much
of the amor patrice as I think is a vir- tue, and though I have the honour to mention the immortal name of Dodlor
Johntbn amongft my friends, and have no quarrel with Mr. Macpherfon, un- D 3
bialTed
[ 33 ] blafTed and uninfluenced. Befides, I am fure Mr. Macpherfon no longer
wifhes the world (hould think the poems any thing but his own manufacture; for to me he has oftener than once obferved, ** it was more creditable " to be an author than a tranflator."—
I
would defpife myfelf, were I capable of
fupporting an untruth for the friendfhip cf any man, or of overturning it, were ir in my power, if I had a grudge
againft another. But, as this is not the
cafe, the public may look upon me as under no bias whatfoever, influenced by no partiality, nor afraid to tell the
tfuth. I think proper to fpeak in this clear and open manner, and prefix my
name, becaufe I know that fome men
imagine there is no moral turpitude
in anonymoufly publifhing one thing
in a pamphlet, whilft they think and
believe the contrary. — But to refume
my fubjed: : — The author of the Differtation, after fome elegant criticifm on
the poem, concludes with obferving,
'* that
[ 39 ]
^'* that although he underftands not the
*' original, yet the tranjlator feems to
*' have heei> animated with no fmall
*' portion of Offian's fplrit." —I believe the whole of Offian's fpirit , for no
tranllation was ever well done, at leafl equal to the original. This is faid by- Mr. Macpherfon himfelf to be literal ;. and Dr. Blair fays, it is animated with
.^ great portion of Offian's fpirit.. Is not this a flrong argument it is no
tranllation ? and the Doftor, how ftre- nuoufly foever he has endeavoured to make them appear authentic, muft have
known better j for fome fay it is the- promifcuous produdtion of the Dodor
and Mr. Macpherfon. (Vide Dili of
Dr. Blair, p. 2i8.)
Before I have done with internal evi- dence, 1 mull: take notice of what has been faid by Mr. Smith, in a late dif- fertation on the genuipenefs of Offian's poems. This gentleman, although a man of great modefty and worth, yet,
farmed by national zeal to fecure the D 4 honour
[ 4P ] honour of an ancient Offian to the Highlands, and ftrip the brow of the modern one of thofe laurels he will one
day, in fpite of all their eftbrts, claim
as his own, avails himfelf of the ignorance of the world concerning the hif- tory of the Highlands in remote ages, and would have us receive conjectures for fadls ; well knowing, that as we
are more ignorant of thefe times, there
is greater latitude for conje(^lure. Conclulions, however, drawn from conjecture, are vague, and will be received as truths only by thofe who wifh them
true. He, in his DiiTertation, puts us
off with giving us a pretty account of
the effects of mufic on the human mind
in former times; as if there was no fuch
thing in our own days as feeing any
emotions produced by it. I can tell Mr. Smith, that I have often feen many
weep to mulic, and forgot I did fo myfelf, until I difcovered it by the number of my tears. The tears of joy and
Ibrrow are equally at the pommand of
mufic.
[ 41 ] mufic. Human nature, by improvement, may be foraewhat varied, but
will, in general, continue always the
fame. Mr. Smith has thrown no new
light on this controverfyj but only
weakened it, by idly adding to the number of diflertations that avail no.- thing. I wi/h he had taken up a fubj.ed: more worthy his labour. At one time he talks of the age of
Fingal as an age of hunting, as beft
fuits his purpofe; at another, makes
mention of it as an age of arts, civilization, and commerce. ** The only
** bufmefs of men was hunting ; the " women wove the robe fur their love." People will do and fay much, and often more than is true, to enforce the
belief of what they themfelves wifh to be true, but are not able to eftablifh. AH men, however, are not alike credulous. An enquirer after truth, always
expeds evidence before he gives his af- fent to a propofition^ and, in order to be able himfelf to give an account of
the
[ 42 ] the faith that is in him, will never be-? lieve as true, upon conjedtural and probable evidence, that which fads alone muft prove. That the queftion in hand
is of that nature, is evident: —yet it is very different with the friends of Oflian
:
they wiih the world to believe, for the honour of their country, becaufe Mr.
Macpherfon made Fingal a Scotch, and
not an Irifli man. Mr. Smith then tells the names and
relidence of men in his neighbourhood,
** whom he has heard, for weeks to-
** ge'iher, repeat ancient poems, many
" of them OlTian's ;" but has not given
us one line of them as a fadl in his Differtation ; nor, were I to call on him to produce the Galic of any forty lines, in either Fingal or Temora, he could not
produce, them. Then an ingenious apo- logy would have been contrived : —the man had dhJ of a fever, or had emigrated to America. Some fuch mifchance, notwithflanding all their difler- tations and noife, has befallen the whole
of
I 43 ] of them ; for all the Highlands has not
yet been able to fhew three lines, excepting thofe Mr. Macpherfon publifli- ed a? a fpecimen, and which, in reality,
is his own tranflation. If they believe themfelves, let them enjoy it, and not attempt to bully the v/orld into a belief of that for which no fort of evidence
has yet been produced.
He tells us, ** Mr. Macpherfon has
** always been readieil to fliew his ori-
** ginals to the beft judges." I deny it. Mr. Macpherfon often promifed me a
fight of them. — I believe, without vanity, I may fay I underfland the Galic
as well as any man living; for I wrote
a Grammar and Dictionary of it; and
yet, although he appointed, at leaft at
fix different times, a day for fhewing
them to me, and I as often waited upon
him, there was always fome apology
made : — the manufcripts v/ere at his houfe in the country; or miilaid; or the key loft ; or I Ihould fee them fome
other time. Why did he promife to fliew
[ 44 ] fliew them ? And, fince he promifed,
why not fhew fome ? Let the public
draw inferences. This is true ; let Mr.
Macpherfon contradid it, if he can. Mr. Smith talks alfo of MSS. that contain thefe poems—Why apply fo earneftly to the author for an edition,
if they have them in thefe MSS. of
their own ? For a committee of the Highland Society has waited on Mr.
Macpherfon, to requeft the original
fhould be printed. —But alas ! not one
line has yet been feen, excepting what
the tranflator has made.
ProfefTor Macleod, of Glafgow, is mentioned as a perfon who was allowed
to compare fome books of the original
with the tranflation -, and yet, in a converfation with me at London, who
promifed to purchafe any number of
lines, not under fix, at the rate of
2 J. 6d. each word, he could neither re- peat a fyllable, nor undertake to procure from Mr. Macpherfon, although then
in town, a fingle line. Thus fruitlefs hitherto
[ 45 ] hitherto has been every attempt to dif- cover a Jftanza of an original, excepting what has been tranflated from the Engliih, to impofe it as a fpecimen
of an original. —Why not publifh large
extracfts from thofe MSS. of which the
authors of diflertations fo much boafl:. If they heard formerly, and ftill (as they aver) know men that repeat them,
why not take them down in writing,
and publifh them ? —Are they afraid that the Highland public, which is fo zealous to eftabliih the authenticity, will not purchafe ? It cannot be believed. —But the reafon is, they are not
to be found.
Mr. Smith mentions Dr. Percy's
Reliques of Ancient Poetry, in which he
fays the Doctor confeiTeth that he himfelf heard pieces of it recited; and,
being compared with the tranjlation,
exactly correfponded.—Dr. Percy does not underftand a fyllable of the Earfe,
and therefore could be no judge. The
truth is. Dr. Blair, and ProfeiTor Fergufon.
[ 46 J gufon, when Dr. Percy was at Edinburgh, took care to introduce a young
fludent from the Highlands, who re- peated fome verfes,^ of which ProfefTor Fergufon faid fuch and fuch fentences' in Fingal were the iranjlation. —Mr.
Smith, if he looks into the fecond and
thirc^ editions of the Reliques^ will find the o'bfervation there no longer ; and
that Di^.' Percy, on refledlion, had juft reafon to fufpe^t that this young ftudent had previoufly been taught the part he
recited J and the lines might as readily
be any common fong, as the original of
Fingal ; for they knew it was impoffibie for an Englifliman to detedl it. This author has annexed to his DifTertation&" fome poems, afcribed to new,
and hitherto unknown, poets. He confefles they are in fome degree altered from what they were when he received them. —That " he compared different
** editions, ftruck off feveral parts that
** were manifeflly fpurious, and brought
** together epifodes that feemed to have
** a relatioa
t 47 ] " a relation to one another." This is a moil: excellent pretext for giving us a new poem from a few ftanzas of ori- ginal : and he takes further care to cover the impofture, by advancing '* that the
** current editions are much adulte-
*' rated." Dargo is the title of one of
his poems. There are a very few ftanzas of poetry in different parts of the Highlands upon this hero Dargo. It is of
that fort which the author of Fingal
Would call the compofition of the 15th
century.—I have them in my polTeiTionj
and in a fmall colledtion of Galic poems,
which I have been preparing (for I alfo was about to be a tranllator!) I have
made up a fort of a poem of fome length
from thefe few ftanzas, entirely different from Mr. Smith's, only that we both
retain the fame Dargo as our mutual
hero. If fale could be expedted for them, I (hould find it no difficult matter, in my notes, to give fpecimens of
the original 'y and I am fure I would
avoid giving thofe I received from the
people.
[ 48 ] people, becauie they cannot bear a' tranflation. And indeed Mr. Smith
gives us not thofe of the old poet, but
thofe he made from his Englifli ori- ginal ; the local phrafeology, and th^e forced ftrain of which, to any difcerning
reader, point out the impoiition. In
fhort, Mr. Smith's and my little poem
both retain the fame name of Dargo,
have received none of the incredible and
marvellous feats of the few original
lines, and are each of them as different from it, and from one another, as, per- haps, the fermons would be which he
and I might write upon one text. The
cafe is the fame as to the reft of his colledion. The original is promifed,
if furbfcribers enough appear in fix months. He has done well to limit the time, in order to have it in his power, at the expiration of fix months,
to refufe it; by which means he will avoid the labour of tranilating the whole
into Earfe. But I hope thofe who are
fo anxious to be in poffcfilon of the
origtJial
[ 49 ] original of OJ/ian, will not negled to take Mr. Smith at his word. If, however, the two copies do not fit each
other better than the fpecimens already
fhewn us, and if the Galic poetry be
not better, we fhall not be at a lofs to judge which is the original -, and when
it appears, we lliall not negle(ft pointing out the vulgarifms and local phrafeology to the few of his countrymen that are judges of the language.
Names are quoted who have given
the originals.—Some of thofe I am ac- quainted with ; and none of them (for
nobody could be more diligent and inquifitive than I have been) could ever produce any thing but a few fcattered fabulous flanzas, fometimes reprefenting the heroes as men, at other times as giants J fometimes probable, and often marvellous ; none of which can bear a
tranllation. A fertile genius, however,
might take up the names as the characters, and write a poem in Englifh,
which a Highlander, who loved his coufi^ E try
[ 50 ] try better' than truths might make himfelf eafily believe he had frequently
heard before. In this manner hath been
manufadiured every tranflation, whether
Mr. Clarke's, Mr. Macpherfon's, or Mr. Smith's, that have hitherto appeared.
Mr. Macphail of Lome, Mr. Macalafter of Tarbert, repeat fome of the above fables, which may ferve for a text
for a man that can write in Englifh.
Thefe men I have i^^n and converfed with ; and although I liflened a long
time to their recitation of fables, &c.
I found nothing worthy of a tranflation,
without fuch extenfive amendments and
embellifiiments, as to make it entirely
a new work. The Reverend Mr. MacDermid, of Glafgow, is mentioned as well acquainted with the original of
Fingal, although he is not pofTefTed of
a fingle line of Offian ; and I believe he
would purchafe a few at the price I offered ProfelTor Macleod.
To expc(ft belief from the world,
where
[ SI ] where there is no evidence for the truth of a propofition, is fuppofing it credulous indeed ; is a difrefpecSt, if not an infult, to the underftanding of the
public. When "the propofition to be
proved is a fadt, and not mere fpeculation, or matter of opinion, fads alone, not internal evidence, which always give
latitude to conjedlure and uncertainty on
both lides, can be a reafonable proof;
and nothing lefs can procure the af- fent of the difpaffionate and unbiaifed mind. That competent fads, although
frequently challenged and called for, have not been hitherto produced by the
fupporters of this queftion, I can ealily
(hew. Nor would I ever have taken
the trouble to fay a fyllable on the fubjed:, had the partizans of Mr. Macpherfon allowed the difpute to die, and
let the public entertain their own opinion of the matter. But by fjlfehoods
to force us into a belief, becaufe fuch
and fuch people- wifli it, although no
reafons are given is arrogance, not to be
E 2 overlooked;
[ 5^ 1 overlooked ; befides, this now is the only time to afcertain the truth, whilft the tranjlator is living, that the originaU
if he has it, may be produced, as the only incontrovertible evidence. It is this has extracted from me thefe obfervations. The more is written to prove the
authenticity, the more clearly the impofture appears ; and thefe late Remarks
and DiffertationSy in place of fupporting,
have only fhewn the abfurdity of attempting to fupport a proportion, which,
becaufe it might bring fome ideal credit to their country, firft proceeded from
Mr. Macpherfon's mouth, and which,
though the tranjlator offers no argument,
they wifh to eftablifli. I Ihould have
been as happy as any of my country- men can be, to have it in my power
to produce the original, and fo fatisfy the world; but as not one line of it has hitherto been feen, but what Mr.
Macpherfon has favoured us with, impofed as a fpecimen, though a<ftually tranflated from the original Englifli, I am
[ S3 ] am fo far a friend to truth, that I cannot permit an impoiition to dcfcend to posterity undetedled. Had I been ig- norant of the Galic, lefs credit might
be expelled to my narration of fac^ls
;
but having written a grammatical Analyfis and a Did:ionary of it, it may be
readily believed I fliould rejoice to have
it in my power to produce the originals
of thefe poems to the public, as the Dictionary and Grammar might, per- haps, be fought after, to help the curious in forming fome opinion of the
original. Thus it would be my intereft to fupport the authenticity, did I think
it honed. Nor fliall it appear that I have been indolent, inadivc, or uninquilitive after information. In fpring 1778, I fet out from London, for the Highlands and Hebrides,
to colled: from fongs, old fayings, the
voice of the people, and manufcripts, if there ihould be any, vocables for the didionary, which I have fince publifhcd.
I knew well the flate of the country.
E 3
It
[ 54 ] It was my refolution, in order to fatisfy
mylelf at leafl, to leave no ftone unturned, and be in poiTeiiion of thefe poems, if they exifted. Not above 17
years had elapfed, fmce Mr. Macpherfon
had performed his firft expedition
thither. All the Highlanders who re- peated poetry, I believed, had not emigrated, nor died ; and we have been
told that fome manufcripts there were
in the polTefTion of fome individuals.
I was elevated with anticipated fuccefs
;
and it was my intention to have fuperfeded Mr. Macpherfon, by publilhing
an original, could it be had. I had
refolved, had I met with any convincing
evidence, to fay fomething on the other
fide, to convert not only Dr. Johnfon,
but the public, by taking the affidavits of thofe who recited the poetry, and
thofe who witnelTed it taken down by me
in writing, and to have thefe fad;s properly vouched by the minifters of the
pariflics, and neighbouring juftices,
where fuch tranfadions might happen;
and
f S5 J and in this manner publifli them. Nay,
the original fignatures of the minifters and juflices I intended to have had re- cognized at Edinburgh, and certified there by people of confideration, whofe
vouchers of it could not be doubted at London. And I am confident, not- withftanding the epithets of " ftubborn
** infidelity," ** hatred of the Scotch,"
** refufing credit to Highland narra- " tion," fo commonly beftov^ed on him by the illiberal. Dr. Johnfon
would believe me, and be converted. Many mountains I traverfed, many
vallies I explored, and into many humble cottages I crept on all four, to interrogate their inhabitants. I wandered
from ifland to illand, wet, fatigued, and
uncomfortable. No labour I thought
too much, no expence too great, whilfl
1 flattered myfelf with converting the
difbelieving Do(ftor Johnfon, recovering
fome of the poetry of Ollian, and Gripping Mr. Macpherfon's brow of what I then ufed to call them, "flolen bays; "for E 4 I then
[ 56 ] I then believed there might be an original, and that he rather willied to appear
the author than the tra?jJlator. As nature,
when fhe denies one fenfe or faculty, is commonly bountiful by giving another
in uncommon perfedion, I particularly
enquired for the blind, who are often
blell with a retentive xmemory, and fre- quently find their account in narration.
I made many deviations to their obfcure
retreats ; and was frequently engaged in long difcourfes with the blind, the lame, and the aged. It was foon, however, rumoured that I came from London, was in pay from his Majefly, and
therefore they fet a high value on what
every one had Hitherto received for nothing, at leafl for a fnuff of tobacco. Tobacco, therefore, and whifky, were
neceifary to chear the fpirits, and raife their enthufiafm for recitation ; befides fome money for their trouble. Whenthefe were brought from a diftance, fo much muft be allowed for the perfon
that was fuppofed to be left at home
to
[ 57 ] to work ill his ftead ; a certain price for his own recitation, previoully ftipulated;
tobacco and whifky, to prepare and excite recitative faculties ; fomething to the perlon that was fent for him ; and,
if lame or blind, for thofe that carried or condudled him. This, when fearches elfewhere prevented my waiting on him
at his abode. I hus I fpared not labour nor expence to procure knowledge; but
found myfelf not a little mortified,
when all they could repeat was nothing
but a few fabulous and marvellous
verffcs J or flories concerning Fionn
Mac Cumhal, alias Fingal, and his Fiona
Of followers chafing each other from
ifland to illand, firiding from mountain
to mountain, or croffing a frith at a hop, with the help of his fpear. There
v/as much of inchantments, fairies, goblins, incantation rhimes, and the fecond
fight. When I heard thofe of one country, I heard all; for they all repeated in general the fame ftories : and when I had the narration of a few, I had every
thing.
[ 58 1 thing. This, however, did not relax my enquiries. I believed thefe to be
the compofitions of the i ^th century j and
beyond the next mountain, in the next
valley, or the neighbouring ifland, fomething of the genuine OJ]ian% poetry might
have remained. I therefore traverfed and
pervaded the whole for near fix months,
but to no purpofe, as to OfTian's poetry;
and, like every other perfon who at- tempts to prove or procure evidence for the genuinenefs of thofe poems, only
difcovered, that, by a certain ** intellec-
•* tual retrogradation, I knew lefs, the
** more I heard of it." In the mean time I did not forget
MSS.—Since I could not find the poems in the mouths of the people, I concluded, if they exifted at all, that Mr. Macpherfon muft have found them
in MSS. ; but as I knew the Earfe was
never written, I began to defpair and
to doubt. Some told me fuch a perfon
had a MS. who, upon interrogation, fent me to another, and he to a third, and
fo
[ S9 ] {o on in a circle, until at length onetold me Mr. Macpherfon had carried them all to London. I faw one, however, in the poffeirion of Mr. Macintyre of Glenace, Argylefliire ; which is mentioned by Mr. Smith, I think, as containing feme poems of Offian. This
is as true as the reft of the ftory. The
manufcript is on parchment : I ex- amined it : it contains only fome Irifh genealogy. It is written in the Irifti character, dialed:, and contradion. It is intelligible to no Highlander, who has
not ftudied the Iriih written dialed
;
nor is there one Scotchman I could
ever find out, not excepting Mr. Macpherfon himfelf, that can decypher
them i neither could I, till after much
ftudy, and confultation of a variety of
keys to the reading of Irifh manufcripts.
It contains not a line of Offian's poetry;
if it does, why did not Mr. Smith tranf- cribe it, and give us fome fpecimens in
his Differtation ? Having made this fruitlefs enquiry
after
[ 6o 1 after the genuine OJJians poetry, from
which I only learned there never had
been any, I pafTed over to Ireland,
there alfo to purfue Offian, and other
enquiries. I rummaged, with the confent of Dr. Leland, Trinity College
library — examined manufcripts —had
different perfons, who underflood the
charad:er and language, in pay — converfed with all who might know any
thing of the matter—and, after all, could
difcover no fuch poetry as Mr. Macpherfon's ; but that the Irifh had been more careful than the Highlanders, who
committed to writing even thofe cofnpofitions of thefifteenth century. Thofe,
as Mr. Macpherfon obferves, are heft
left in the obfcurity of the original.
There are, however, confiderable re- mains of ancient Irifh learning in manufcripts of great antiquity. For a lift of thefe, I refer the curious to Bifhop
Nicholfon's Irifh Hiftorical Library.
Since it is very certain that the Irifh had the ufe of letters at leaft as early as the
[ 6: ] the time of Offian, who was a real charafter, though not the author of Mr.
Macpherfon's Poems, Fingal and Temora; and fmce it is clear from authentic hiftory, and the confent of all the people of the Highlands, that Fingal and Offian were Irifli j how comes it neither Offian himfelf, nor any cotemporary, nor any fucceeding bard or
writer, if they have been orally recit- ed, has collected and com.mitted them
to writing ? Are the compofitions of
the fifteenth century more worth notice than thofe of the genuine OJ/ian?
And Mr. Macpherfon declares, they
have been found, a few years ago, in the mouths of the people. It is impoffible, if they ever exifted, that the bards and others, who could write, within
thcfe three laft centuries, (hould not have collected them. Whatever longs
and epifodes Offian fung, did not long
furvive himfelf; and it Vv-as difficult for former bards to anticipate the compofitions of the age of chivalry, unlefs they
r 62 ] they had as much of the fecond light
as of the poetical genius.
I would not wifh to appear to derogate from the real honour and anti- quity of Scotland j that can never be
aiFedted by the lofs of thefe poems : but
when I am confcious, that without a knowledge of Irifh learning, we can know nothing of the Earfe as a tongue,
(the Irifh being the fludied language,
and the Earfe only a diftant provincial
dialed:) I cannot but exprefs my afto- nifliment at the arrogance of any man,
who, to make way for the producStion
of 1762, would deftroy all the archives which the Irifh, acknowledged by all the world to have been in the eighth
century the mofl learned nation in Europe, have been for ages labouring to produce. When the Highlander knows
nothing of Irifh learning, he knows nothing of hi.mfclf ; and when Irifli hif- tory is loft. Highland genealogy be- comes very vague. The Irifh had laws,
many of which have come down to our
3 own
[ 63 ] own days, written in the ancient lan- guage. Fordun and Buchanan, although
Ibme centuries back, having no knowledge of their own origin, received the lift of their ancient kings, as re- corded in the Chron. Scotorum, and other
Irifh books. The vernacular tongue,
unlike to Scotland and England, was
the vehicle of their laws, teaching, and
pleading. They very early had a regulated church, governed by an hierarchy, before the liturgy of Rome was re- ceived, and under their own kings,
who always fpoke the language of the country. When Rome obtained the management of fpiritual affairs, Greek
and Roman learning became more common, but through the medium of the Galic ; for, different from England,
Scotland, and the other ftates of Europe,
their laws and ftate-bufinefs were not tranfaded in Latin until the Englifh, in the reigns of Elizabeth and James the
Firft, eftablifhed that practice.
Until the Reformation, they had all forts of fchools and colleges : and it was
[ 64 } was not until Elizabeth ordered Englifh to be taught in all fchools, and
eredied Trinity College at Dublin, that
thefe were extinguifhed. Thither the youth of England, and other countries,
went for education ; and all the popular
ftories of the Highlands at this day agree, that every chieftain went thither for education and the ufe of arms, from the fourth century until the Reformation.
Icolumkill was firft founded by the munificence of the Irifh ; and all the abbots and monks belonging to it, one
abbot only excepted, until its diilblution, were^Irifh. All the Highland cler- gy not only ftudied but received ordination in Ireland. The clergy of the Wands
cfpecially, and thofe of the weftern
coaft, were frequently natives of Ire- land. Hence it happens, that all the
poetical compofitions, ftories, fables, &c. of any antiquity, which arc re- peated in the Highlands at this day, are confelledly in the IriHi Gilic. Whatever bards exilled in the Highlands,
received
[ 65 ] received their education at the IrKh
academies -, and every ftanza that is re- markably fine or obfcure, is ftill called Ga/ic dhoimhan Eirionnach, i. e. deep
Iri/h. No argument can be adduced in fa- tour of Highland learning, from their ancient laws ; for none, according to Mr. Macphcrfon himfelf, ever exifted,
except the will of the chieftain, until
forrie partial and faint influences of it tvefe felt in the reign of the latter Jamefes. Private property has not been
legally afeertained until very lately i for the extent of a chief's territory de- pended on the number and valour of
his valTals and followers. Hence it is, that few chieftains at this day can fhew
charters of any confiderable date. But
I can fhew, from the language of religion, for although Earfe was never the
vehicle of learning, and fierce chieftains
i)vould not fubmit to civil government,
yet religion, blended with, fuperftition, was in fome degree acknowledged by
F thera.
[ 66 ] them, nay, from even the ftlle of the pulpit at prefent in the Highlands, and
the few books of piety they have lately
publiflied, that the Irifh Galic was the language of law, divinity, and poetry.
The common Catechifm, the Confeffion of Faith, the verfion of the Pfalm.s fung in churches, are written in Irifh
;
and the language of the minifter when
he preacheth, and the extemporaneous
effufion of the peafant's prayer, border upon it. As they received in the Highlands their knowledge of the Chriftian
religion from Icolumkill, and Icolumkill from Ireland, all the terms in di- vinity are immediately Irifli, and in the remote parts of the Highlands, at this
d?.y, not well understood. The Earfe
dialedl is rather barren of words, having
never been cultivated ; and the preacher
that introduceth any idea beyond the
Calviniflic fyflem, is difficultly underftood.—It will be in vain to reafon abftraftedly, even on morality ; and the audience, not only flrangers to the Cen- timent.
[ 6/ J timent, but even to the expreffion, can^' hot always comprehend the fpeaker. All the Scotch hiflorians together,
have recorded that Scotland received
_ their iirft kin^s from Ireland ; and Mr.
Macpherfon allows Fingal's anceftors to have been Irifh. The family of Argylc
are flill ftiled Sllockd T>hiarmid, i. e. the defcendants of Dermid. an Irifh cb^ef;
and Mackenzie and Mscdonal are univerfally acknowledged, and the S^cotch
jjeerage and Herald's Office connrm
Jt to be of Irifli defcent. Iys^ like manner, all the confidcrabie Highland families may be {hevv'n to have fprung from
^he fame, at leafl from a foreign line. Dr. Blair, after faying much from
hiternal evidence, to prove the remote
antiquity of Offian's poems, proceeds, m
an Appendix to his DilTertation, to
Fadis, the only method from which any
fhccefs in eftablifhing the authenticity
of his favourite poems could be expected. — '' I had not," fays he, *' the leaft
*' fufpicion, when this DifTertation was F 2 " firft
[ 68 ]
** firft publlflied, that there was any oc-
** cafion for fupporting their authentr-
** city as genuine produftions of the
*• Highlands of Scotland; as tranfiations
** from the Galic language, not for- " geries of a fuppofed tranllator. In
•* Scotland their authenticity was ne-
*' ver called in queflion. I had myfelf
** particular reafon to be fully fatisfied
** concerning it. My knowledge of
** Mr. Macpherfon's perfonal honour
** and integrity, gave me full aflurance
** of his being incapable of putting
** fuch a grafs impodtion, firft: upon his " friends, and then upon the public." —Whatever the Dodor's knowledge of Mr. Macpherfon's perfonal honour then might be, I think he has had reafon,
by this time, to be of a different opinion ; for, to ufe the Doctor's own expreffion, " Mr. Macpheribn has not
** done what he ought to his friends
** and the public." — He certainly pro- mi fed to publifh, or depolit them in- a library ;
[ 69 ] library; neither of which has been, and
neither will be done.
The ingenious tranfiator got the Doctor fairly engaged in a controverfy, to which his tafte of the belles lettres gteatjy inclined him, and then left him
to battle it as he could. The Dodor fays, " If the queftlon
*' had been concerning manufcripts
** brought from fome diflant and un-
** known region with which we had no
** intercourfe ; or concerning tranfla-
** tions from an Afiatic or American
*' language, which fcarce any body un- " derftood, fufpicions might naturally
** have arifen, and an author's alTertion
*' been anxiouflyandfcrupulouily weigh- " ed : bat in cafe of a literal tranllation, " profefTed to be given of old tradition-
** ary poems of our own country ; of
** poems alTerted to be known in the
** original by many thoufand inhabi-
** tants of Great Britain, fuch extreme
'* fcepticifm is altogether out of place."
-^In this cafe which the Doctor puts,
F 3
^s
[ 7° ] as few might underftand an Afiatic or American hnguage, it might be a very
difficult matter entirely to fatisfy the doubts of thofe who thought proper tq
be infidels ; but in the cafe of Ofllan, there are numbers in Scotland and Ire- land who underftand the Galic, and any
reafonable evidence produced, would naturally have its due effedt. —Where is the evidence ? Is it what it ought to be ? Where is the original ? — When
the controverfy was new, and the po- ems but ju.ft publifhed, one would think
the Editor, from views of intereft, re- gard to his country and truth, and from
refpedl to the public, would fhew the
original ; yet none of thefe confiderations had weight with him. The truth
is, he had no original to produce, and
it was too great trouble to fit down tp
tranflate fo much into Galic. But the
confidence, notwithftanding, with which
the authenticity is aflerted, without any
evidence, is no great degree of modefly.
*' Either the author mufl have had the " influence
[ 7' ] " influence to engage as confederates in
"' the fraud all the natives of the High-
** lands and Illands, or we fhould, long
•' ere this time, have heard their united
** voice exclaiming, Thefe are not our
** poems, nor what we were accuRomed
*' to hear from our bards, or our fa- " thers." The anfwer to this argument
is very plain — The Highlanders and
Scotch, very partial to their country and
antiquities, although the tranflation might differ from what they might
have heard repeated, would not take the
tjTouble to detedt it, as even that detection might be underflood as an argu- ment againfl their genuinenefs. They
were glad of this new and unknowqi
honour; and many of the names of the
heroes in the poems being familiar to
their ears, of which they had often heard mention made in the tales and
fables of the Highlands in their youthful years, and, in fomc degree, at this day, could be eafily led, by a little ** Ca-
** kdonian bigotry," not only to believe,
F4 but
[ 72 ] but to vouch for their being a " literal " tranflation of the poems of Offian,
'* with which they had been famiUar in
** their infancy." From this complexion
and difpofition, though I agree with
Dc6lor Johnfon, that they had not a
*' fettled purpofs to deceive," the perfons
whom Dr. Blair produceth as vouchers of the truth of Oflian, have been
led to give in their names, not doubting but Mr. Macpherfon would perform
his promife to the public of printing
them, or depofiting the Galic original in fome library: but both the Dodor, who
has publifhcd the names, and thofe who
permitted him, have been handfomely
treated by the tranjlator,
** But as reafoning alone is not apt to
*' make much impreffion, where fufpi-
** cions have been entertained concern-
** ing a matter of fadt, it was thought
** proper to have recourfe to exprefs
*^ teftimonies."—I am glad the Dodlor
and I agree with regard to the nature of the evidence that in fuch a cafe canbe
[ 73 ]
fee indifputable, which is fads. We
differ only in this, that the Dodor
gives implicit faith to the teflimony of
gentlemen, in fome degree concerned,
without enquiring into the evidence
which they themfelves had for their belief j and that I do not give my af- fent to a proportion upon the teftimony
of any man, however refpedable, if a party concerned, unlefs he give rea- fonable and convincing evidence of his
belief, or produce fads that are indif- putable.—The honour of the Highlands was concerned ; therefore evidence more
convincing than fignatures and ipfe dixits ought to be fhewn -, efpecially when
the nature of the cafe admits of it ; for the originals are faid to be in the tranf- Jator\ polTeffion, and a fight of them
may be eafily procured. The Dodor,
however, admits of fignatures and ipfe
dixits as indifputable ; I refufe credit to them, and demand a fight of the original, the manufcripts they talk of. —
i
Much good-nature, a delire to befriend Mr.
[ 74 ] Mr. Macpherfon, knowledge of his perfonal honour, and an enthuliafm natural
to men who are long habituated to the
ftudy of the Belles Lettres, infenfibly led the Dodor to admit of teftimony
which a man more circumfpedt would
refufe, and efpecially when having fuch
an opportunity as he then had of in- forming himfelf better. But what Dr. Johnfon fays is true: ** The people of
** the Low Countries know as little of " the Highlands as the Englifli them- " felves,"
When I travelled in the Highlands, I made it my bufinefs to fee as many as refided in the country, of thofe gentle- men whofe names the Dodor has made
ufe of. Mr. Donal Macqueen, minifter of Killmuir, in the Ille of Sky, is the
firft name who vouches for Mr. Macpherfon 's tranflation *' being a literal " one," and " that the original was re-
** peated by numbers, in every part of
** the Highlands." This is the learned
minifter who chofe to be lilent when
interrogated
f IS ] fnterrogated on this fubjedl by Doftor
Johnfon j and although he gave his lig- nature to Dr. Blair, as a voucher for th^
authenticity, to my certain knowledge,
he is not in pofTeffion of a line of the originals, althou-h long in fearch of them.
He w^iflied to procure me fome, but
knew not how. He knows the compoJltions of the fifteenth century as well as others. Is it poflible that fuch a learned
minifter, refiding on the very ifland where the greatefl part of the poems are
faid to have been got, who vouched for the authenticity of them fo foon as they were publifhed, declared they were in every body's mouth, and, knowing the
,ufe of pen, ink, and paper, would not
take fome, at leafl, of them down in writing to convince the world ? Yet it is a truth, in 1778 this gentleman could
not produce one line of them. —Mr.
Donald Macieod, minifler of Glenelg,
I think, lodged Mr. Macpherfon on his journey. He has vouched alfo for the
authenticity 3 yet though I challenged
3 him
[ 76 ] him to produce three lines of the origU
nal, he could not (hew one. Other
rhimes, of little merit, he hdd enough.
Mr. Nicl I'vlacleod, one of the minifters of Mull, vouched, but could not,
although defirous of it, favour me vv^ith one line. He fent for different people,
who /je thought were polTcired of them,
but th'ry produced only the comp:jfitions
of the ffteentb ce?jtmy,
Mr. Mac Auky, chaplain to the 88th
regiment, is mentioned alfo as a voucher. He knows juft as much of the poems as his above brethren. — I have converfed with Mr. Macaulay on the fubjedt,
* Lachlan Macpherfon, of Strath-
* malhie, Efquire, gives a very full an4
* explicit teftimony, from particular
* knowledge, in th^ following v/ords : ** That in the year 1760, he accompa-
** nied Mr. Macpherfon during fome
** part of his journey through the High- " lands, in fearch of the poems of Of- " fian : that he afiiftcd him in coUed-
*' ing them: that he took down from
*' oral
[ n ]
^* oral tradition, and tranfcribed from
** old manufcripts, by far the greateft
*' part of thofe pieces Mr. Macpherfon " has publifhed : that lince the publi-
** cation, he has carefully compared the " tranflation with the copies of the ori-
'* ginals in his hands, and that he finds
** it amazingly literal \ even to fuch a
*' degree as often to preferve the ca-
** dence of the Galic verlification." — If Mr. Macpherfon, of Strathmafhie, had
'* copies of the original in his own
** hands," why not ihew them ? Why
did not the Dodor alk them, and depolit them in the Advocate's or Univerfity's library ? Where are they now ? Mr. Macpherfon is dead, and his manafcripts, I fuppofe they will fay, have
been buried with him f It were eafy to iliew them, if they had them j but
every circumftance confirms the fraud and impoflure.
The Dodor fays further, " That Sir " James Macdonal afTured him, that af- " ter having made, at his defire, all t\\Q " enquiries
[ 78 ]
** enquiries he could, he entertained nd^
** doubt of the authenticity : that he
** lately heard fcveral parts of them re-
** peated in the original. — This parti- " cular muft have great weight, as it is
** well known how much the judgment
** of Sir James deferves to be relied
'* upon, in every thing that relates to
'* literature and tafte."—This p^articular
muft have great weight, indeed, to dif- prove the authenticity 3 as a gentleman
of Sir James's learning and tafte would
not be fatisfied with hearing lines recited, but would fend for Mr. Donald
Macqueen, the learned minifter of his own pariih, alluded to by Dr. Johnfon,^
and mentioned above as a voucher, and
would have taken down the Imes in
v/riting. — When a controverfy was known to be on foot, is it not abfurd
to fuppofe, that a gentleman of the firft- rate abilities of the age, would negled"
fuch an opportunity of committing to writing what might be foon irretriev- ably loft? Sir James would certainly.
f 79 3
if he had heard them, have fetn them
written, and fent them out to Edinburgh to the Dod:or, as an incontrovertible fact; and I am amazed the Dodor did not requeft it of him.
'* Defirous, however," continues the Dodor, " to have this tranflation par- " ticularly compared with the oral edi-
** tions of any who had parts of the ori-
** ginal difiiindlly on their memory, I
** applied to feveral clergymen, to make
** enquiry in their refpedive parishes
'•concerning fuch perfons, and to com-
*' pare what they rehearfed with the
** printed verfion. Accordingly, from " Mr. John Macpherfon, miniHer of
*' Slate, in Sky; Mr. NielMacIeod, mi-
** nifter in Mull ; Mr. Macnicol, mini-
** fter in South Uift ; Mr. Donald Mac-
** queen, minifter of Kilmuir, in Sky;
** and Mr. Donald Macleod, minifter of
** Glenelg; I have had reports on this
** head, containing diftin6t and explicit " teftimoriies to almoft the whole epic
*' poem of Fingal, from beginning to " end.
[ «s 3
*' end, and to feveral of the lefTer poehisr,'
** rehearfed in their prefence, and com-
*' pared by themfelves with the printed
** tranflations." Three of thefe five minifters I know, and waited upon them
when I travelled in that country for in- formation. I begged their affiftance in procuring a fmall fpecimen of Offianj
which they granted ; but, in place of
going to their cabinet for manufcripts,
or copies of them, as I expe<5ted, applr- cation was made to fome old man, or fuperannuated fidler, who repeated over
again the tales of the fifteenth century. If this be not true, let Meliieurs Macqueen and Macleod contradid: it, and
produce the originals if they can. Either the Do(ftor, or thefe gentlemen,
have taken too much liberty with matter of fadl ; or the one has impofed on
the other, and all upon themfelves, by
a too great defire to cftablifli an impofture, becaufe it brought an ideal ho- nour to the Highlands, and that fome
of the names in their popular tales wereinfertedv
f 8i 3 inferted. It is very fingular, that nobody
. in the Highlands has attempted a complete Galic tranflation of Macpherfon's
Fingal and Temora. Had it been done
twelve years ago, it v^ould be no difii- cult matter to fet it off as the compoHtipn of Oflian ; but nov/ it is too late. —
•
In my tour in the Highlands, a refpectable minifter begged I Vv'ouM fet about
a tranflation of Fingal, and that he and
others would undertake to prove it the compolition of Offian, and procure afH^
davits for that purpofe. We need not,
therefore, be furprized to hear Highlanders confidently talk of their having
fecn and heard them repeated, although none can produce a fpecimen. — If a man fays he has a gold watch in his pocket, and I deny it; if he has it, is there any thing eaiier than convincing
me, by fhewing it ? But to perfifl in af- firming that he has it, and publifliinp- differtations to prove it ; to rail, and
abufe all who will npt believe him, is an infult on the party, and a " degree of
G " ftubborn
[ 82 ]
** ftubborn audacity the wodd has hi-
'* therto been unacquainted with." —It
is the laft fubterfuge of guilt.
There has been lately publiflied at London, a book entitled. Remarks on Dr. Johnfons Tour into the Hebrides. This book has been many years in compoling. It underwent a vafl variety of
editions in manufcript, and has been
corred:ed, amended, and improved by
many hands in Scotland ; and, finding
its way to London, was prepared for the
prefs by a friendly embellillier. Thefe
amendments and additions are afcribed by many to Mr. Macpherfon himfelf. How far this is true, I do not pretend
to fay ', but I am certain it has been
done by fome perfon who has lived in England, fome man different from the
oflenfible author ; for there are fuch
local circumftances mentioned in the book, as a perfon who had never been
fouth of the Tweed, could not have been,
acquainted with. If it be Mr. Macpherfon'*
f 83 ] pherfon's compofition, it is his laft ef- fort in this controverfy.
I fhall not take up my time with
making obfervations on the illiberalities and fcurrilities of which it is made
up ', but only will point out to the world fuch a frefli inilance of impofture as will aftonifli, in which the author triumphs as having proved the authenticity of OfTian's poems. -— The
book was written on purpofe to eflablifli the genuinenefs of the poems. How
far it has fucceeded, appears from the following fraud, the only argument ad- duced : — ** But as Dr. Johnfon may
** think it too great a trouble to travel
*^ again to the Highlaqds for a fight of
*' old manufcripts, I fliall put him on a
** way of being fatisned nearer home,
** If he will but call fome morning on
** John Mackenzie, Efq; of the Tem-
** pie. Secretary to the Highland So-
^* ciety, he will find in London more
** volumes in the Galic language and
f* charad;er, than perhaps he will be
G ^ " pleafcd
[ 84 ]
'* pleafed to look at, after what he has " faid." ** Among thefe is a volume, " which contains Ibme of Oflian's po-
*' ems."—On reading the laft fentence,
I was overjoyed that the originals of
Offian were at lafl difcovered, notwithfcanding my own bad fuccefs in meeting
with them. Being impatient to fee them, I accordingly loft no tim.e in waiting en Mr. Mackenzie; and, having
looking over thefe volumes in manufcript, found no compofitions of Ofiian
therein ! They are manufcripts written in the Irifli dialed: and charader, on
the fubjed of Iridi and Highland genealogy. —We have every reafon to believe
that this is the very manufcript, if any,
that -was "left at Beckct's by Mr. Macpherfon fome tim'e ago, with a view to impofe it as that of Offian ; for I am
credibly informed, this very piece was
{}:nt to Mr. Mackenzie by him.
As the writer of the Remarks fccms
himfjlf entirely ignorant of the contents of that manufcript, being a fbranger to the
[ ss ] the Irifh character and contractions,
it v/as vainly believed by him and his
partizans, that with an old Irifh manufcript on genealogy, they might prove
the originality of Offian. This laft attempt to deceive, is an inr
fult more glaring than th? impoflure it was intended to fupport ; and which de- termined me not to overlook it. Nor
is this tl^e only literary impofture that has been attempted by a Scotchman.—
•
A Lauder endeavoured to prove Milton's Paradife Loft a plagiarifm, by li- beral quotations fro^ his countryman
Hog's trandation of Milton into Latin, by faife quotations from Mafen-ius,
Staphorftus, Taubmannus, &e. with Latin lines of his own forging, until deteftgd by Dr. Douglas. If Mr. Lauder
could for a time impofe on the public,
by .forging Latin verfes, ,v/hy not Mr.
Macpherfon be able to ti'anllate a few
lines from Engliili into Galic ? Another perfon wiilied to prove the iEneid Earfc, becaufe '[ Arma virumque
[ S6 ]
** cano," and *' Airm 's am fear canam"
have the fame meaning, and nearly the
the fame found.
I have now finished what I meant to fay on this fubjed:. The truth is afcer- tained, and, I beHeve, the public will
jiot be favoured with any more tranfla- tions of Galic poems, nor Differtations for or againft the authenticity of Offian^ as the defenders of that caufe have not hitherto been able to produce an original,
though fome difingenuous attempts have
been ufed. Like the author of the Remarks, they have ^hofen to let the imaginary original remain in the obfcuritj^,
and to themfelves unintelligible ftate, of the Irifh charaders ! They have of- ten been called on to produce three
lines, yet nobody has been able to fhew
them.—They are flill called on to fliew the original, with proper and competent
vouchers of the authenticity, and proofs
that there is no coilufion; for nothing^
but the original can perfuade. —Ten
thoufand difTerlations avail nothing j and
any
[ 87 ] aiiy thing further on the fubjed, but a
iight of the original, fhall have no at- tention paid it. This relation of fails which I have
given, may be contradided, but can never be overborne; for fadls are ftubborn
things : there is no contending with
them but by fads. FINIS.
*^* A gentleman promifed to orna- ment a fcolloped ihell with filver, if I ihould bring him one from the Highlands, and to fwear it was the identical
fliell out of which Fingal ufed to
jdrink